India 
Fostering Climate Resilient Upland Farming Systems in 
the Northeast (FOCUS) 
Design completion report 
Main report  
Document Date:  23 August 2017 
Project No. 
Report No: 
2000001421 
4654-IN 
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework – Nagaland and Mizoram combined 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
II.  Project description 
A. 
Project Area and Target Groups 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Outcomes/Components - Nagaland 
D.  Outcomes/Components - Mizoram 
E. 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies 
III.  Project implementation 
A. 
Approach 
B.  Organizational Framework 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
D. 
4. 
E. 
Financial management, procurement and governance 
Procurement arrangements 
Supervision 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
H.  Sustainability 
I. 
Assurances 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Summary of FM risks and mitigating actions 
Table 2: Risks and Risk Mitigation 
Table 3: Project Cost Summary (amount in million) 
Table 4: Project financing plans by Components by Financiers (Nagaland State) 
Table 5: Project financing plans by Components by Financiers (Mizoram State) 
Table 6:Project financing by Components and Financiers (Combined) 
Table 7:  Number of Benefited Households, cumulative - Nagaland 
Table 8:Sensitivity  of NPV, IRR and BCR  to varying scenarios - Nagaland 
Table 9:Number of Benefited Households, cumulative - Mizoram 
Table 10: Sensitivity  of NPV, IRR and BCR  to varying scenarios - Mizoram 
iii 
iv 
iv 
v 
vii 
viii 
xi 
1 
1 
10 
10 
11 
12 
19 
26 
27 
27 
28 
32 
34 
40 
41 
41 
42 
47 
47 
35 
41 
43 
44 
44 
44 
45 
45 
46 
46 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
USD 1.0 
= Indian Rupees (INR) 
=INR 68 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iv 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
AG 
AO 
AOS 
APC 
APDMP 
APMC 
ATMA 
AWP&B 
BPCC 
CAG 
CAHW 
CAIM 
CPE 
CRPs 
CSSs 
DAHV 
DEA 
DMU 
DoA 
DPCC 
FAS 
F&AO 
FAO 
FIGs 
Auditor General 
Accounts Officer 
Annual Outcome Survey 
Agriculture Production Commissioner 
Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project 
Agriculture Producers' Marketing Committee 
Agriculture Technology Management Agency 
Annual Work plan and Budget 
Block Project Coordination Committee 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
Community animal health worker 
Convergence of Agricultural Interventions Programme in Maharashtra 
Country Programme Evaluation 
Community Resource Persons 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services 
Department of Economic Affairs 
District Project Management Unit 
Department of Agriculture 
District Project Coordination Committee 
Finance and Accounts Specialist 
Finance and Accounts Officer 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Farmer Interest Groups 
FOCUS 
Fostering Climate Resilient Upland Farming Systems in the Northeast 
FPO 
GEF 
GoI 
GoM 
GoN 
HH 
ICAR 
ICEF 
ILRI 
ILSP 
JRMC 
JTDP 
JTELP 
M&E 
Farmer Producer Organization 
Global Environment Facility 
Government of India 
Government of Mizoram 
Government of Nagaland 
Household 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
India-Canada Environment Facility 
International Livestock Research Institute 
Integrated Livelihoods Support Programme 
Jhum Resource Management Committee 
Jharkhand Tribal Development Programme 
Jharkhand Tribal Empowerment and Livelihoods Programme 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MGNREGS 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
Ministry of DoNER 
Ministry of Development of Northeast Region 
MIS 
MoU 
MOVCD 
Management Information System 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Mission on Organic Value Chain Development 
v 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
NAPCC 
NEPED 
NER 
National Action Plan on Climate Change 
Nagaland Environment Protection and Economic Development through People's Action  
Northeast Region 
NERCOMP 
Northeast Region Community Resource Management Project for Upland Areas 
NGO 
NLUP 
OPELIP 
OTELP 
SPD 
PEFA 
PFM 
PFS 
PLUP 
PMC 
PMKSY 
PMU 
PSC 
PTSLP 
PWD 
RIMs 
RKVY 
SAABs 
SCRAM 
SoCRAN 
SHG 
SLEM 
SoE 
SRI 
SSI 
Non-governmental Organization 
New Land Use Policy 
Orissa PTG Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme 
Orissa Tribal Empowerment and Livelihoods Programme 
State Project Director 
Public Expenditure Financial Accountability Assessment 
Public Finance Management 
Project Financial Statements 
Participatory Land Use Planning 
Project Management Committee 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayi Yojana 
State Project Management Unit 
Project Steering Committee 
Post Tsunami Sustainable Livelihoods Project 
Public Works Department 
Results and Impact Management System 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
Site Allotment Advisory Boards 
Society for Climate Resilient Agriculture in Mizoram 
Society for Climate Resilient Agriculture in Nagaland 
Self Help Group 
Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Management 
Statement of Expenditure 
System of Rice Intensification 
Sustainable Spice Initiative 
SWCAs 
Soil and water conservation Assistants 
TA 
ToR 
ToT 
TRC 
Technical Assistance 
Terms of reference 
Training of Trainers 
Terrace Rice Cultivation 
TRWEP 
Tejaswini Rural Women's Empowerment Project 
UC 
UNDP 
USD 
VC 
VFAs 
WRC 
Utilization certificate 
United Nations Development Programme 
United States Dollar 
Village Council 
Veterinary Field Assistants 
Wet Rice Cultivation 
vi 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Map of the project area 
vii 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Executive Summary1 
1. 
Background  and  rationale.    Nagaland  and  Mizoram  are  two  of  the  eight  states  in  the  North 
Eastern  Region  (NER)  of  India,  a  biodiversity  hotspot  where  climate  change  adaptation  is  of  critical 
importance for the largely rural population.  With a hilly terrain, low population density, shallow soils 
and high rainfall, farmers have adopted a shifting cultivation system known as jhum. This largely self-
sufficient system has adequately met the various needs of rural communities, including food, fibre and 
energy,  but  is  now  getting  disrupted  due  to  shortening  jhum  cycles  as  a  result  of  increasing 
population, focus on high value crops for cash income, soil fertility degradation and top soil erosion on 
account of decreased fallow cycles. Changing climate patterns is further exacerbating these disruptive 
trends. 
In  Nagaland  the  jhum  system  covers  60  percent  of  the  area  under  food  grain  cultivation,  and 
2. 
about half of rural households are engaged in jhum cultivation, with about 100,000 ha of forest being 
cleared  for  cultivation  each  year.    In  Mizoram  about  60  percent  of  the  people  are  engaged  in 
agriculture  with  jhum  being  the  main  land  use  and  20,000  ha  are  being  cleared  each  year  for  jhum 
cultivation.    In  both  states,  rice  is  the  main  staple  food,  and  upland  paddy  is  the  main  jhum  crop, 
grown mixed with other crops. Jhum land and forest-fallows also meet most community firewood and 
timber needs, and are also sources of wild foods and medicinal plants, as well as catchment areas of 
local streams.    
Jhum is a way of farming poor upland soils by utilising fertility accumulated in the forest-fallow 
3. 
period.    The  practice  of  burning  controls  weeds  and  disease  pathogens.    Almost  no  external  inputs 
are  used,  and  the  system  is  naturally  organic.  The mixed  cropping  with  traditional  varieties  reduces 
risk and supports traditional food habits linked to distinctive local cultures. On the other hand,  jhum is 
widely  held  to  be  a  destructive  farming  system,  causing  severe  soil  erosion,  atmospheric  pollution, 
damage to soil biology and loss of biodiversity. The system is increasingly becoming unsustainable as 
jhum  cycles  are  becoming  shorter,  with  less  time  to  restore  soil  fertility  and  biodiversity.  Jhuming  is 
labour-intensive, with no potential for mechanisation, and most work is done by women. With low crop 
yields, not much is produced per day worked, and production usually does not meet household food 
needs or generate much needed cash income.   
Approach.  The  project  will  address  the  issues  facing  jhum  cultivation  through:  (i)  better  jhum 
4. 
cultivation  practices  that  will  be  both  more  productive  and  more  sustainable  creating  an  ecological 
balance;  and  (ii)    supporting  jhumia  households  to  adopt  alternative  farming  systems,  particularly, 
sedentary  farming.  Both  of  these  approaches,  along  with  more  productive  wet  rice  fields,  better 
plantation  crops,  improved  livestock  systems  and  increased  off-farm  income,  will  enhance  farmer’s 
income  and  reduce  pressure  on  natural  resources  and  increase  resilience  to  climate  change.  As 
farmers move to more market-orientated production, the project will support improved market access 
and value chain development.  
5. 
Targeting:  Virtually all households in both these states are members of tribal ethnic groups. In 
Nagaland, the project would cover eight out of the state's 11 districts, and in Mizoram, four out of eight 
districts. The criteria used by the respective states to identify these districts are (i) high prevalence of 
shifting  cultivation  (ii)  prevention  of  an  overlap  with  another  large  donor  funded  project  and  (iii) 
focusing only on hill states and not the plains. In Nagaland the project would cover 650 villages (about 
two-thirds of all villages), with clusters being selected on the grounds of high levels of jhum cultivation 
and shortening jhum cycles, along with potential for high value crops. In Mizoram, all 272 rural villages 
in  the  four  districts  would  be  covered.    In  the  selected  villages  all  agricultural  households  would  be 
covered (137,000  in Nagaland and 64,500 in Mizoram), with  support for disadvantaged  households, 
women and youth. In total 201,500 households with 1,007,500 persons will be reached by the project. 
1Mission composition:Shreekantha Shetty (Mission Leader);A. M. Alam (Economist); Antonio Rota(Lead Adviser, IFAD, Rome); 
V.P  Singh  (Agronomist  and  Agroforestry  Specialist);  Venkatesh  Tagat  (NRM  Specialist);  A.B.  Negi,  (Livestock  Specialist); 
Pratul Dube (Financial Management Specialist); Mahendra Chhetri (Farm Road Engineer); Meera Mishra (Country Coordinator, 
IFAD-ICO); and Sankarasubramaniam Sriram (Programme Support Analyst – Procurement Specialist, IFAD-ICO).  
viii 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
6. 
Scaling  up:  FOCUS  will  build  on  current  and  recent  initiatives  in  the  two  states  that  have 
demonstrated the  effectiveness of a twin approach of promoting better management of  jhum on the 
one hand and gradually shifting towards sedentary agriculture on the other. In Nagaland these are: (i) 
NEPED2,  funded  by  the  India-Canada  Environmental  Facility  (ICEF)  during  1995-2006;  and  (ii) 
Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Management in shifting cultivation areas of Nagaland for ecological 
and livelihood security (SLEM) project funded by UNDP-GEF. In Mizoram, the New Land Use Policy 
(NLUP) promotes sedentary agriculture. Additionally, the North Eastern Region Community Resource 
Management  Project  for  Upland  Areas  (NERCORMP),  a  project  supported  by  IFAD  in  Manipur, 
Meghalaya and the hill districts of Assam, demonstrated community planning and implementation for 
more sustainable land use systems. 
Objective:  The  overall  goal  of  the  project  is  to  increase  agricultural  income  of  201,500 
7. 
households, and  to  enhance their resilience to climate change. This  would be achieved through the 
development  objective  of  increasing  the  environmental  sustainability  and  profitability  of  farming 
systems practiced by highland farmers.   
Components:    The  project  will  have  three    components:  (i)  Improved  jhum  management;  (ii) 
8. 
value chain and market access; and (iii) project management and knowledge services 
Component 1: Improved Jhum Management will aim to promote proven and emerging climate resilient 
best practices.  
1.1  –  Better  jhum  and  conservation  will  support:  (i)  capacity  building  of  staff,  lead  farmers  and 
farmers;  (ii)  land  use  planning  to  develop  rational  and  sustainable  systems  for  village  land 
utilisation;  (iii)  better  jhum  management  through  introduction  of  a  package  of  improved  practices 
for soil and fertility management, crop production, agro-forestry and fallow  management; and (iv) 
community  forest  conservation  with  re-vegetation  and  soil  conservation.  The  project  in  total  will 
support  25,300  ha  of  better  jhum,  29,850  ha  fallow  management  in  jhum,  and  18,440  ha  of 
community/village forests. 
1.2  -  Settled  agriculture  will  support:  (i)  existing  rice  cultivation  on  the  lowlands  through  short 
duration seeds, fertility improvement techniques and improved cropping intensity; and (ii) existing 
orchards  and  plantation  through  demonstration  of  soil  and  water  conservation  works,  improved 
planting  materials  and  planting  of  high  value  trees.  In  Mizoram,  the  poorest  households  in  each 
village  will  be  supported  to  get  access  to  land  for  settled  agriculture.  The  project  in  total  will 
support 15,190 ha of existing terrace cultivation, 15,190 ha of upland settled agriculture and 2,720 
ha of settled agriculture to landless. 
Component 2: Value chain and market access 
2.1 - Value chain development will support: (i) production support for clusters of market-orientated 
spices (chilli, turmeric and ginger in Mizoram and large cardamom, chilli and ginger in Nagaland), 
including supply of planting materials and training; (ii) marketing support for a range of cash crops 
(chilli,  ginger,  turmeric,  cardamom,  oranges,  other  fruit,  bamboo  and  other  jhum  crops  with 
marketable  volume);  (iii)  livestock  support  largely  covering  pigs  with  support  for  breeding,  feed 
improvement,  and  animal  health;  and  (iv)  innovation  support  for  testing  and  dissemination  of 
innovative  technologies  and  approaches  for  agriculture,  livestock  and  marketing. The  project  will 
support 3,600 ha and 4,000 ha of spice production support in Mizoram and Nagaland respectively. 
2.2  -  Market  access  infrastructure  will  support  construction  of  market  infrastructure  using  climate 
resilient building techniques. The project will support building agriculture link roads in Mizoram and 
cross drain structures in Nagaland.  
Component 3: Project Management and Knowledge Services: The project will be implemented by new 
societies to be established within the Agriculture Production Commissioner’s Office  (APC’s Office) in 
2 Implemented in two phases, the first phase (1995-2001) was called Nagaland Environment Protection and Economic 
Development through People’s Action and the second phase (2001-06) was called Nagaland Empowerment of People through 
Economic Development. https://www.nagaland.gov.in//Nagaland/GovernmentAndPrivateBodies/Department_of_NEPED.html 
ix 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Nagaland  and  within  the  Department  of  Agriculture  (DoA)  in  Mizoram.  As  this  project  covers  two 
states, it will be a testing ground for improved jhum practices for the north-eastern region. To facilitate 
cross learning, the project in each state, will engage Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) to 
generate knowledge on upland farming systems and their response to climate change and to create a 
learning platform for other states in NER.  In addition, IFAD will provide a grant to both states for the 
engagement of FAO for capacity building and provision of technical assistance. FAO will be requested 
to contribute from its own resources for this technical assistance sub-project.   
Organisational  Framework:  At  the  state  level,  the  APC’s  office  in  Nagaland  and  DoA  in 
9. 
Mizoram will be the  nodal  agencies,  with the  implementing  agency  being the  two states' Society for 
Climate Resilient Agriculture.  The Chief Executive Officer/Secretary of the Society would be the State 
Project Director (SPD), supported by a team of technical and administrative staff. The SPD would be 
reporting  to  the  APC  in  Nagaland  and  to  the  Secretary,  Agriculture  /  Director,  Department  of 
Agriculture,  in  Mizoram.    At  the  district  level,  a  District  Management  Unit  (DMU)  will  be  established 
within  the  office  of  District  Agriculture  Office.  The  District  Agriculture  Officer  would  be  the  District 
Project Manager, with a small team of professionals to facilitate project implementation.  
10. 
Project  cost:    The  project  would  be  implemented  over  a  six  year  period.  Total  cost  is 
estimated at USD 168.47 million for the two states, which would be financed by an IFAD loan of USD 
75.5  million,  an  IFAD  grant  of  USD  1  million,  parallel  financing  using  Centrally  Sponsored  Scheme 
(CSS) funds of USD 27.51 million, state government contributions of USD 31.92  million, convergence 
funding of USD 26.27 million, and a beneficiary contribution of USD 6.27 million.       
11. 
Benefits and beneficiaries: A total of 201,500 households (137,000 households in Nagaland 
and 64,500 households in Mizoram) would directly benefit from the project. Wider benefits will accrue 
from the generation and dissemination of knowledge, and from the institution building of organisations 
at the village level.    
1. 
Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  and  Sensitivity  Analysis:  The  project  investment  in 
Nagaland  has  an  overall  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  of  29  percent,  Benefit  cost  ratio  of  1.78 
and  Net  Present  Value  of  INR  6,593  million  (discount  rate  of  10  percent).  The  project  investment  in 
Mizoram has an overall Economic Internal Rate of Return of 25 percent, Benefit cost ratio of 1.51 and 
Net  Present  Value  of  INR  3,141  million  (discount  rate  of  10  percent).  A  switching  value  analysis 
demonstrates that costs would have to increase by 78% or benefits to decrease by 44% for the NPV 
to be zero in case of Nagaland. Similarly costs would have to increase by 51% or benefits to decrease 
by 34% for the NPV to be zero in case of Mizoram.   
Sustainability.  Project interventions should be sustainable. Improved agricultural practices, 
12. 
if  found  by  farmers  to  be  useful  and  profitable,  will  be  sustained  provided  inputs  and  markets  are 
available. Interventions in the market access and value chain component (largely in the private sector) 
will aim to ensure this. The project will build capacity of local service providers at the village level and 
will establish village level suppliers of inputs. All of these will be operated by local people and groups, 
and be financially viable and so sustainable after the project is completed.     
13. 
Adherence  to  IFAD  policies.  The  project  is  fully  in  line  with  IFAD’s  Strategic  Framework 
(2016-2025),  and  adheres  to  IFAD  policies  for  targeting  and  gender  mainstreaming,  climate  change 
and  social,  environmental  assessment,  engagement  with  indigenous  peoples,  nutrition  sensitive 
agriculture,  and  scaling  up.  It  is  also  aligned  to  the  India  COSOP.  The  environmental  and  social 
category is considered to be B, while the climate risk classification is deemed to be Moderate.  
x 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Logical Framework –combined 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Baseline 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Mid-Term  Endline 
Source 
Frequency  Responsibility 
Assumptions (A) / 
Risks (R) 
Outreach 
Goal: Income of 201,500 farm 
households in hill areas of 
Nagaland and Mizoram 
increased and their resilience to 
climate change enhanced 
Development Objective: 
Environmental sustainability and 
profitability of the farming 
systems in hill areas  enhanced 
Outcome 1:  Improved farmers' 
capacities to manage upland 
farming sustainably 
Outputs:  
a. Participatory Land Use 
Planning conducted  
b. improved jhum management 
-estimated corresponding 
total number of household 
members 
-Number of youth receiving 
services promoted by the 
project 
Number of HH reached 
% of HH jhum- farming for  
3 or more years 
continuously on single plot 
Number of HH reporting 
increase of >100% in  
household incomes 
% soil carbon 
Real increase in net farm 
income (in 2017 prices)  in 
million INR 
Number of trees increased 
at least 20 per ha in jhum 
plot 
Number of HH reporting 
adoption of environmentally 
sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies and 
practices3 
No of VC with completed 
PLUP  and land suitability 
maps 
No farmers trained  (W/M) 
on better jhum and fallow 
management 
0 
0 
0 
402,000 
1,007,500 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
M&E Unit 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
24,180 
81,400 
60,450 
201,500 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
M&E Unit 
70% 
Impact 
assessment 
Baseline 
End-line 
61,050 
151,125 
Impact 
assessment 
Baseline 
End-line 
4% 
3,151.2 
4,754.6 
Soil carbon 
test 
TOS 
10 #/ha 
20#/ha 
TOS 
81,400 
201,500 
Project MIS 
Baseline 
Annual 
Baseline 
MTR 
End-line 
Baseline 
MTR 
End-line 
Yearly 
M&E Unit 
Commissioned 
Study 
M&E Unit 
Commissioned 
Study 
M&E Unit 
M&E Unit 
Commissioned 
Study 
M&E Unit 
Commissioned 
Study 
M&E unit 
922 
922 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
M&E unit 
101,800 
290,800 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
M&E unit 
(A) economic 
growth and social 
stability  
(R) Climate 
change and/or 
better non-farm 
opportunities 
makes farming 
unattractive. 
(A) Producers are 
able to finance the 
continued 
investments 
required to climate 
proof their farms  
(A) Access to 
reliable technical 
advice and 
planting material is 
secured  
3Climate resilient technologies and practices refer to agro-forestry, soil and water conservation, improved planting material, integration with livestock 
xi 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Baseline 
c. Village forest conserved 
No farmers trained  (W/M) 
on settled agriculture 
Area in ha  under SWC, by 
jhum, jhum fallow, settled 
agriculture 
Area under CCA managed 
by VC 
d. Access of poorest households   No of   HH benefitting from 
Outcome 2: Increased volume of 
marketed crops and livestock , 
with improved returns to 
producers 
Outputs: 
a. Spice producers are integrated 
in national and international spice 
markets 
b. Increased productivity of pig 
production 
c. value-chain  clusters 
developed 
support to landless 
Gross returns from spices 
(million INR)  
Gross returns from livestock  
(million INR) 
No participating HH in 
organized spice value chain 
Pig off-take number 
Number of clusters 
Outcome 3: Improved access to 
markets 
Outputs: 
a. Rural roads rehabilitated  
Number of farmers reporting 
improved physical access to 
markets 
Length  and  type  of  access 
road rehabilitated in km 
Underlined indicators are IFAD RIMS indicators 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Mid-Term  Endline 
Source 
Frequency  Responsibility 
35,000 
105,200 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
M&E unit 
58,240 
88,250 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
M&E unit 
10,600 
18,440 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
M&E unit 
5440 
10,880 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
M&E unit 
289.9 
947.0 
Project MIS 
Yearly 
295.8 
584.4 
M&E Unit 
Commissioned 
Study 
6800 
15,200 
AOS 
Annual 
M&E unit 
27,000 
55,000 
AOS 
Annual 
M&E unit 
35 
80 
AOS 
Annual 
M&E unit 
20,000 
48,000 
AOS 
Annual 
M&E unit 
300 
800 
Project 
MIS 
Quarterly 
M&E unit 
Assumptions (A) / 
Risks (R) 
(A) Effective 
convergence with 
Govt programme 
to build the assets 
of the poorer HH 
(R) High 
transaction cost 
due to small 
volume and remote 
location 
(R) Implementation 
of   
APMC Act 
prevents new 
types of market 
linkages and 
reduces farm-gate 
prices. 
(A) Operation and 
maintenance by 
communities and 
Govt is effective. 
xii 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
1. 
India’s economic and agricultural development 
2. 
Poverty:  with  over  250  million  poor  people,  India  remains  home  to  the  largest  population  of  the 
poor  in  the  world.    Despite  being  the  third  largest  economy  in  the  world  in  terms  of  purchasing  power 
parity  (PPP)  and  the  fastest  growing  large  economy,  reducing  poverty  remains  a  key  challenge  for  the 
country. Headcount poverty in the country declined from 37.2 percent (rural 41.8 percent) in 2004-05 to 
21.90  percent  (rural  25.70  percent)  in  2011-12.  India  also  achieved  Millennium  Development  Goal  1  of 
reducing extreme poverty by half. Even so, removing poverty continues to be a key development priority 
for the country and is important globally for the achievement of SDG 1. 
3. 
Agriculture:  India’s  agricultural  performance  has  been  remarkable  over  the  past  decades, 
transforming the nation from chronic dependence on grain imports into net exporter of food, particularly of 
rice, cotton, sugar and beef.  Nevertheless, with faster growth in other sectors, the share of agriculture in 
India’s economy has declined to less than 17 percent. Agriculture continues to be a key livelihood source 
and  an economic anchor for a majority of people in the country. Growth and stability  of the farm sector 
therefore  is  critical  to  impact  poverty  as  rural  areas  account  for  over  71  percent4  of  poor  people  in  the 
country. About 60 percent of agriculture in India continues to be rain-fed and therefore highly sensitive to 
climate  variability.  Even  a  modest  deficit  in  monsoon,  delay  in  its  arrival  or  its  erratic  performance  can 
adversely impact the main kharif crop, food production, food prices, incomes and food security. 
Climate change: the Government of India (GoI) has been alive to the challenges of climate change 
4. 
and has taken initiatives to address climate risks. The ratification of the Paris Treaty on Climate Change in 
October 2016 whereby India committed to reduce greenhouse gases, promote use of renewable sources 
of  energy  and  increase  forest  cover  is  an  example  of  India’s  conscious  efforts  to  tackle  the  issue  of 
climate  change.  Earlier  in  2008,  India  released  its  National  Action  Plan  on  Climate  Change  (NAPCC), 
focused  on  adaptation  to  climate  change.  Protection  of  the  poor  and  vulnerable  sections  of  society 
through sustainable development strategies is a key priority in the plan. There are eight missions under 
the  NAPCC,  of  which  four  directly  relate  to  adaptation,  including  the  National  Water  Mission,  National 
Mission for sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem, National Mission for a Green India and National Mission 
for  Sustainable Agriculture. A  detailed  mission  document  has  been  prepared  for  each  mission,  outlining 
the key challenges, proposed strategies and actions, specific activities and implementing agencies. All the 
missions have been approved by the Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change. 
Policies  and  programmes:  GoI  has  put  in  place  several  rural  development  schemes  with 
5. 
important  policies,  strategies  and  acts  that  provide  the  framework  for  agriculture,  forestry,  rural 
development  and  growth,  and  which  are  central  to  IFAD’s  efforts  in  India.  The  GoI  has  over  the  years, 
implemented  flagship  programmes  across  the  country  to  increase  the  livelihood  potential,  especially  in 
rural  areas.  Among  these,  the  Mahatma  Gandhi  National  Rural  Employment  Guarantee  Scheme,  the 
National Rural Livelihood Mission, and the Food Security Program under the National Food Security Act 
and the National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture are the main ones.     
2. 
North-Eastern India: Climate change and agriculture  
6. 
The North Eastern Region (NER) of the country is one of the 12 bio-diversity hotspots, being home 
to more than one-third of the country's bio-diversity. Climate change adaptation for North Eastern Region 
is critical as more than 81 percent of the population in the region is rural (Census 2011) and dependent on 
4As per the Rangarajan Committee report (http://planningcommission.nic.in/reports/genrep/pov_rep0707.pdf), of the 363 million poor 
people in India in 2011-12, approximately 260.5 million were rural. The estimates as per the Tendulkar Committee 
(http://planningcommission.nic.in/reports/genrep/pov_rep0707.pdf)for the same year were 270 million total and 217 rural. 
1 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
climate  sensitive  production  systems  and  natural  resources.    With  a  hilly  and  mountainous  terrain, 
relatively  low  population  density,  shallow  soils,  high  rainfall  and  physical  isolation  from  the  main  land 
mass of India, the natural resource management practices, livelihood systems and food habits of people 
in  the  hill  states  of  NER  have  evolved  around  a  shifting  cultivation  system known  as  jhum. This  largely 
self-sufficient  system  has  adequately  met  the  various  needs  of  rural  communities,  including  food,  fibre 
and  energy,  but  is  now  getting  disrupted  due  to  shortening  jhum  cycles  as  a  result  of  increasing 
population and conversion of land to permanent plantation and other crops.  Changing climate patterns is 
further exacerbating these disruptive trends. 
7. 
Conscious of these challenges, Nagaland and Mizoram, two of the eight NER States, are seeking 
to restore the balance between the ecological imperatives of their complex highland ecology and growing 
human  needs  by  integrating  modern  scientific  and  technological  knowledge  with  traditional  know-how, 
experience and locally  evolved systems of resource governance  with  embedded cultural practices. This 
calls  for  a  flexible,  deliberative  and  multi-disciplinary  approach  of  engaging  with  village  communities 
towards  sustainable  intensification  of  jhum  with  the  end  goal  of  promoting  climate  resilient  practices 
through  the  twin  approaches  of  systematically  aligning  jhum  cycles  to  the  natural  regeneration  cycle  of 
forests and simultaneously encouraging sedentary agriculture where possible. Government of Nagaland 
(GoN)  and  Government  of  Mizoram  (GoM)  have  sought  IFAD  support  as  the  latter  has  carried  out 
successful programming in the area of community-based natural resources development in the NER and 
elsewhere. 
In Nagaland the jhum based upland farming system covers 60 percent of the total agricultural area 
8. 
under  food  grain  cultivation  and  half  of  the  state's  production  of  food  grains.      About  half  of  rural 
households in the state are engaged in jhum cultivation, with about 100,000 ha of forest being cleared for 
cultivation  each  year.    In  Mizoram,  about  60  percent  of  the  people  are  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits 
and the main agricultural land use is jhum, with about 20,000 ha being cleared each year.  In both states, 
rice is the main staple food, and upland paddy is the main jhum crop.  The hilly topography of both states 
limits the area of wetland paddy that can be grown, meaning that neither state is able to meet its needs 
for rice from domestic production.   
9. 
Alongside upland paddy, other cereals, root and tuber crops, pulses, oilseed, vegetables and spices 
are grown on jhum land. Cultivated jhum land and forest-fallows also meet most of community firewood 
and  timber  needs,  and  are  sources  of  a  variety  of  wild  fruits,  berries  and  medicinal  plants,  as  well  as 
being the catchment areas of local springs and streams. Governments in both states have made efforts to 
promote  settled  agriculture  in  upland  areas,  with  plantation  crops  such  as  oranges,  tea  and  oil  palm, 
being most suited to the hilly topography.    
10.  Rural  Poverty  in  the  project  area.  In  Nagaland,  the  poverty  analysis  conducted  as  part  of  the 
preparatory activities for the project design, shows that poverty has multiple dimensions in the rural areas 
of  the  state,  namely  in  terms  of  access  to  basic  services,  connectivity  and  low  incomes.  It  is  closely 
associated  with the agriculture and natural resources based livelihoods of the rural households: the  low 
productivity, the high inputs of family labour for agriculture, the limited options to diversify livelihoods, and 
the high cost of living in the State, trap households in poverty and render them vulnerable to price shocks 
on the one hand and to climate change on the other. As per census data, the incidence of rural poverty in 
the  state  has  doubled  from  2004  to  2012  and  stood  at  19.9%  in  2011-2012  equivalent  to  280,000 
persons. The qualitative wealth ranking exercise conducted in sample villages suggests that on average 
16% of rural households earn less than  75,000 INR/year which puts them close to or below the poverty 
line. The poor rely on a production system comprised of jhum cultivation, terrace cultivation and livestock 
rearing,  and  their  landholdings  are  typically  less  than  1  ha  of  jhum  and  1  ha  of  terrace  cultivation. 
Landlessness is less than 10% of rural households. 
2 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
11. 
In Mizoram, poverty and under development is primarily linked to the continued subsistence mode 
of farm production with over 85% of rural households dependent on some kind of farming including jhum. 
Nearly  93%  of  self-employed  population  in  agriculture  are  considered  as  poor  primarily  due  to  several 
factors  negatively  impacting    performance  of  agriculture  including  small,  unproductive  land  holding  with 
traditional  jhum farming, acidic soil  with low fertility and overall less sunlight affecting better growth, low 
productivity  of  food  grains  per  unit  area,  challenges  of  access  to  credit  and  agricultural  input  services, 
difficulties in marketing even where there is surplus production, low skills of agricultural labourer for high 
technology,  etc. The incidence of poverty  increased during the period 2003/04  to 2009/10, from 23% to 
31% and this put the number of rural poor at 160,000 persons. The qualitative wealth ranking conducted 
as part of the preparatory study for the design of the project suggests that 35% of rural households earn 
less  than  5,000  INR/month/HH  which  is  less  than  the  state  poverty  line.  More  than  half  of  agricultural 
holding (54.65%) are marginal holdings (below 1 ha). The highest percentage of youths (18-35 years) are 
engaged  in  household  agricultural  activities  (53.7%),  followed  by  casual  labour  (detailed  analysis  of 
poverty, gender and youth in Appendix 2). 
12.  Nutrition indicators for the states in the north-east of India are varied. However, both Nagaland and 
Mizoram fare better than the national average in terms of all key major indicators of underweight, stunting 
and wasting in children aged under 5 years.  For example, whereas the national average for prevalence 
of  underweight  in  under  5  children  is  29.4  percent,  the  prevalence  in  Nagaland  is  19.5  percent  and  for 
Mizoram it is 14.8 percent. In terms of prevalence of wasting, again Nagaland (11.8 percent) and Mizoram 
(14.3 percent) are lower than the national average of 15.1 percent. Similarly, against the national average 
of  38.7  percent  for  stunting,  the  percent  prevalence  in  Nagaland  and  Mizoram  are  29.1  and  26.9 
respectively. In terms of low birth weight of children under 3, Nagaland is slightly lower than the national 
average whereas Mizoram is the best in the country5.  The two states also fare better than the national 
average in terms of prevalence of anaemia. 
B.  Rationale 
1.  The problems to be addressed 
In the hilly tracts of Northeast India, jhum agriculture is the dominant economic activity and over 86 
13. 
per cent of the people living in hills are dependent on it.   With increasing population, the area under jhum 
increased  from  1,326,000  hectares  in  1980  to  1,685,000  hectares  in  1990,  although  there  has  been  a 
decline  in recent  years.   Shifting cultivation  usually involves the following steps:  (i) selection  of forested 
hilly  land;  (ii)  cutting  down  trees  and  shrubs;  (iii)  allowing  this  vegetation  to  dry  before  burning;  (iv) 
traditional rituals; (v) broadcasting and dibbling seeds, tubers and cuttings; (vi) weeding and protection of 
crops; (vii) harvesting and threshing; and (viii) post-harvest festivals.   
14.  Land  is  usually  cultivated  for  between  one  and  two  years,  although  cultivation  can  sometimes 
extend to three or four years, before the land is abandoned to naturally regenerate and return to forest for 
a number of years. The choice of crop is consumption-oriented with a mixture of crops being grown on the 
same plot, however the need for cash means that there is increased cultivation of crops for sale, such as 
ginger and chilli.  The length of the  jhum cycle (the total period of cultivation plus fallow-forest period) is 
influenced by population pressure, nature and density of forest re-growth, terrain, angle of slope, texture 
of  soil  and  rainfall.  Areas  of  sparse  population  generally  have  longer  jhum  cycle  (15-25  years),  while 
areas with high density of population have shorter jhum cycle (5-10 years). 
15.  The practice of jhum has many arguments in favour and against. Those in favour believe that it is 
built  on  the  forest’s  natural  cycle  of  regeneration,  causing  only  temporary  loss  of  forest  cover  which 
regenerates  itself  quickly  after  the  farmers  abandon  jhum  land.    Jhuming  is  a  way  of  farming  thin  and 
infertile  upland  soils,  where  normal  sedentary  agriculture  is  not  possible,  by  utilising  the  fertility  that 
5 India Health Report- Nutrition (2015). http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/file/INDIA-HEALTH-REPORT-
NUTRITION_2015.pdf 
3 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
accumulates  in  organic  matter  during  the  forest-fallow  period.  Unlike  permanent  crops  and  plantations, 
forest  loss  is  only  temporary,  and  in  this  way  bio-diversity  is  deemed  to  be  maintained. The  practice  of 
burning controls weeds and disease pathogens.  Almost no external inputs are used, and the system is 
naturally  organic. The  mixed  cropping  system  using  traditional  crop  varieties  reduces  risk  and  supports 
rich  and  diversified  traditional  food  habits  linked  to  distinctive  local  cultures.  This  argument  in  favour  of 
jhum  however  does  not  take  into  account  the  distortions  that  have  crept  into  jhum  farming  system 
including reduced jhum cycle resulting in inadequate time for regeneration, and cultivation of cash crops 
such as ginger which leads to extensive top soil disturbance leading to top soil erosion.    
 The arguments against jhum centre on it being a destructive and unsustainable farming system. It 
16. 
is said that this is the major cause of land degradation in the north-east6.  Jhuming is often carried out on 
very steep slopes, and can result in severe soil erosion7.  Burning vegetation creates pollution and adds 
to  atmospheric  CO2,  as  well  as  destroying  soil  microbes  and  organic  matter,  and  resulting  in  a  loss  of 
organic carbon and nitrogen from the soil (although it may enhance phosphorus and add potash).   The 
destruction  of  forest  is  also  believed  to  negatively  impact  biodiversity.  In  particular,  the  system  is 
increasingly  unsustainable  as  jhum  cycles  become  shorter,  with  less  time  for  fertility  to  recover  and 
biodiversity to be restored.  Jhuming is labour-intensive, with almost no potential for mechanisation, and 
most work is done by women8.  With low and declining crop yields, not much is produced per day worked, 
and jhum production usually does not meet household food needs, or generate much in the way of cash 
income.  Jhuming is also vulnerable to weather variations – as crops rely entirely on rainfall and there is 
little scope for effective measures to increase infiltration of water.  At the same time, early rains can delay 
the  burning  of  vegetation,  so  preventing  timely  planting  of  crops.  In  both  states  population  growth  and 
other  demands  on  land,  mean  that  the  jhum  cycle  is  becoming  shorter  and  the  system  less  productive 
and  sustainable. This  is  visible  in  Nagaland  with  jhum  cycles  coming  down  to  less  than  seven  years  in 
one-third of the villages, and in some places to only 5 to 6 years.  As  jhum cycles shorten, the soil does 
not get adequate time to recoup and a downward spiral of degradation, leading to lower yields, resulting 
in an expansion of jhum area to meet household needs, and even shorter cycles set in. The situation in 
Mizoram is not much better with jhum cycles reduced to 5 years in many villages. 
2.  
Approach and logic behind project interventions 
Support for traditional practices and culture 
17.  The  design  of  this  project  is  in  consonance  with  the  following  nine  principles  of  engagement 
espoused in  the  IFAD Policy  on  Engagement  with Indigenous Peoples: (i) cultural heritage and  identity; 
(ii) free, prior and informed consent; (iii) community driven development; (iv) equitable access to land and 
resources;  (v)  building  on  indigenous  knowledge;  (vi)  environmental  issues  and  climate  change;  (vii) 
access to markets; (viii) empowerment; and (ix) gender equality.  
Jhum cultivation and the traditional foods that it produces are the cornerstones of the tribal cultural 
18. 
heritage and identity in Mizoram and Nagaland, and the project is focused on making this system more 
productive  and  sustainable.  Village  livestock  also  have  an  important  role  in  traditions  and  food  -  often 
being  consumed  at  festivals.    The  participatory  planning  process  through  elected  Village  Councils  will 
ensure free, prior and  informed consent,  and a  community driven development approach. There are no 
land tenure issues in Nagaland and households largely have access to land resources for jhuming. Three 
types of land ownership pattern exist in Nagaland. They include: (i) private lands which are used for both 
jhuming  and also for terraced rice cultivation; (ii) clan  lands  which are owned by  a clan collectively and 
used for fuel wood collection; and (iii) community lands owned collectively  by  the entire village  which  is 
6Task Force on Shifting Cultivation, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi.  Thoughts on Rural Development in North-East India in the 
21st Century', Journal of North- Eastern Council, Shillong, May 1995 
7Soil loss on steep slopes can be as high as 40.9 ton/ha, with corresponding loss of soil 
nutrients.https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258386412_Soil_Health_Management_under_Hill_Agroecosystem_of_North_East_India 
8 75% of jhum work is done by women,  NEPED (2007). Adding Value to Shifting Cultivation in Nagaland, India.  
4 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
largely  used  as  conservation  forests  and  for  fuel  wood  collection.  There  are  generally  three  ways  of 
jhuming on private lands excluding terrace rice fields: (i) Jhum land is in 8-15 blocks depending upon the 
jhum  cycle  and  majority  of  the  households  own  a  parcel  of  land  in  each  block  and  undertake  jhum 
cultivation  collectively;  (ii)  jhum  land  is  in  8-15  blocks  depending  upon  the  jhum  cycle  and  some  (not 
majority) of the households own a parcel of land in each block and only those who own land undertake 
jhum cultivation in that jhum cycle while others do not take up  jhuming or use land owned by others for 
jhuming; and (iii) jhum land are divided into blocks owned by individual households and the households 
practice  jhum  on  their  private  land  individually.  The  first  scenario  where  jhum  land  is  divided  into  8-15 
blocks  in  which  majority  of  the  members  own  land  is  the  most  common  scenario.  However,  the  land 
ownership  is  de  jure  as  there  are  no  land  records  and  title  documents.    The  mechanism  for  resolving 
disputes is vested with the village council recognizing the cultural heritage and identity of the indigenous 
people. Land in Mizoram is generally community managed with traditional free access to all households 
living in the villages. GoM holds these lands in trust on behalf of the community. On the recommendation 
of Village Councils, the state government is issuing title deeds for up to eight hectares to persons taking 
up  settled  agriculture,  but  this  can  effectively  exclude  households  who  lack  the  resources  to  invest  in 
settled agriculture.  FOCUS will address this issue to ensure equitable access to land resources. 
19.  Building  on  indigenous  knowledge  will  be  a  key  to  improving  both  jhum  cultivation  and  settled 
agriculture.  There  are  a  number  of  examples  of  traditional  practices  for  more  productive  jhum 
management  in  Nagaland  and  Mizoram  which  provide  the  basis  for  the  improved  practices  to  be 
supported by FOCUS9. Wetland rice cultivation in Nagaland is based around the traditional  zabo system 
of rainwater  harvesting.  Representation of  women is already mandated by state policy  and  laws  in the 
Village Council (VC), the principal  local governance  institution at  the  village level.   Women are already 
fully  involved  in  production  and  marketing  of  farm  produce,  as  well  as  in  credit  group.    The  project  will 
build  on  this  to  ensure  empowerment  and  gender  equality,  with  full  participation  in  project  institutions, 
capacity building for women, and reduction in their often excessive workload. 
Improving jhum cultivation 
20.  The  project  will  address  the  issues  facing  jhum  cultivation  through:  (i)  better  jhum  cultivation 
practices  that  will  be  both  more  productive  and  more  sustainable,  with  an  ecological  balance  being 
created;  and  (ii)  gradually  shifting  jhumia  households  to  sedentary  farming.    Both  of  these  approaches, 
along  with  more  productive  wet  rice  fields,  better  plantation  crops,  improved  livestock  systems  and 
increased  off-farm  income,  will  enhance  farmer’s  income  and  reduce  pressure  on  land  and  enhance 
adaptation  to  climate  change.    As  farmers  seek  to  increase  their  income  via  more  market-orientated 
production,  they  will  need  support  for  marketing,  including  orientation  of  production  towards  what  the 
market needs in terms of volume, quality and price.    
21.  More  productive  and  sustainable  jhuming  (“better  jhum”)  requires  a  judicious  combination  of 
modern  scientific  knowledge,  agricultural  technologies  and  practices  in  natural  resource  management 
with  the  traditional  wisdom  and  adaptive  practices  of  the  highland  communities.  For  instance,  farmers 
already practice certain measures to conserve soils, such as placing logs along contours; and this can be 
augmented by a ground cover of nitrogen-fixing legumes to add fertility, conserve moisture and suppress 
weeds.    Such  measures  will  enable  communities  to  cultivate  a  jhum  field  for  a  longer  period,  thereby 
restoring the jhum cycles to the earlier, sustainable levels of 15 to 20 years.  A virtuous cycle can thus be 
created. Similarly, planting of carefully selected indigenous species of trees and shrubs on  jhum fallows 
can  reduce  soil  degradation  and  increase  the  biomass  for  soil  fertility  restoration  and  as  firewood  and 
timber. This, together with better planting material for jhum crops (and judicious introduction of new crops 
9 For example "The Alder Managers, the cultural ecology of a village in Nagaland", Malcolm Cairns, PhD thesis, 2007.  Also see 
Building upon Traditional Agriculture in Nagaland, IIRR, 1999.   In Mizoram there is the indigenous Changkham technology - see 
https://www.cinram.umn.edu/sites/cinram.umn.edu/files/purama_may_28_2015.pdf.  
5 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
and varieties), will increase household food production and also enable additional sales of surplus cash 
crops.   
22.  The communitarian systems of resource governance embedded in the cultural ethos and customs 
of the highland communities in the two States provide an ideal setting to introduce such changes, and the 
project will support participatory land use planning in each village to enable communities to come up with 
a  rational  plan  for  equitable  and  sustainable  use  of  natural  resources,  including  reservation  of  steeper 
slopes  for  trees  and  the  establishment  of  community  conservation  areas  which  will  be  reserved  for 
traditional  timber and non-timber forest products. 
More productive and sustainable settled agriculture 
23.  As  farmers  become  able  to  cultivate  more  productive  jhum  plots  for  a  longer  period,  and  as  they 
invest  in  planting  trees  and  soil  conservation  methods,  they  will  be  less  inclined  to  shift  their  cultivation 
plots  and  jhum  will  evolve  into  sedentary  farming.      Jhum  farming  is  highly  labour  intensive  (and  a  real 
burden  for  women),  and  improvements  to  enhance  the  productivity  and  income  generation  from  settled 
agricultural  and  livestock  enterprises,  will  mean  that  households  will  earn  considerably  more  from  non-
jhum activities and so reduce the amount of jhum they cultivate10.  The design mission saw examples of 
this  –  such  as  a  village  in  Nagaland  that  had  given  up  jhum  in  favour  of  pig  production.      With  only  a 
limited area of terraces for wetland paddy cultivation (the topography means it is difficult to create more 
terraces),  settled  agriculture  on  sloping  land  means,  to  a  large  extent,  a  move  to  permanent  tree  and 
plantation  crops  which  are  produced  for  sale  rather  than  meeting  subsistence  food  production.      The 
approach to support settled agriculture  will be to improve the productivity  of land and provide access to 
better  planting  materials  (with  village  level  plant  nurseries  and  local  seed  systems)  and  other  inputs, 
along with training.   Where possible, intercropping with annual crops will contribute  to food security and 
also ensure the continued production of the traditional crops that were previously grown in jhum. 
24.  Particular attention will be paid to the poorest households who may otherwise lack the resources to 
invest  in  settled  agriculture.    In  Mizoram,  where  there  is  greater  emphasis  on  conversion  of  jhum  to 
settled agriculture, these households will be identified and provided with land titles for a specific area of 
jhum land for conversion to settled agriculture. The project will then provide support for these households 
for land development and the establishment of permanent crops. In Nagaland, where much less land has 
so far been converted, the project will support jhum conversion via physical and vegetative soil and water 
conservation  methods  (including  narrow  bench  terraces  for  wet  rice  cultivation)  to  make  sloping  land 
agriculture productive and sustainable.    
25.  The  technologies  and  methods  used  in  production  of  these  relatively  new  commercial  crops  are 
often out of date and crops are nowhere near as productive as they should be. Up to now the emphasis 
for  government  support  has  been  on  getting  these  crops  established  rather  than  on  improving 
productivity.      Standards  of  crop  husbandry  are  often  poor,  and  pests  and  diseases  are  not  effectively 
controlled.   In some cases farmers are using dangerous pesticides such as Furadan and DDT, and it may 
well be possible to reduce production costs as well as increase productivity.     
26.  Household  food  security  will  not  be  overlooked.    There  is  a  major  opportunity  to  increase  the 
productivity of  wetland rice through integrated soil fertility management,  improved  irrigation,  better seed 
and improved crop varieties (although care will be taken to preserve traditional varieties, many of which 
fetch premium prices in local markets).  Pulses, oilseeds and maize can be sown after paddy has been 
harvested to utilise residual soil moisture and produce fodder. There are also opportunities to grow food 
crops, especially the local vegetables and grains found in traditional jhum, as intercrops in orchards and 
in homestead vegetable gardens. 
Access to value chains 
10 Not only does settled agriculture require less labour, but a higher share of this labour comes from men. 
6 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
27.  This  shift  from subsistence  to  commercial  production  can  result  in  a  major  increase  in  household 
income  and  improvement  in  living  standards.    However  more  engagement  with  markets  has  risks  and 
needs to be accompanied  by improved access to markets and better value chain management.   If this 
does not happen, households may revert to  jhum cultivation11.   FOCUS value chain support will aim to 
address bottlenecks in the production and marketing system, to ensure that farmers are able to produce 
products for specific market opportunities. It will complement and support better jhum and the expansion 
of settled agriculture.  
28.  There  is  potential  to  capitalise  on  jhum  products  as  being  traditional  varieties  produced  under 
natural  conditions  (they  are  effectively  organic  by  default).    Markets  for  such  products  exist  within  the 
state12, however to access larger and more distant markets may need some form of certification - such as 
organic.    FOCUS  will  enable  partnerships  with  external  agribusiness  and  trade  organisations  to  enable 
access to such markets13. Processing of products adds value and can reduce  the volume  and  increase 
shelf  life  to  make  access  to  external  markets  easier.    There  are  opportunities  to  produce  ground  and 
packaged  spices  for  local  markets  and  semi-processed  (cleaned,  sliced  and  dried)  spices  for  markets 
outside of the state (providing new opportunities for local youth).  Drying is not so easy due to the amount 
of rainfall at the time of harvesting some crops, but there is potential to support the development of new 
approaches and drying technologies - which would also be useful for paddy and maize as well as spices.    
29.  FOCUS will develop value chains for selected products.  A value chain study14 carried out as part of 
the  project  design  process,  has  identified  a  number  of  sub-sectors  with  potential  for  value  chain 
interventions.    These  are  spices  (large  cardamom,  ginger,  chilli,  and  turmeric),  oranges,  areca  nut, 
bamboo,  vegetables,  and  pineapple.      Based  on  the  potential  benefits  from  improving  market  linkages, 
the project will initially focus on cardamom, ginger and chilli in Nagaland, and turmeric, ginger and chilli in 
Mizoram - once dried these are non-perishable, low volume and high value products that can  withstand 
transport to more distant markets.  At the same time, the project will provide marketing support for widely 
growing cash crops, such as ginger and oranges, as well as bamboo, including support for aggregation 
and producer organisations, and links with the private sector.  The project will support the establishment 
of small marketing units in the Horticulture Department of Mizoram and in the State Agriculture Marketing 
Board of Nagaland to provide support on policy, market intelligence and planning issues. 
30.  Market access is also hindered by poor road infrastructure.   In Nagaland the road network is not 
well developed, although around 80% of villages are connected by a road, only about 20% have an all-
weather  bitumen  road.    Many  villages  are  connected  by  little  more  than  a  farm  track,  which  gets  very 
muddy  and  may  be  prone  to  landslides,  making  it  impassable  during  the  rains.    In  Mizoram  almost  all 
villages  are  now  connected  by  all-weather  roads,  these  tend  to  run  along  the  ridges  where  settlements 
are  located.  Much  of  the  land  with  good  potential  for  the  development  of  plantation  and  other 
permanent crops  are  in  lower  valleys,  which  lack  any  road  access.    In  response  to  these  needs  in 
Mizoram the project  will  invest in access roads and in Nagaland the  emphasis will be on  building cross 
drain structures to make the roads usable during rainy season. In both states, funds  will be provided to 
support  innovative  sub-projects  to  be  implemented  by  selected  government  agencies,  universities  and 
NGOs.   
Supporting village livestock development 
11 The design mission saw an example of this in Mizoram, where farmers had taken up grape cultivation for winemaking.  This had 
done well while the state prohibited the sale of other alcoholic drinks, but relaxation of this policy to allow sales of liquor from outside 
of the state has meant a big drop in demand for locally produced wine.  In Hnahlan village, the number of jhum households had 
fallen to only 40 (out of 730 in the village) with the growth in grape production.  However, with problems in marketing wine over the 
last two years, the number of jhum households has now increased to 350.  The village Grape Growers Association is actively 
looking for other opportunities such as grape juice, while some farmers are moving into oranges.  
12http://www.in.undp.org/content/india/en/home/library/environment_energy/market-development-assessment-for-organic-agri-
horticulture-prod/ 
13 Contact has already been made with this spices initiative: https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/sectors/spices/ 
14Value Chain Analysis Report for Mizoram and Nagaland, Sanjay Kumar Gupta (Value Chain Consultant) 
7 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
31.  The project will also support livestock production in project villages.  Livestock are an integral part 
of  rural  livelihoods  and  traditions,  and  in  both  states  most  village  households  keep  a  few  pigs  and/or 
chickens.  Cattle  and  goat  rearing  are  also  significant  in  some  locations,  and  in  some  areas  mithun 
(gayal -  Bosfrontalis)  are  kept.    Mithun  have  a  special  place  in  the  culture  of  north-east  India.      Poultry 
contribute  to  household  food  security,  while  pigs  represent  a  form  of  savings  which  can  be  sold  for  a 
significant lump sum (INR15,000 to INR 20,000) at times of need.  Pigs and poultry are, to a large degree, 
fed  on  domestic  food  waste  and  crop  by-products,  but  manufactured  feeds  are  also  used.    Support  for 
pigs will enable project interventions to reach most of the households in project villages. 
32.  The  rationale  to  include  livestock  in  the  project  is  to  increase  household  income,  reduce 
dependence  on  jhum  cultivation,  utilize  crop  by-products,  and  to  realize  new  opportunities  through 
improved  production technologies, both for livestock and feed  production.    Villages do  not allow pigs to 
roam,  and  all  pigs  are  housed,  generating  a  significant  volume  of  manure.    However  almost  no  use  is 
made  of  pig  manure  and  there  is  an  opportunity  to  demonstrate  improved  composting  systems,  which 
households can  be shown  how to use  to make compost that could  be  utilized  in homestead  vegetable 
gardens and on areas of permanent cropping.     
33.  The  approach  to  livestock  development  will  be  based  on  the  successful  “Pashu  Sakhi”  model  15.  
This involves having a trained Community Animal Health Worker (CAHW) in each village who will provide 
preventive  health  services  and  first  aid,  as  well  as  providing  advice  and  information  on  improved 
husbandry  practices  including  feeding  and  housing.      The  CAHW  will  act  as  a  link  between  livestock 
producers and  the Department of Animal Husbandry  – with the project  also providing support  to  DAHV.   
CAHW will be expected to charge for their services and become self-sustaining during the project period.  
In each village, the CAHW would be selected from the village community and it is expected that a great 
majority of them would be women, particularly younger women.   
34.  Although the project will focus primarily on pigs and to a lesser extent on poultry, there will also be 
opportunities in specific villages to undertake pilot initiatives to support  goats and mithun, and to develop 
dairy production and marketing groups which the states may decide to scale up later.  . 
3.  Theory of change 
35.  The governments of both states look upon this project as a means of developing and showcasing 
methodologies to foster climate resilient development of the traditional  highland  farming systems based 
on jhum, and to initiate value chains around selected spices, horticultural crops and livestock to diversify 
livelihoods and enhance incomes of their rural population.   
36.  The project's overall theory of change is shown in the figure below.  This shows how the increasing 
pressure  on  jhum  systems,  combined  with  limited  market  opportunities  and  poor  support  services  are 
increasing  the  vulnerability  of  small  farmers  to  environmental  degradation  and  climate  change.    The 
project will respond to these needs through: (i) promoting more rational systems for planning sustainable 
land use; (ii) more sustainable and productive jhum cultivation systems; (iii) land conversion from jhum to 
permanent  cropping  (reducing  adverse  environmental  impacts  and  the  workload  for  women);  (iv)  more 
productive  permanent  cropping  systems for  food  and  cash  crops;  (v)  increased  and  less  risky  livestock 
production; and (vi) improved access to, and integration with, input and output markets leading to better 
returns and new opportunities for producers. 
15 The Pashu Sakhi model has been successfully used by IFAD-supported project in India (MPOWER, Tejaswini MP) as well as 
other development programmes.   See www.goattrust.org for further details.  
8 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
9 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project Area and Target Groups 
37.  Project area and target group: The criteria used  by the respective states to identify the  districts 
where the project would be implemented are (i) high prevalence of shifting cultivation (ii) prevention of an 
overlap  with  another  large  donor  funded  project  and  (iii)  focusing  only  on  hill  states  and  not  the  plains. 
Accordingly,  in  Nagaland,  the  project  would  focus  on  eight  out  of  11  districts  namely,  Mon,  Longleng, 
Zunheboto, Wokha, Kiphire, Phek, Mokokchung and Kohima. Dimapur district is not being considered as 
it  is  largely  situated  in  the  plains.  Tuensang  and  Peren  districts  are  not  included  as  these  are  covered 
under the World Bank supported North East Rural Livelihoods Programme (NERLP). The eight selected 
districts have approximately 200,00016 rural households.  
38. 
In Mizoram, the project would be implemented in the four out of eight districts  namely, Champhai, 
Mamit, Serchhip and Kolasib. The remaining four districts of the state, namely Aizawl, Lunglei, Lawngtlai 
and  Saiha,  have  not  been  considered  due  to  the  on-going  implementation  of  other  major  projects. The 
four selected districts have approximately 83,25417 households. 
39.  The  target  group:  The  population  of  the  state  of  Nagaland  is  largely  tribal18  with  about  16 
recognized tribes. Mizoram is also a predominantly tribal state19; majority of the population are Mizo, but 
there are also some Maras, Chakmas, Riangs and Bru. The project’s target group would be entirely tribal 
and would include all farmers in the project villages who are dependent on jhum cultivation. As the project 
would  involve  participatory  land  use  planning  for  the  entire  village  and  seek  to  create  community 
conserved  areas  and  firewood  forests  besides  jhum  improvement,  low  land  rice  cultivation,  upland 
orchard/plantation crop cultivation and value chain development, the project will largely target all farming 
households in selected villages.  
40.  Targeting  Approach:  The  project  would  adopt  a  two  stage  targeting  strategy.  First,  the  project 
would  adopt  geographic  targeting  by  excluding  the  districts  with  other  major  development  projects. The 
project area in a district will be selected primarily based on high levels of jhum cultivation with an aim to 
increase the jhum cycle and at the same time increase the number of years of jhum cultivation to make a 
gradual shift towards settled agriculture. Second, the project would adopt a social targeting approach by 
excluding the households with permanent government jobs. The target group categories would therefore 
include  all  tribal  households  involved  in  jhum  farming  and  those  unable  to  take  up  jhum  cultivation  on 
account  of  labour  shortages  and  other  vulnerable  households  having  persons  with  disability  and  other 
challenges.  Women  are  the  main  contributors  to  both  agriculture  and  livestock  activities  and  therefore 
gender  would  be  mainstreamed  into  the  project  activities  so  that  women  have  access  and  control  over 
resources both in terms of targeting of project activities and also their participation in various committees 
of the project.  
41.  Similarly  youth  would  be  engaged  in  various  project  activities  which  include  training  them  in  pig 
value  chain  which  is  a  low  risk  investment  and  providing  them  with  capital,  and  engaging  them  as  the 
main  grassroots  level  project  facilitators  in  the  form  of  Lead  Farmers,  Community  Resource  Persons 
(CRPs)  and  CAHWs.  Youth  associations  in  both  the  states  would  be  supported  to  participate  in  the 
innovation fund related activities in both the states.  
42. 
In Nagaland, the project would select a cluster villages in each district depending on the size of the 
district  after  excluding  the  clusters  allocated  the  proposed  JICA  project.    A  cluster  approach  would  be 
followed in order to be ensure ease of delivery of project services and to promote economies of scale in 
16196,827 as per Census 2011 
17As per state statistics assuming growth rate of 13.5% between the 2011 census and 2017. 
1889% in Nagaland as per 2001 Census 
19 94% in Mizoram as per 2001 census 
10 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
selected  commodities  to  facilitate  aggregation  of  both  inputs  and  output  for  enhancing  marketability  to 
outside  markets  and  also  reduction  in  transaction  costs.  The  main  village  clusters  selection  criteria 
include:  (i)  at  least  75%  of  the  villages  with  high  levels  of  jhum  cultivation  with  more  than  60%  of  the 
households undertaking jhum cultivation; (ii) more than 50% of the jhum cultivating villages have a jhum 
cycle of eight years and less; (iii) one cluster per district covering the blocks falling in the cluster in their 
entirety to ensure that the cluster boundary is in consonance with the administrative boundaries for ease 
of management; ((iv) existence of access roads; and (v) potential for cultivating high value crops on  jhum 
land. In total the project would cover a total of 650 villages (69% of all villages in the eight districts with 
approximately  137,000  rural  households)  -  covering  a  population  of  685,000  persons.  A  saturation 
approach  will  be  followed  within  each  cluster  to  ensure  comprehensive  land  use  planning  for  the  entire 
village landscape.  
43. 
In  Mizoram,  the  project  would  cover  all  the  villages  of  the  four  project  districts.  A  saturation 
approach will be followed to ensure comprehensive land use planning for the entire village landscape and 
provision  of  support  services  to  address  the  needs  of  77%  of  the  households  who  are  involved  in  farm 
activities.  In  total  the  project  would  cover  all  272  villages  in  the  four  project  districts  and  would  support 
64,500 households comprising a population of 322,500 persons in these districts.  
44.  Based  on  the  profile  of  the  households  activities  related  jhum  improvement,  settled  agriculture, 
value  chains  and 
land  use  planning, 
village/community forest conservation marketing support and market access promotion, the project would 
generate benefits to all the households in project.  
livestock  development  would  be 
In  case  of 
targeted. 
45.  Scaling up: The project will scale up a number of current and recent efforts for jhum improvement 
and conversion.   In Nagaland these are: (i) NEPED20, funded by the India-Canada Environmental Facility 
(ICEF)  during1995-2006;  and  (ii)  Sustainable  Land  and  Ecosystem  Management  in  shifting  cultivation 
areas  of  Nagaland  for  ecological  and  livelihood  security  (SLEM)  project  funded  by  UNDP-GEF.  In 
Mizoram  the  New  Land  Use  Policy  (NLUP)  promotes  sedentary  agriculture.  Additionally,  the  North 
Eastern  Region  Community  Resource  Management  Project  for  Upland Areas  (NERCORMP),  a  project 
supported  by  IFAD  in  Manipur,  Meghalaya  and  the  hill  districts  of  Assam  demonstrated  community 
planning  and  implementation  for  more  sustainable  land  use  systems.  Details  of  lessons  learned  from 
these projects can be found in the Appendices 3 and 12. 
46.  Regarding livestock, the project will build on lessons from pig production interventions in the north-
east, especially in Nagaland, sponsored by Tata Trusts with support from ILRI.  These include  improved 
feeding systems, as well as low cost pig housing and breed improvement.   Other innovations that could 
be scaled up include the use of azolla as a protein supplement, silage from sweet potato plants (an idea 
from  Nagaland),  and  chopped  and  fermented  banana  plant  stalks  (an  idea  from  Mizoram).    Mithun 
development can be based on the approach adopted in Nagaland by Entrepreneurs Associates (EA), an 
NGO, with funding from Tata Trusts.  This involves fencing of forest areas for grazing and the introduction 
of improved husbandry practices. 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
47.  The  overall  goal  of  the  project  is  to  increase  household  agricultural  income  of  137,000  rural 
highland households in Nagaland and  64,500 households in Mizoram and to enhance their resilience to 
climate  change.  This  goal  would  be  achieved  through  the  development  objective  of  increasing  the 
environmental  sustainability  and  profitability  of  farming  systems  practiced  by  highland  farmers.  The 
project will strengthen the capacities of state agencies and community based institutions to develop and 
20 Implemented in two phases, the first phase (1995-2001) was called Nagaland Environment Protection and Economic 
Development through People’s Action and the second phase (2001-06) was called Nagaland Empowerment of People through 
Economic Development. https://www.nagaland.gov.in//Nagaland/GovernmentAndPrivateBodies/Department_of_NEPED.html 
11 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
jhum 
implement  climate  resilient  resource  management  systems,  soil  and  water  conservation, 
improvement, existing  settled  agriculture improvement, diversification  of land  use/farming systems, crop 
productivity enhancement and development of climate resilient and equitable farm based value chains. 
48.  Key combined indicators at the goal level will include:  (i) 70% of the jhum households farming for 
three  or  more  years  on  the  single  plot;  and  (ii)  75%  of  the  households  (151,125  households)  reporting 
increase of more than 100% in household income. Development objective level indicators to be measured 
include:  (i)  Soil  carbon  percentage  of  at  least  4%  on  jhum  land;  (ii)    Real  increase  in  net  annual  farm 
income (in 2017 prices) to INR 4,754.6 million; and (iii) number of trees per ha of jhum land increased to 
20.  These  require  data  to  be  collected  on  an  annual  basis.  The  tracking  of  results  from  outputs  to 
outcomes  and  impact  would  enable  the  project  to  attribute  the  results  to  project  interventions  and 
generate useful lessons on what worked best and what did not work and why.  
C.  Outcomes/Components - Nagaland 
1.  Outcomes and outputs 
49.  One of the most important outcomes of this project will be the  gradual transition from current form 
of jhum cultivation to more sedentary cultivation practice  along with adoption of climate resilient farming 
practices and a resultant increase in net farm income. The major outcomes of this project will include: (i)  
137,000  households  reporting  adoption  of  environment  friendly  sustainable  and  climate  resilient 
technologies (use of agro-forestry, soil and water conservation, improved planting material and integration 
with livestock; (iii)  gross returns from spices increased to INR 669.1 million;  and (iv)  gross returns from 
livestock increased to INR 316.5 million.  
50.  The  major  outputs  of  this  project  will  include  (i)  100%  of  the  villages  (650)  with  completed 
participatory  land  use  plans;  (ii)  182,000  farmers  trained  on  better  jhum  and  fallow  management;  (iii) 
78,000  farmers  trained  on  settled  agriculture;  (iv)  47,450  ha  under  SWC  by  jhum,  fallow  and  settled 
agriculture;  (v)  13,000  ha  under  community  conservation  areas;  (vi)  8,000  households  participating  in 
organized spice value chain; (vii) 30,000 households benefitting from pig rearing; (viii) 75.000 households 
reporting improved access to markets; and (ix) 400 km of farm link road improved. 
2. 
Components 
51.  The  project  will  have  three  components:  (i)  Improved  jhum  management;  (ii)  Value  chain  and 
market access; and (iii) Project management and knowledge services. 
i. 
Component 1: Improved Jhum Management 
52.  Agriculture  in  Nagaland  is  practiced  on  hill  slopes  and  valley  lands.  Normally  farmers  have  been 
farming  on  the  slopes  of  the  hills  by  clearing  forests  and  preparing  the  cleared  land  for  rain-fed  mixed 
cropping systems for few years, generally for 1-2 years. They leave the land as fallows and return after 8-
10  years  to  cultivate  it  the  same  way  for  another  1-2  years.  They  also  cultivate  wet  land  rice  on  the 
terraced lowlands, called terraced rice cultivation (TRC) year after year. The  jhum cycle in Nagaland has 
been decreasing and in some places it has come down to just 5-6 years.  
53.  The project intends to introduce agricultural interventions by taking into account climate change and 
its  impact  on  food  production  and  livelihoods  and  promote  proven  and  emerging  climate  resilient  best 
practices. These include: (i) use of remote sensing capacities to facilitate Village Councils to identify lands 
appropriate  for  cultivation  and  to  avoid  using  steeply  sloping  lands  for  jhum  cultivation,  as  is  prevalent 
currently;  (ii)  introduction  of  fertility  management  practices  using  both  biological  measures  and  also 
possibly through the introduction of “nano-nutrient delivery systems”;  (iii) use of traditional knowledge in  
erosion control for ensuring extension of cultivation period from currently one year to at least three years; 
and (iv) use of better agronomic practices, introduction of  agro-forestry, linear planting, cereal  and pulse 
12 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
cultivation  to  build  synergy  between  crops  to  maintain  soil  health  on  one  hand  and  improved  farmer 
income on the other.   
Sub-component 1.1 – Better jhum and conservation 
54.  Capacity  building:  The  project  will  train  PMU  staff  who  in  turn  will  train  all  the  district  level 
/Block/Circle level staff to explain the project concept, project components and step-wise implementation 
modalities  including  the  process  of  village  level  micro-plan  preparation.  Village  level  workers  will  be 
trained  thereafter.  The  project  will  initially  conduct  a  workshop  at  the  district  level  by  inviting  all  the 
Chairpersons  of  Village  Councils  (VCs)  and  Secretaries  of  Jhum  Resource  Management  Committee 
(JRMCs) in the project area to orient them on project goal and activities with deliberations on the impact 
of  the  project.  Subsequently  a  meeting  of  the  Village  Assembly  will  be  held  to  deliberate  on  village’s 
interest  to  participate  in  the  project  with  view  to  comply  with  free  prior  informed  consent  requirements. 
Based  on  the  willingness  of  the  community,  the  project  implementation  will  proceed.  The  project  will 
identify  a  Lead  Farmer  from  each  village  and  train  them  in  better  agronomic  practices.  These  Lead 
Farmers  will  be  the  focal  points  for  implementing  village  level  activities  and  will  be  supported  by 
Block/Circle level line department officers and village level workers.   
55.  Land use planning: The project will engage Nagaland GIS and Remote Sensing Application Centre 
(NaRSAC)  to  assist  in  the  preparation  of  land  use  maps  and  land  suitability  maps  for  the  eight  project 
districts. A PLUP for each village will be finalised after validation from the Village Council. Based on the 
PLUP  and  also  land  suitability  classification  maps,  Village  Councils  will  be  trained  to:  (i)  identify  lands 
suitable for growing various crops based on the slope, altitude and soil texture, and to allocate land based 
on this scientific information for jhum, settled agriculture and community forest conservation areas; (ii) fix 
boundaries for land allocated for settled agriculture; and (iii) decide on the crops to be cultivated to ensure 
development of economies of scale required for accessing markets.  
56.  Better  Jhum:  Jhum  system  has  two  phases:  (i)  crop  production  phase;  and  (ii)  fallow  phase. The 
fallow phase is also known as  jhum cycle in Nagaland. The duration of both, cultivated and  jhum fallow 
varies according to the fertility and productivity status of the land. Usually in  jhum system, many crops of 
different duration, such as rice, chillies, ginger, vegetables, etc. are grown in the same piece of land and 
in  an  inter-spread  (non-linear)  manner.  The  project  will  focus  on  improving  current  jhum  and  improved 
management  of  jhum  fallows,  which  will  give  two-fold  results.  First,  it  will  increase  the  productivity  and 
second it will lengthen jhum cycle, resulting in increased fallows. The project will promote Farmer Interest 
Groups  (FIGs)  to  take  up  activities  related  to  current  jhum  improvement  and  fallow  jhum  management. 
Each  FIG  will  comprise  of  10-20  farmers  and  each  member  of  the  FIG  will  be  connected  to  20  jhum 
families  and  these  20  households  will  be  the  associates  of  FIG  members.  The  project  will  train  FIG 
members and provide project support for implementation of activities.  
57.  Current Jhum Improvement: FIGs comprising jhum farmers will be encouraged to earmark the ridge 
and steep slopes for permanent tree farming, and side slopes for crop farming along with trees, including 
fruit trees. All jhum farmers will be covered and each jhum farmer will get support for about 25% of their 
jhum  plot  (estimated  at  0.13  ha  per  jhum  farmer).  The  project  will  support  the  construction  of  water 
harvesting ponds, low cost bunds, and trenches that will improve the  availability of moisture. This will be 
complemented by planting of the leguminous crops on contour bunds (perpendicular to the incline), such 
as,  Leucaena  (Leucaena  leucocephala),  Alder  (Alnus  nepalensis),  Neel  (Indigo  fertinctoria),  perennial 
pigeon  pea  and  Gliricidia  (Gliricidia  sepium).In  current  jhum  fields,  wild  sunflower  (Tithonia  diversifolia) 
and stylo (Stylosanthes hamata) may also be grown and chopped off before sowing of the main crops.21 
The project will also support introduction of nano-nutrient delivery systems. Crops/commodities such as, 
rice,  maize,  sesame,  cowpea,  vegetables    and  other  pulses  will  also  be  promoted  for  consumption 
21B. Jama, C. A. Palm, R.J. Buresh, A. Niang, C. Gachengo, G. Nziguheba, and B. Amadalo (2000). Tithoniadiversifolia as a green 
manure for soil fertility improvement in western Kenya: A review. Agroforestry Systems, 49: 201-221 
13 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
purposes to add to dietary diversity and to improve nutritional security in addition to fodder trees, tubers, 
etc, for use as animal fodder and feed.  
58.  The  project  will  promote  linear  manner  planting  (proper  row  and  plant  spacing)  to  increase  the 
possibility  of  using  farm  implements  and  to  control  weed  growth.  Mulching  using  local  materials,  use  of 
nano-nutrients, planting leguminous plants on the upper edge of the bunds and cereals on the lower edge 
of the bund to improve farm productivity and income of the farmers in the short and medium term will be 
promoted.  These  interventions  are  climate  resilient  as  there  will  be  reduction  in  erosion  and  improved 
fertility  reducing  the  need  to  slash  and  burn  and  shift  to  another  jhum  plot.  The  project  support  will  be 
spread over three years to ensure continued cultivation on the same plot with better practices. The project 
will  support  current  jhum  improvement  in  a  total  of  65,000  ha  with  direct  support  in  11,700  ha  covering 
91,000 households.  
59.  Fallow  Jhum  Management:  Fallow  jhum  management  gives  benefits  for  both,  in-situ  and 
downstream areas.  The project will support low cost contour bunding, trenching, creating terraces using 
vegetative  strips  of  fast  growing  plant/tree  species  and  grasses,  such  as  Leucaena,  Gliricidia,  Alder, 
Indigo/  neel,  perennial  pigeon  pea  and  vetiver.  The  project  will  support  seeding  the  fallows  with  both, 
annual  and  perennial  legume  cover  crops,  such  as  the  perennial  pigeon  pea,  wild  sunflower  (Tithonia 
diversifolia),Sesbania  species  (speciosa  and  aculeate),  Trifolium  alexandrinum,  Indigofertinctoria,  stylo 
(Stylosanthes  hamata),etc.  The  project  will  support  fallow  jhum  management  in  all  project  villages 
covering  a  total  of  65,000  ha,  out  of  which  direct  project  support  will  be  for  16,250  ha  covering  some 
91,000 households. Each household will get support for about 0.18 ha of fallow jhum. 
60.  Community  Conservation  Area:  The  community  forests  remain  the  vital  community  asset  for 
protecting  water  sources,  supply  of  non-timber  forest  produce  (NTFP),  and  controlling  forest  fires.  The 
project  will  fund  contour  bunding,  contour  trenching  and  water  harvesting  structures  and  biological 
measures, including seeding the area with leguminous plants, such as the wild sunflower, glyricidia and 
stylo,  and  perennial  pigeon  pea.  Protection  of  water  sources,  raising  nurseries  and  supplying  planting 
material  of  locally  preferred  species  such  as, Tree  bean  (Parkia  timoriana,  Parkia  speciosa,    Badrang  / 
Indian  Pepper  (Xanthozylum  rhetsa,  Champa  (Michella  champaka),  Gamar  (Gmelina  arborea),  Cotton 
tree (Bombax ceiba), etc.  Non-structural vegetative measures will also be promoted to recharge springs 
after  mapping  of  the  geology,  vegetation  and  data  on  water  availability. 22  The  project  will  support  this 
activity in 20 ha of community forest per village covering in total 13,000 ha. 
Sub-component 1.2 – Support to Settled Agriculture 
61.  The  project  does  not  directly  promote  settled  agriculture.  Many  farmers  have  made  the  transition 
from jhum only system to jhum and settled agriculture mixed system. The project will support two aspects 
related  to  settled  agriculture:  (i)  the  existing  terrace  rice  cultivation;  and  (ii)  orchards  and  plantations  in 
sloping uplands. 
62.  Support  to  existing  terrace  rice  cultivation:  The  project  will  support  farmers  undertaking  terraced 
rice  cultivation  to  increase  soil  fertility,  productivity  and  cropping  intensity,  and  stabilize  productivity.  1-2 
FIGs  in  each  village,  comprising  of  about  10-20  members  will  be  established  and  supported  by  the 
selected  Lead  Farmer  and  trained  on  better  agro-techniques.  Farmers  will  be  encouraged  to  grow 
Sesbaniarostrata,  and  azolla  as  green  manure  before  transplanting  of  paddy  in  the  lowland  rice 
fields.23The  project  will  select  short  duration  improved  local  paddy  varieties  in  consultation  with 
22
ICIMOD -2016- Spring recharge interventions in Nepal 
23S.Kannaiyanand  K. Kumar (2005). Azolla Biofertilizer for Sustainable Rice Production. 
https://books.google.co.in/books?isbn=8170353564 
14 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
KVKs/ATARI. The possibility of two crops of decent productivity with first crop of low land short duration 
rice and a second crop of pulses/ginger/ onion after rice cultivation will be explored.24 
63.  The  project  will  also  support  sustained  low  cost  water  supply,  better  seeds  and  better  practices 
(seed  selection,  management  and  replacement,  row  planting,  and  crop  rotation)  in  terraced  lands. 
Introduction  of  ducks  or  fish  into  the  rice  cultivation  areas25,  development  of  supplementary  irrigation 
system such as lift irrigation, and water harvesting ponds for rice cultivation and also micro-irrigation will 
be  supported.  The  project  will  support  39,000  households  covering  9,750  ha.  Each  household  will  get 
support for 0.25 Ha of terrace rice cultivation.   
64.  Support  for  upland  settled  agriculture:  In  Nagaland,  transition  from  jhum  to  settled  agriculture  is 
taking  place  on  medium  slopes  situated  close  to  the  village.  These  are  being  converted  into  vegetable 
gardening,  fruit  orchards  and  spice  cultivation  plots.  In  such  villages,  the  project  will  establish  a  FIG 
comprising of about 10-20 members with support from the Lead Farmer. Each FIG member will be linked 
to  20  associate  members.  The  FIG  members  will  be  provided  training  on  soil  and  water  conservation, 
improved  farming  systems  and  better  agro-techniques.  The  project  will  also  support  soil  and  water 
conservation  works  such  as  contour  bunding  and  trenching  as  demonstrations.  Construction  of  water 
harvesting ponds will be taken up, wherever feasible to provide for protective irrigation.  
65.  The  project  will  support  construction  of  low  cost  terraces  wherever  feasible.26  Better  agronomic 
practices will be supported which includes compost pits,  azolla pits, and legume, fodder trees and multi-
purpose  tree  planting,  such  as  Buteamonosperma,  Albizialebbec,  and  Gliricidia  on  bunds.  The  treated 
area will be utilized for planting high value trees like  Meliacomposita, Alnusnepalensis, and other locally 
available  tree  crops.27  Commercially  important  trees  like  walnut  (Juglans  regia),  chestnut  (Castanea 
dentata),  bay  leaf  (Laurus  Nobilis),  cinnamon  (Cinnamomum  tamala),  large  cardamom  (Amomum 
Sabulatom)  and  chillies  (Capsicum  chinense  and  Capsicum  frutescens)  and  other  species  will  be 
supported.28 The  project  will  support  transition  to  settled  agriculture  covering  9,750  ha  covering  39,000 
households. Each selected household will get support for 0.25 Ha of upland settled agriculture. 
ii. 
Component 2: Value Chain and Market Access 
Jhum  improvement, settled agriculture and  value chain and market access are clearly  interlinked. 
66. 
Many  farmers  have  both  jhum  and  settled  agriculture  (mainly  plantations,  spice  cultivation,  and  lowland 
rice). The shift to settled agriculture is on account of labour shortage for taking up labour intensive  jhum 
cultivation; disinterest of youth to take up jhum cultivation and also the need to cultivate high value crops 
to  generate  cash  income.  The  beneficiaries  under  Value  Chain  and  Market  access  will  be  a  subset  of 
beneficiaries under better jhum and settled agriculture. Livestock support will also target a subset farmers 
undertaking jhum to increase their income so as to reduce their dependence on jhum. 
67.  A cluster approach for promotion of select value chain commodities will be adopted wherein on an 
average four villages form a cluster, which ensures economies of scale in terms availability of a minimum 
truck  load  of  produce  for  marketing  players  to  get  into  business  partnership  with  value  chain  farmers. 
24  Singh  V  P,  Singh  RK,  Sastri  ASRAS,  Baghel  SS,  Chaudhary  JL.1999.  Rice  growing  environments  in  Eastern  India:  An  agro-
climatic analysis. Indira Gandhi Agril. Univ. and the International Rice Research Institute. Pub. Pp 76. 
25  Singh  VP,  Early  AC,  Wickham  TH.  1979.  Rice  agronomy  in  relation  to  rice-cum-fish  culture.  Pp.15-36.  In  Proc.  International 
conference on integrated systems. ICLARM / SEARCA, Manila, Philippines. 
26  Early  AC,  Singh  VP,  Tabbal  DF,  Wickham  TH.  1979.  Land  evaluation  criteria  for  irrigated  lowland  rice.  Report  of  an  expert 
consultation.  In  Land  Evaluation  Criteria  for  Irrigation.  World  Soil  Resources.  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United 
Nations, Rome, Italy, 50:114-144. 
27V.P. Singh, (2007). Agro- horti- silviculture in hill slopes for enhanced and sustained production and hill conservation. Pp 70-73 In: 
Islam, Z., Hossain, M., Paris, T., Hardy, B., and Gorsuch, J. (Eds) Technologies for Improving Rural Livelihoods in Rainfed Systems 
in South Asia. IRRI, Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines. Pp 124. 
28A.K. Singh, G.C. Munda, S.V. Ngachan, A.S. Panwar, P.K. Ghosh, Anup Das, D.P. Patel, B.U. Choudhury, A.K. Tripathi and K.P. 
Mohapatra. 2012.  
15 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Clusters  ensure  collective  procurement  of  agriculture  inputs  and  business  development  services  i.e. 
transportation and logistics services to make these service economical.   
Sub-component 2.1 – Value chain development:    
68.  Production  Support:    The  project  will  support  activities  for  enhancing  production  of  Naga-chillies, 
large cardamom and ginger using a cluster approach. The clusters / villages will be selected based on the 
suitability (soil, climate, water, etc.) of soils and slopes, interest and ability of farmers to invest in labour to 
cultivate selected crops and ability to allocate a separate plot of about 0.5 ha either in current jhum or in 
fallow jhum to grow only the selected crops. Once the clusters are identified, the project will identify and 
train  two  CRPs  for  each  cluster  in  various  aspects  of  nursery  management,  planting  material  selection 
and  in  micro-propagation  techniques  for  rapid  multiplication  of  quality  planting  material  and  package  of 
practices. The  project  will  identify  and  support  100  CRPs  in  the  project  districts  with  about  2  CRPs  per 
cluster.  
69.  The  project  will  promote  FIGs  comprising  20  farmers  per  group  in  respect  of  three  spice  crops 
namely  Naga-chill,  ginger  and  cardamom  in  50  clusters  covering  about  4  villages  per  cluster.  The  FIG 
members will be provided access to improved planting material of Naga-chilli, ginger and cardamom, and 
bio-fungicide  such  as  Trichoderma  for  cardamom  and  trained  in  better  package  of  practices  which  will 
help in increasing survival of plants and better application of nutrients (organic) and management of pests 
and  diseases.29  In total about 400 FIGs  will be supported.  CRPs  will support FIGs by  providing quality 
planting  materials.  The  project  in  total  intends  to  support  8,000  households  and  expand  production  in 
1,000 ha for Naga-chilli, 1,000 ha for ginger and 2,000 ha for cardamom. 
70.  The project plans to introduce an innovative modality for digital delivery of extension and monitoring 
of  production  practices,  input  use  and  expected  production.    This  can  be  accessed  by  market  players 
across  the  world  to  support  their  procurement  decisions  by  identifying  number  of  farmers  cultivating  a 
particular crop, quantity of produce expected, and package of practices used. This would reduce the need 
for face to face interaction required to access market players, increase the reliability quotient and enable 
the farmers to make a quick progression into organic certification.   
71.  Marketing  Support:  The  major  constraints  to  value  chain  development  of  traditional  spice,  and 
agricultural  and  horticultural  crops  are  mainly  issues  related  to  marketing.  They  include:  (i)  limited 
aggregation  for  achieving  economies  of  scale  required  for  cost  effective  collection,  transportation  and 
storage; (ii) insufficient investment in post-harvest management practices, including primary processing to 
add  value  and  also  to  reduce  volume  for  transportation;  (iii)  inadequate  data  on  marketable  quantity  to 
feed  into  supply  chain,  (iv)  inadequate  linkage  with  premium  markets  on  account  of  issues  related 
compliance to certification  and  quality standards;  and (iv) limited access to market players from outside 
the state.30 
72.  The  project’s  marketing  efforts  will  be  directed  towards  both  the  project  promoted  commodities 
(Naga-chilli,  ginger  and  Cardamom)  and  also  other  commodities  and  crops  promoted  under  jhum 
improvement  and  settled  agriculture,  including  commodities  such  as  turmeric,  orange,  passion  fruit  and 
pineapple, which are grown in sufficient quantities for market entry to be viable. The project will support 
aggregation  and  primary  processing  and  will  support  establishment  of  market  linkages,  common  facility 
ecntres  and  collection  centres.  In  addition,  the  project  will  also  support  extraction  of  oleoresins, 
capsanoids, natural plant based dyes, etc. The project will support value addition to bamboo in terms of 
manufacture  of  handicrafts  and  incense  sticks  and  partial  processing  such  as  flattening  including  better 
designs.  
29 ATMA and Horticulture Mission for NE states and Himalayas- http://tmnehs.gov.in) 
30 Livelihood based Agri-business and Market studies for North East Rural Livelihoods Project, MART, 2011  
16 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
73. 
In order to facilitate production based on market needs and to identify market linkage partners, the 
project  will  support  establishment  of  a  marketing  unit  within  the  State Agriculture  Marketing  Board. The 
marketing  unit  will  establish  contacts  with  agencies,  such  as  Sresta  Organics,  Patanjali,  and  other 
agencies  to  develop  contract  farming  modalities  for  the  FIGs  promoted  under  the  project.  Patanjali  has 
shown  interest  to  buy  dried  turmeric,  tulsi,  aloe  vera,  etc.  The  marketing  unit  will  analyse  all  market 
interests  and  explore  the  possibility  of  entering  into  contract  farming  arrangements.  Collaboration  with 
IDH India and its Sustainable Spice Initiative will be formalized to attract private sector participation into 
marketing  of  farm  produce.  The  project  will  support  construction  of  common  facility  /collection  centres, 
participation in trade fairs and exhibitions, and will also organize buyer-seller meets. The project will also 
prepare plans to attract private sector rom outside the state to establish processing and value addition of 
select crops. The project will also support progression of farmers into organic production. 
74.  Livestock  support  services:  The  project  will  train  a  CAHW,  in  all  the  650  project  villages.  With 
women having a major role in livestock, about 50% CAHWs will be women and remaining will be men folk 
committed to serve the community and stay in the village. The project envisages immunizing the pigs and 
poultry  in  the  project  area  and  the  pigs  will  also  be  de-wormed  on  a  limited  scale  during  the  first  three 
years  of the project. The project  will focus mainly  on  the  pig sub-sector by  developing support services 
related  to  breed  improvement,  feed  improvement,  and  animal  health.  The  project  will  demonstrate  and 
promote feed crops cultivation (e.g. sweet potato, tapioca, colocasia, cow-pea, maize, azolla, etc.) in the 
backyard  and  create  awareness  among  the  farmers about  the  nutrient  requirement  of  pigs. The  project 
will  encourage  existing  retail  outlets  to  sell  fish  meal,  soya  bean  meal  and  oil  cakes  and  mineral  and 
vitamin  mixture.  Small  feed  grinding  units  will  be  established  to  utilise  locally  produced  maize,  dried 
cassava, etc.  
75.  The project will support establishment of 148 small pig breeding units (6:1 unit) to be operated by 
progressive/ experienced farmers, distribution of about 30,000 improved piglets for individual households 
on 50% cost basis, and demonstration of improved pig housing and compost production from pig manure. 
Existing  artificial  insemination  services  for  pigs  will  be  expanded  by  strengthening  the  existing  boar 
stations  under  DAHV.  The  project  will  aim  to  raise  awareness  of  the  quality  threats  among  the  pig 
slaughterers, retailers and transporters through information campaign and imparting training on hygienic 
slaughtering including provision of slaughter slabs, handling, displaying and selling of pork.  
Innovation  Fund:  FOCUS  will  fund  the  testing  and  dissemination  of  innovative  technologies  and 
76. 
approaches  to  improving  settled  agriculture,  livestock  and  marketing.  Several  organizations,  such  as 
Entrepreneurs Associates have started training youth and providing them with credit for starting enterprise 
and Mithun rearing as a biodiversity initiative.31 Similarly, The Green Caravan has started aggregation of 
local  produce  and  marketing  these  products  outside  the  state  and  also  value  addition  of  local  pork 
through smoking to market outside the state.32 These, and other similar efforts need a funding mechanism 
for  expansion.  Fragmented  pockets  of  production,  high  cost  of  production,  limited  value  addition  efforts 
and limited aggregation efforts to ascertain volume and transaction costs to test market viability constrain 
production  scaling  up  and  higher  value  realization.  Innovative  aggregation  and  marketing  efforts  need 
funding  support.    In  order  to  address  these  issues,  the  project  will  set  up  an  innovation  fund  that  will 
provide flexibility to fund any emerging innovation.    
77.  Development  of  entrepreneurial  skills  of  youth  remains  a  challenge.  Skill  development  and 
financing challenges mainly constrain young entrepreneurs.33The project will prioritize the needs of youth 
while  approving sub-projects funded  by  the Innovation Fund.  Sub-projects of  youth taking up enterprise 
31https://www.eanagaland.com/ 
32https://www.facebook.com/TheGreenCaravanNagaland/ 
33 Rural Entrepreneurship in India: Challenge and Problems;  Brijesh Patel, Kirit Chavda, G. H. Patel Institute of Business 
Management, Vallabh Vidhyanagar Sardar Patel University, Gujarat, India 
17 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
related to aggregation and value addition will be funded on a priority and capacity building aspects will be 
built  into  this.  In  addition,  the  project  will  actively  identify  agencies  that  have  capacity  to  submit  sub-
projects  that  train  youth  in  specific  vocations  and  provide  funding  for  enterprise  establishment  coupled 
with technical backstopping. Such agencies will be funded using Innovation Fund. 
Sub-component 2.2 - Market access infrastructure 
78.  A  major  constraint  for  the  development  of  market-orientated  agriculture  is poor  road  access  to 
production areas.  Although almost all villages are now connected by all-weather roads, these tend to run 
along the ridges where settlements are located. Much of the land with good potential for the development 
of plantation and other permanent crops are in valley bottoms and on the lesser steep-slopes.  However, 
such  areas  often  have  no  road  access,  making  it  difficult  to supply  inputs  and  extract  crops. Farm  link 
roads are therefore a major priority of the government. However, many of the roads that have been built, 
either by DoA or using village labour funded via MGNREGS have been constructed without proper survey 
and  design  resulting  in  poor quality,  high  gradient  and  largely  unpaved;  they  are  not  resilient  to  intense 
monsoon seasons or extreme events exacerbated by climate change.  
79. 
IFAD  loan  funds  In  Nagaland  will  be  only  allocated  for  construction  of  critical  gaps  in  the  existing 
road infrastructure such as bridges, culverts and other cross drainage structure. The plan is to construct a 
total of around 200 km of earth road (with proper side slopes and cross drainage and base course) using 
convergence  funds  (MGNREGS).  In  addition,  the  project  will  build  600  cross  drainage  structure  using 
IFAD funds which will result in improvements to 200 km of existing gravel roads. 
iii. 
Component 3: Project Management and Knowledge Services 
80.  A  new  society  has  been  established  headed  by  the  Chief  Secretary  which  will  be  the  lead 
implementing  agency.  The  APC  will  chair  the  Project  Management  Committee and  has  been  appointed 
as  the  Mission  Director.  An  Indian  Administrative  Services  officer  has  been  appointed  as  the  Chief 
Executive  Officer,  who  will  be  the  Secretary  of  the  society.  The  details  regarding  project  management, 
implementation arrangements are described in Appendix 5.   
81.  Knowledge  Management:  The  project  will  develop  a  Knowledge  Management  strategy  and  action 
plan  for  knowledge  generation  and  dissemination.  This  will  include  internal  learning  through  regular 
progress review meetings, and participatory M&E at the community level. Information will be shared at the 
village  level.  Knowledge  will  also  be  shared  with  external  stakeholders  and  the  wider  development 
community  through  generation  of  knowledge  products.  A  project  website  will  be  established  as  a 
knowledge sharing tool, with information on good practices and innovations shared with NITI Ayog, DEA 
and Ministry of DoNER, and also displayed on the IFAD Asia website.  
82.  Capacity building and knowledge generation: The project will be working on both jhum improvement 
and settled agriculture. In order to generate concurrent impact data and to demonstrate the effectiveness 
of  these  approaches,  the  project  will  engage  the  ICAR,  Regional  Centre  in  Barapani  and  the  Regional 
Agriculture  Technology  Application  Research  Institute  (ATARI).  Both  these  institutions  come  under  the 
Deputy  Director  General  (Extension),  ICAR,  GoI.  An  agreement  will  be  signed  between  GoN  and  ICAR 
detailing the terms of engagement.  
83.  The project with assistance from ICAR will aim to be a platform for learning for the other states in 
NER  wherever jhum is  being practiced. The project  has allocated  USD 260,000 to  generate knowledge 
on  the  evolution  and  sustainability  of  upland  farming  systems  and  their  capacity  to  respond  to  climate 
change.  
84.  Technical Assistance: IFAD will provide a grant of about USD 550,000 to GoN for capacity building. 
Capacity  building  will  cover  jhum  improvement,  settled  agriculture,  value  chain  development  and 
monitoring  and  evaluation.  The  major  activities  envisaged  under  technical  assistance  includes;  (i) 
preparation  of  training  materials  and  conducting  training  of  all  Veterinary  Doctors  in  animal  production 
18 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
related  issues  covering  pigs,  cattle,  goats  and  poultry;  (ii)  preparation  of  training  materials  for 
establishment of private nurseries for nut trees, timber trees, and fuel wood trees and conducting TOT for 
Agriculture Research Station staff on nursery management; (iii) preparation of training materials for spice 
production and training of trainers; (iv) engagement of specialist consultants in Highland farming systems, 
Agroforestry and Soil and Water Conservation, and for ongoing technical support to the PMU; (v) prepare 
a long term weather data based agro-climatic atlas for Nagaland; (vi) development of a computerised MIS 
and  training  of  MIS  staff  in  its  management;  and  (vii)  support  for  project  monitoring  and  evaluation 
including assessment of outcomes and impact. GoN will engage Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO) to implement these activities. FAO will also be requested to contribute from its own 
resources  into  this  technical  assistance  sub-project.  A  technical  assistance  agreement  will  be  signed 
between GoN and FAO detailing the terms of this engagement. 
D.  Outcomes/Components - Mizoram 
1.  Outcomes and outputs 
85.  One of the most important outcomes of this project will be the gradual transition from current form 
of jhum cultivation to more sedentary cultivation practice along with adoption of climate resilient farming 
practices and a resultant increase in net farm income. The major outcomes of this project will include: (i)  
64,500  households  reporting  adoption  of  environment  friendly  sustainable  and  climate  resilient 
technologies (use of agro-forestry, soil and water conservation, improved planting material and integration 
with  livestock;  (iii)  Gross  returns  from  spices  increased  to  INR  277  million;  and  (iv)  Gross  returns  from 
livestock increased to INR 267.9 million.  
86.  The  major  outputs  of  this  project  will  include  (i)  100%  of  the  villages  (272)  with  completed 
participatory  land  use  plans;  (ii)  108,800  farmers  trained  on  better  jhum  and  fallow  management;  (ii) 
27,200  farmers  trained  on  settled  agriculture;  (iii)  40,800  ha  under  SWC  by  jhum,  fallow  and  settled 
agriculture;  (iv)  5,440  ha  under  community  conservation  areas;  (v)  10,880  households  benefitting  from 
landless  support;  (vi)  7,200  households  participating  in  organized  spice  value  chain;  (vii)  25,000 
households benefitting from pig rearing; (viii)  48,000 households reporting improved access to markets; 
and (ix)) 400 km of farm link road rehabilitated. 
2. 
Components 
87.  The  project  will  have  three  components:  (i)  Improved  jhum  management;  (ii)  Value  chain  and 
market access; and (iii) Project management and knowledge services. 
i. 
Component 1: Improved Jhum Management 
88.  Agriculture in Mizoram state is practised on hill slopes and terraced low lands. The forest cover has 
been  reduced  from  over  90%  to  88%  during  the  last  25  years  due  to  the  practice  of  shifting  cultivation 
(locally called  jhum). The quality of forest also depleted during this period.  Normally farmers have been 
farming  on  hill  slopes  by  clearing  forests  and  preparing  the  cleared  land  for  rain-fed  mixed  cropping 
systems for 1-2 years in Mizoram. They leave the land as fallows and return after 8-10 years to cultivate it 
the same way for  1-2  years. However, they continue  to cultivate  wet land rice  on the terraced lowlands 
years  after  year.  The  farmers  cultivate  wet  land  rice  on  terraced  lowlands  called  wet  rice  cultivation 
(WRC).  
89.  The  project  intends  to  implement  agricultural  interventions  by  taking  into  account  climate  change 
and  its  impact  on  food  production  and  livelihoods  and  proven  and  emerging  climate  resilient  best 
practices.  These  include:  (i)  use  of  remote  sensing  capacities    to  facilitate  Village  Councils  to  identify 
lands  appropriate  for  cultivation  and  to  avoid  using    steeply  sloping  lands  for  jhum  cultivation,  as  is 
prevalent currently; (ii) introduction of fertility management practices using both biological measures and 
also possibly through the introduction of “nano-nutrient delivery systems”; (iii) use of traditional knowledge 
19 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
in    erosion  control  for  ensuring  extension  of  cultivation  period  from  currently  one  year  to  at  least  three 
years;  and  (iv)  use  of  better  agronomic  practices  to  introduce  agroforestry,  linear  planting,  cereal    and 
pulse cultivation to build synergy between crops to maintain soil health on one hand and improved farmer 
income on the other.   
Sub-component 1.1 – Better Jhum and Conservation 
90.  Capacity  building:  The  project  will  train  PMU  staff  who  in  turn  will  train  all  the  district  level 
/Block/Circle level staff to explain the project concept, project components and step-wise implementation 
modalities  including  the  process  of  village  level  micro-plan  preparation.  Village  level  workers  will  be 
trained  thereafter.  The  project  will  initially  conduct  a  workshop  at  the  district  level  by  inviting  all  the 
Chairpersons and Secretaries of Village Councils (VCs) in the project area to orient them on project goal 
and  activities  with  deliberations  on  the  impact  of  the  project.  Subsequently  a  meeting  of  the  Village 
Assembly  will  be  held  to  deliberate  on  village’s  interest  to  participate  in  the  project  with  view  to  comply 
with  free  prior  informed  consent  requirements.  Based  on  the  willingness  of  the  community,  the  project 
implementation will proceed. The project will identify a Lead Farmer from each village and train them in 
better  agronomic  practices.  These  Lead  Farmers  will  be  the  focal  points  for  implementing  village  level 
activities and will be supported by Block/Circle level line department officers and village level workers.   
91.  Land  Use  Planning:  The  project  will  engage  Mizoram  Remote  Sensing  Application  Centre 
(MiRSAC)  to  assist  in  the  preparation  of  land  use  maps  and  land  suitability  maps  for  the  four  project 
districts.  The  project  will  also  prepare  land  suitability  classification  maps  for  each  village  to  enable  the 
project to identify clusters for development of value chains and also crops/plantation suitable to the area. 
Based  on  the  land  use  maps  and  also  land  suitability  classification  maps,  Village  Councils  and  Site 
Allotment Advisory Boards (SAAB) will be trained to: (i) identify lands suitable for growing various crops 
based on the slope, altitude and soil texture, and to allocate land based on this scientific information for 
jhum,  settled  agriculture  and  village  forest  conservation;  (ii)  fix  boundaries  for  land  allocated  for  settled 
agriculture;  and  (iii)  decide  on  the  crops  to  be  cultivated  to  ensure  development  of  economies  of  scale 
required for accessing markets.  
92.  Better  Jhum:  Jhum  system  has  two  phases:  (i)  crop  production  phase;  and  (ii)  fallow  phase. The 
fallow phase is also known as  jhum cycle in Nagaland. The duration of both, cultivated and  jhum fallow 
varies according to the fertility and productivity status of the land. Usually in  jhum system many crops of 
different duration, such as rice, chillies, ginger, vegetables, etc. are grown in the same piece of land and 
in  an  inter-spread  (non-linear)  manner.  The  project  will  focus  on  improving  current  jhum  and  improved 
management  of  jhum  fallows,  which  will  give  two-fold  results.  First,  it  will  increase  the  productivity  and 
second it will lengthen jhum cycle, resulting in increased fallows. The project will promote FIGs to take up 
activities related to current  jhum improvement and fallow  jhum management. Each FIG  will comprise of 
10-20  farmers  and  each  member  of  the  FIG  will  be  connected  to  20  jhum  families  and  these  20 
households  will  be  the  associates  of  FIG  members.  The  project  will  train  FIG  members  and  provide 
project support for implementation of activities.  
93.  Current Jhum Improvement: FIGs comprising farmers will be encouraged to earmark the ridge and 
steep slopes for permanent tree farming, and side slopes for crop farming along with trees, including fruit 
trees. All jhum farmers will be covered and each jhum farmer will get support for about 25% of their jhum 
plot (estimated at 0.25 ha per jhum farmer). The project will support construction of low cost bunds and 
trenches  and  water  harvesting  structures  that  will  improve  the  availability  of  moisture.  Planting  of  the 
leguminous  crops  on  contour  bunds,  such  as  Flemingia  macrophylla,  Flemingia  semilata,  Tephrosia 
candida, and Gliricidia maculate will contribute to improved soil fertility and moisture conservation through 
leaf fall and mulch. This help  in stabilizing and  improving productivity.  Crops/commodities such as, rice, 
maize, sesame, cowpea, vegetables and other pulses will also be promoted for consumption purposes to 
add to dietary diversity. 
20 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
94.  The  project  will  promote  linear  manner  planting  (proper  row  and  plant  spacing)  to  increase  the 
possibility  of  using  farm  implements  and  to  control  weed  growth.  Mulching  using  local  materials,  use  of 
nano-nutrients, and planting leguminous plants and the upper edge of the bunds and cereals on the lower 
edge  of  the  bund  to  improve  farm  productivity  and  income  of  the farmers  will  be  promoted.  The  project 
support wll be spread over 3 years to ensure continued cultivation on the same plot with better practices. 
The project will support current jhum improvement in total 54,400 ha out, of which direct project support 
will be for 13,600 ha covering some 54,400 households.  
95.  Fallow  Jhum  Management:  Fallow  jhum  management  gives  benefits  for  both,  in-situ  and 
downstream areas. The emphasis will be to grow the soil erosion controlling and nutrient building species 
rather  than  allowing  the  scrubby  growth  during  the  fallow  periods.  The  project  will  support  low  cost 
contour bunding, including log wood bunding, trenching, creating terraces using vegetative strips of fast 
growing tree species and grasses, such as Gliricidia, Tephrosia, Flemingia, and vetiver / lemongrass. The 
project will also support seeding the fallows with both, annual and perennial legume cover crops, such as 
the  perennial  pigeon  pea,  Sesbania  speciosa,  Trifolium  alexandrinum,  Indigo  feratinctoria,  and  this  is 
expected to stabilize the land and improve soil fertility. The project will support in total 13,600 ha covering 
54,400 households. Each household will get support for 0.25 Ha for fallow management. 
96.  Village  Forest  Conservation:  The  village  forests  remain  the  vital  community  asset  for  protecting 
water sources, supply of non-timber forest produce (NTFP), and controlling forest fires. Only the dry wood 
is allowed to be removed from the village forests and no commercialization is allowed for the NTFPs. The 
project will support the restoration / conservation of village forests, which will involve re-demarcating the 
village forest boundaries, constructing contours, construction of check dams, protection of water sources, 
and  protection  of  water  sources,  raising  nurseries  and  supplying  planting  material  of  locally  preferred 
species.  Non-structural  vegetative  measures  will  also  be  promoted  to  recharge  springs  in  the  village 
forests after mapping of the geology, vegetation and data on water availability.34 The project will support 
raising  nursery  and  planting  of  locally  preferred  species  such  as,  Parkia  timoriana,  Michella  champaka, 
Gamar  (Gmelina  arborea),  Bombax  ceiba,  etc.  Village  Councils  will  implement  this  activity.  This  activity 
will cover 5,440 ha (20 ha per village). 
Sub-component 1.2 – Support to settled agriculture  
97.  The  project  does  not  directly  promote  settled  agriculture.  Many  farmers  have  made  the  transition 
from jhum only system to jhum and settled agriculture mixed system. The project will support two aspects 
related  to  settled  agriculture:  (i)  the  existing  settled  agriculture  comprising  terrace  rice  cultivation  in 
terraces and orchards and plantations in sloping uplands; and (ii) the landless households  - households 
that have access to jhum land but not to land with tenurial security. 
98.  Support  to  existing  terrace  rice  cultivation:  The  project  will  support  farmers  undertaking  terraced 
rice cultivation. The main aim of this will be to increase soil fertility, productivity and cropping intensity, and 
stabilize productivity.  The project will form FIGs and train them on improved crop husbandry. The project 
will  also  promote  additional  measures  for  improving  soil  fertility  by  growing  Sesbaniarostrata  and 
Azollapinnata  under  rice  cultivation  systems.35  This  apart,  developing  supplementary  irrigation  system 
such as lift irrigation, water harvesting ponds for rice cultivation in low land areas will also be supported. 
The project will select short duration improved local paddy varieties in consultation with KVKs/ATARI. In 
addition,  the  project  will  also  support  introduction  of  second  crop  (pulses/ginger/  onion)  after  rice 
cultivation, rice-fish cultivation and fish farming in ponds in each of the selected villages. The project will 
support  10,880  households  covering  2,720  ha.  Each  household  with  terrace  rice  cultivation  will  get 
support for 0.25 Ha. 
34ICIMOD -2016- Spring recharge interventions in Nepal 
35Effects of Sesbaniarostrata and Azollamicrophylla incorporation on transformation of applied zinc and copper in lateritic rice soils 
with  different  flooding  regimes,  B. Mandal,  K. Bhattacharya.  P.  K. Mete  and  L.  N. Mandal.  Biology  and  Fertility  of  Soils,  May 
1997, Volume 24, Issue 4, pp 394–39 
21 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
99.  Support to upland settled agriculture: The project will support existing settled agriculture in uplands 
by  providing  them  with  quality  planting  material  for  horticulture  crops,  such  as  banana,  orange  and 
pineapple, and spices such as black pepper, turmeric and Mizo-chilli to improve the farm productivity and 
income  of  the  farmers  in  the  short  and  medium  term.  High  value  timber  tree  species,  such  as  Mesua 
ferra, Duabanga grandiflora and / or  Duabanga meluccana, and Cedrela toona  will be  introduced  in the 
system  to  add  to  the  farmers’  income.  The  results  of  agri-horti-silvicultural  systems  and  other  systems 
piloted  by  ICAR  in  the  northeast  region  will  be  expanded.36The  project  will  also  support  construction  of 
water harvesting ponds and other measures. The possibility of two crops of decent productivity with first 
crop of lowland rice and an upland crop (e.g. onion, garlic, field pea, lentil, and other legumes) after rice 
will  be  explored  through  proper  crop  planning  using  water  balance  analysis  and  improved  agronomic 
practices.37  The  project  will  support  5,440  households  covering  2,720  ha.  Each  household  with  upland 
settled agriculture will get support for 0.5 Ha. 
100.  Support to the landless: The project will the poorest households to access land with tenurial rights. 
Households that are without tenurial land rights in each village will be identified and a FIG will be formed. 
The selection criteria will include household that: (i) have participated in  jhuming for the last three years 
continuously;  (ii)  do  not  have  temporary  pass  and  land  settlement  certificate  for  any  land  other  than 
residential plot; (iii) do not have any member working in the government sector; and (iv) households that 
are  dependent  on  wage  labour  for  75%  of  their  income. A  FIG  in  each  village  comprising  about  10-20 
members will be established and supported by the Lead Farmer. A land parcel will be identified using the 
land use maps and temporary pass will be issued for at least 0.5 ha per member. This allocation will be 
made  not  individually  but  for  a  group  as  a  whole.  FIGs  will  be  provided  training  on  better  agronomic 
practices and supported  will be provided for  soil and  water conservation  works in these selected  areas. 
Measures  such  as  contour  bunds,  contour  trenches  and  construction  of  water  harvesting  ponds.  The 
project  will  support  promotion  of  integrated  farming  systems  in  these  lands.  The  project  will  support 
10,880 households covering 5,440 ha. 
ii. 
Component 2: Value Chain and Market Access 
101.  Jhum  improvement, settled agriculture and  value chain and market access are clearly  interlinked. 
Many farmers have both  jhum and settled agriculture  (mainly  plantations, and lowland rice). The shift is 
mainly on account of labour shortage for taking up labour intensive jhum cultivation, disinterest of you to 
take  up  jhum  cultivation  and  also  the  need  to  cultivate  high  value  crops  to  generate  cash  income. The 
beneficiaries  under  Value  Chain  and  Market  access  will  be  a  subset  of  beneficiaries  under  jhum 
improvement and settled agriculture. Livestock support will also target a subset farmers undertaking jhum 
to increase their income so as to reduce their dependence on jhum. 
102.  A cluster approach for promotion of select value chain commodities will be adopted wherein on an 
average four villages form a cluster, which ensures economies of scale in terms availability of a minimum 
of a truck load  of produce  for market players  to get into  business partnership  with value chain farmers. 
Cluster  ensures  collective  procurement  of  agriculture  inputs  and  business  development  services  i.e. 
transportation and logistics services to make these services economical. 
Sub-component 2.1 – Value chain development   
103.  Production Support: The project will support activities for enhancing production of: (i) Turmeric and 
Mizo-chilli  in  Kolasib  district;  (ii)  Mizo-chilli  and  Turmeric  in  Mamit  district;  (iii)  Mizo-chilli  and  Ginger  in 
Serchhip  district;  and  (iv)  Mizo-chilli  and  Ginger  in  Champhai  district.  Non-availability  of  quality  planting 
36 A.K. Singh et all 2012, Natural Resources Management for sustainable hill agriculture – need for a paradigm shift 
37  Singh  V  P,  Singh  RK,  Sastri  ASRAS,  Baghel  SS,  Chaudhary  JL.1999.  Rice  growing  environments  in  Eastern  India:  An  agro-
climatic analysis. Indira Gandhi Agril. Univ. and the International Rice Research Institute. Pub. Pp 76. 
22 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
material remains an issue. By supplying improved planting material, it is assumed that the productivity of 
these crops will increase by 30 to 50%.38 
104.  The  project  will  identify  30  clusters  (each  cluster  of  about  4  villages)  and  support  engagement  of 
two CRP in each cluster to support the FIGs. The cluster selection for production support will depend on 
the  suitability  (soil,  climate,  water,  etc.)  of  the  area  to  produce  these  crops  and  access  to  roads. 
Interested farmers in these clusters will have to allocate a separate plot of about 0.5 ha either in current 
jhum or in fallow jhum to grow these selected crops. Appropriate training for the CRPs and FIGs will be 
provided  by  the  project.  The  project  will  support  promotion  of  FIGs  of  up  to  20  farmers  per  group  in 
respect  of  commodities/crops  shortlisted  for  each  district.  The  project  will  support  7,200  households 
covering 3,600 ha under spice production.  
105.  The project plans to introduce an innovative modality for digital delivery of extension and monitoring 
of  production  practices,  input  use  and  expected  production.    This  can  be  accessed  by  market  players 
across  the  world  to  support  their  procurement  decisions  reducing  the  need  for  face  to  face  interaction 
required to access market players and increase the reliability quotient and enable the farmers to make a 
quick progression into organic certification.   
106.  Marketing  Support:  The  major  constraints  to  value  chain  development  of  traditional  spice,  and 
agricultural  and  horticultural  crops  are  related  to  marketing.  These  include:  (i)  limited  aggregation  for 
achieving  economies  of  scale    in  cost  effective  collection,  transportation  and  storage;  (ii)  insufficient 
investment  in  post-harvest  management  practices,  including  primary  processing  to  add  value  and    to 
reduce  volume for transportation; (iii)  inadequate data on marketable quantity to  feed into supply chain,  
(iv) inadequate linkage with premium markets on account of issues related to compliance of certification 
and quality standards; and (v) limited access to market players from outside the Mizoram state.39 
107.  The  project’s  marketing  efforts  will  be  directed  towards  both  the  project  promoted  commodities 
(Mizo-Chilli,  Ginger  and  Turmeric),  and  also  other  commodities  and  crops  promoted  under  jhum 
improvement  and  settled  agriculture,  including  ,  orange  and  passion  fruit  which  are  grown  in  sufficient 
quantities,  to  make  them  viable  for  market  entry.  The  project  will  support  aggregation  and  primary 
processing activities and will support market linkages.  In addition, the project will also support next level 
of processing of spices such as extraction of oleoresins, capsanoids,  natural  plant based dyes,  etc and 
value addition to bamboo.  
108.  In order to facilitate production based on market needs, the project will support establishment of a 
marketing unit within the horticulture department. The marketing unit will establish contacts with agencies, 
such  as  Sresta  Organics,  Patanjali,  and  other  agencies  to  develop  contract  farming  modalities.  . 
Collaboration with IDH India and its Sustainable Spice Initiative will be formalized to attract private sector 
participation  into  marketing  of  farm  produce.  The  project  will  support  construction  of  common  facility 
/collection centres, participation in trade fairs and exhibitions, and  will  also  organize buyer-seller meets. 
The project will also prepare plans to attract private sector rom outside the state to establish processing 
and  value  addition  of  select  crops.  The  project  will  also  support  progression  of  farmers  into  organic 
production. 
109.  Livestock Support: The project will train a CAHW, in all the 272 project villages. With women having 
a major role in livestock, about 50% CAHWs will be women and remaining will be men folk committed to 
serve the community and stay in the village. The project envisages immunizing the pigs and poultry in the 
project  area  and  the  pigs  will  also  be  de-wormed  on  a  limited  scale  during  the  first  three  years  of  the 
project.  The  project  will  focus  mainly  on  the  pig  sub-sector  by  developing  support  services  related  to 
38 ICAR NE Hill Complex- http://www.icarneh.ernet.in) 
39
Livelihood based Agri-business and Market studies for North East Rural Livelihoods Project, MART, 2011  
23 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
breed improvement, feed improvement, and animal health. The project will demonstrate and promote feed 
crops cultivation (e.g. sweet potato, tapioca, colocasia, cow-pea, maize, azolla, etc.) in the backyard and 
create awareness among the farmers about the nutrient requirement of pigs. The project will encourage 
existing  retail  outlets  to  sell  fish  meal,  soya  bean  meal  and  oil  cakes  and  mineral  and  vitamin  mixture. 
Small feed grinding units will be established to utilise locally produced maize, dried cassava, etc.  
110.   The project will support establishment of 64 small pig breeding units (6:1 unit) to be  operated by 
progressive/ experienced farmers/CAHWs. In addition, the project will bear 50% cost of 25,000 improved 
piglets  to  25,000  households.  The  project  will  also  demonstrate/promote  improved  pig  housing  and 
compost production from pig manure. Existing artificial insemination services for pigs will be expanded by 
strengthening  the  existing  boar  stations  (4)  under  DAHV  and  introducing  cold  chain  facilities  in  each 
veterinary hospital of the project areas. The project will support other livestock related activities such as 
cattle, goat rearing and aquaculture. The project will aim to raise awareness of the quality threats among 
the  pig  slaughterers,  retailers  and  transporters  through  information  campaign  and  imparting  training  on 
hygienic slaughtering including provision of slaughter slabs, handling, displaying and selling of pork. 
111.  Innovation Fund: Several societies, associations, cooperatives, public sector companies, producer 
companies,  local  agro-enterprise  and  innovators  operate  in  the  state.  These  agencies  and  individuals 
operate in an environment of limited scale, inadequate capital and inability to access latest technologies 
and large scale markets. This apart, in order to realise the potential of the agricultural and allied sectors, a 
higher  scale  of  operations  is  required  to  enter  external  markets  on  competitive  terms  and/or  fetch  a 
premium  price  for  products  produced  in  the  states.  The  project’s  value  chain  support  will  facilitate 
expansion  of  production  and  marketing,  and  is  envisaged  to  generate  a  new  set  of  entrepreneurs  with 
market  linkages.  In  addition,  higher  level  investment  is  required  to  establish  extraction  of  oleoresins, 
capsanoids  and  tumerons.  These  need  to  be  funded  in  a  sub-project  mode.    Accoringly  an  innovation 
fund (IF) is proposed as a funding mechanism through which agencies from the public, private or social 
sectors would work with FOCUS to implement specific sub-projects involving innovative approaches that 
support the overall objectives of the project.  
112.  Project  states  being  hilly  regions,  face  high  transportation  costs  for  movement  of  agriculture 
commodities  due  to  access  difficulties  on  account  of  longer  rainy  periods,  landslides,  and  land  sinking. 
Limited entrepreneurship and marketing opportunities coupled with low volume high cost of transport and 
limited  risk-taking  ability  constrain  agri-business  development.  The  IF  is  envisaged  to  overcome  these 
constraints  by  supporting  potential  agencies  who  can  offer  innovative  solutions  to  project  target 
communities.  Such  sub-projects  should,  ideally,  have  potential  to  be  scaled  up,  by  FOCUS  or  other 
actors, so as to reach a larger number of households. Sub-projects funded by the IF will be established in 
strategic  locations  of  project  districts.  Preference  will  be  given  to  agencies/individuals  planning  to 
establish  facilities  within  the  project  locations.  Agencies/business  entities  registered  in  the  state  of 
Mizoram and Nagaland respectively will be preferred. In the event an outside agency intends to apply for 
IF, such agencies will be required to have a local partner.  Funding pattern will be  maximum 75% grant 
from  FOCUS  and  minimum  25%  contribution  from  applicant  or  beneficiary.  The  Fund  would  have  two 
windows- one for local youth preferably setting up new enterprises where the grant element will be 75% 
and  second  for  all  other  applicants  from  the  region  or  outside  with  relatively  lower  grant  element. 
Applicants bringing higher contribution would be preferred. 
113.  The project will prioritize the needs of youth while approving sub-projects funded by the Innovation 
Fund. Sub-projects of youth taking up enterprise related to aggregation and value addition will be funded 
on a priority and capacity building aspects will be built into this. In addition, the project will actively identify 
agencies  that  have  capacity  to  submit  sub-projects  that  train  youth  in  specific  vocations  and  provide 
funding for enterprise establishment coupled with technical backstopping.  
24 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Sub-component 2.2 - Market access infrastructure 
114.  A  major  constraint  for  the  development  of  market-orientated  agriculture  is poor  road  access  to 
production areas.  Although almost all villages are now connected by all-weather roads, these tend to run 
along the ridges where settlements are located. Much of the land with good potential for the development 
of plantation and other permanent crops are in valley bottoms and on the lesser steep slopes.  However, 
such  areas  often  have  no  road  access,  making  it  difficult  to supply  inputs  and  extract  crops. Farm  link 
roads are therefore a major priority of the government. However, many of the roads that have been built, 
either by DoA or using village labour funded via MGNREGS. These have been constructed without proper 
survey  and  design  leading  to  poor quality,  high  gradient  and  largely  unpaved;  these  are  not  resilient  to 
intense  monsoon  seasons  or  extreme  events  exacerbated  by  climate  change.  Rural  roads,  therefore, 
often get washed away, buried, or become impassable depending on conditions. 
115.  The farm link roads to be built under the project will be of better quality, with proper side and cross 
drainage  and  climate  resilient  measures  to  connect  to  high  potential  agriculture  areas,  horticulture 
clusters and mithun villages. The project will rehabilitate and improve  a total of around 200 km of earth 
road (with proper side slopes and cross drainage and base course) using the funding facilities available 
under  CSS  and  upgrade  200  km of  existing  earth  roads  with  base  course  to PMGSY  and  PWD  gravel 
road standards using IFAD  funds. These roads  would be built  with  all climate resilient features such as 
protection of slopes, grass-turfing, adequate number of drainage crossings, side drains, etc.   
iii.  Component 3: Project Management and Knowledge Services 
116.  The  Department  of  Agriculture  will  establish  a  society  under  the  Chairmanship  of  the  Chief 
Secretary,  named  Society  for  Climate  Resilient  Agriculture  in  Mizoram  (SCRAM)  which  will  be  the  lead 
implementing agency for the project.  State budget allocations for the project and IFAD loan proceeds will 
flow through the Agricultural department. The Secretary, Agriculture will be co-chair of the society and the 
Director,  Department  of  Agriculture  will  be  the  Mission  Director.  GoM  will  appoint  a  Joint  Director  level 
Officer from the technical department on a fulltime basis as the Chief Executive Officer and secretary of 
the society. The details regarding project management and implementation are described in Appendix 5.  
117.  Knowledge  Management:  The  project  will  develop  a  Knowledge  Management  strategy  and  action 
plan. This will include internal learning through regular progress review meetings, and participatory M&E 
at the community level, Information will be shared at  the village level  via  a village notice board, posters 
and  leaflets.  Knowledge  will  also  be  shared  with  external  stakeholders  and  the  wider  development 
community  through  the  generation  of  knowledge  products.  A  project  website  will  be  established  as  a 
knowledge sharing tool, with information on good practices and innovations shared with NITI Ayog, DEA 
and Ministry of DoNER and also displayed on the IFAD Asia website. 
118.  Capacity Building and Knowledge Sharing: The project will be working on both jhum improvement 
and settled agriculture. In order to generate concurrent impact data and to demonstrate the effectiveness 
of  these  approaches,  the  project  will  engage  the  ICAR,  Regional  Centre  in  Barapani  and  the  Regional 
Agriculture  Technology  Application  Research  Institute  (ATARI).  Both  these  institutions  come  under  the 
Deputy  Director  General  (Extension),  ICAR,  GoI.  An  agreement  will  be  signed  between  GoN  and  ICAR 
detailing the terms of engagement.  
119.  The project with assistance from ICAR will aim to be a platform for learning for the other states in 
NER  wherever jhum is  being practiced. The  project  has allocated  USD 260,000 to  generate knowledge 
on  the  evolution  and  sustainability  of  upland  farming  systems  and  their  capacity  to  respond  to  climate 
change.  
120.  Technical Assistance: IFAD will provide a grant of about USD 450,000 to GoM for identified areas 
of  technical  assistance  for  the  project.  The  major  activities  envisaged  in  this  include;  (i)  preparation  of 
training  materials  and  conducting  training  of  Veterinary  Officers  in  animal  production  related  issues 
25 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
covering  pigs,  cattle,  goats  and  poultry;  (ii)  preparation  of  training  materials  and  conducting  ToT  in 
implementing  Sloping  Agricultural  Land  Technology  (SALT);  (iii)  preparation  of  training  materials  and 
conducting  ToT  related  to  terrace  rice  cultivation;  (iv)  preparation  of  training  materials  and  conducting 
TOT for establishment of private nurseries of high quality planting materials; (v) engagement of Specialist 
Consultants in Highland farming systems, Agro-forestry, soil and water conservation, organic certification, 
animal  production  and  to  formulate  policy  reforms  related  to  Agricultural  Produce  Marketing  Committee 
Act; (vi) prepare a long term weather data based agro-climatic atlas for Mizoram; (vii) development of a 
computerised MIS and the support and training of MIS staff in its operation; and (viii) support for project 
monitoring  and  evaluation  including  baseline  survey  and  end-line  survey  with  impact  assessment.  GoM 
has  agreed  to  engage  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  United  Nations  (FAO)  to  implement  these 
activities in view of its well established expertise in these fields. A FAO engaged consultant has joined the 
mission  and  is  in  the  process  of  preparing  a  technical  proposal  including  budget.  FAO  will  submit  the 
technical proposal to the state government which will review and submit to IFAD for approval. Thereafter 
GoN will enter into a TA Agreement which among other things will provide details on the activities, work 
plan, payment modalities and reporting requirements. 
E.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies 
121.  A number of lessons have been learned from past and current projects regarding what has worked 
well, and what could be done better in future.  Details of relevant lessons are in Annex 3.  These lessons 
include: 
122.  Targeting:  Overall,  the  intervention  paradigm  with  disadvantaged  groups  is  valid  as  IFAD-funded 
projects that focus on particularly disadvantaged groups among the rural poor, and include the scheduled 
tribes, scheduled castes, women and the landless as their target group. The targeting of disadvantaged 
groups  in  remote  areas  combined  with  a  ’’saturation  approach’’  is  relevant  to  the  design  of  the  project. 
This approach of combining geographical targeting and saturation approach have been effectively used in 
all  the  IFAD  project  designs  in  India.  This  project  combines  both  these  aspects  to  avoid  portfolio 
dispersion at the sub-state level to achieve greater management efficiencies.  
123.  Leveraging government resources through Parallel financing and Convergence: Strengthening the 
linkages  with  public  programmes  and  collaboration  with  sub-state  and  local  government  entities  (also 
known as “convergence”) with public programmes is particularly relevant in a Middle Income Country like 
India where government investments for developmental activities are big and where IFAD finances play a 
catalytic role. All projects approved since the 2010 CPE have embedded this aspect in the design (ILSP, 
JTELP,  LAMP,  OPELIP,  APDMP).  The  convergence  approach  has  enhanced  the  policy  engagement 
opportunities  at  different  level  from  central  to  state  government  and  boosted  the  scaling-up  landscape. 
This  project  design  has  attempted  to  take  the  convergence  approach  to  a  new  level  by  seeking  flow  of 
funds  from  the  Centrally  Sponsored  Schemes  (CSS)  to  the  project  implementing  agency  so  that  these 
funds are used in conjunction with the IFAD funds to achieve better results and to have larger coverage. 
124.  Focus on Rain-fed agriculture: IFAD projects in India have generated valuable body of knowledge 
to  raise  agricultural  productivity  and  to  improve  viability  of  rain-fed  agriculture.  A  particularly  relevant 
example is of private sector partnership between cotton farmers of Vidarbha (in CAIM project) with Better 
Cotton Initiative; promotion of SRI and SWI techniques for enhancing production of rice and wheat; large 
scale  adoption  of  the  Broad  Bed  Furrow  technique  for  soil  and  water  conservation,  etc.    IFAD  projects 
have also focussed both on diversifying crops by promoting high value, short duration crops as well as on 
off farm activities to help farmers deal with the weather shocks.  
125.  Settled  Agriculture:  NERCORMP  results  indicate  that  unproductive  jhum  fallows  have  been 
converted  to  commercial  plantations,  including  agro-horticultural  systems,  resulting  in  productive  use  of 
land,  higher  incomes,  reversal  of  resource  degradation  and  improved  local  environment.  Consequently, 
26 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
jhum cultivation per household decreased to an average of 1.2 acre in 2016 from the baseline (2011) of 
nearly  2.1  ha.  End  line  survey  (2016)  showed  that  the  area  under  jhum  decreased  from  61  percent  at 
baseline  in  2011  to  about  33  percent  in  2016  due  to  jhum  land  development  interventions  of  the 
project.40This  project  intends  to  focus  on  improving  current  jhum  and  improved  management  of  jhum 
fallows through soil fertility improvement measures, better agronomic practices and tree and horticultural 
crops. 
126.  Soil  and  water  conservation:  Increase  in  water  availability  and  control  of  soil  erosion  through 
physical  and  biological  measures  have  been  tested  successfully  in  the  tribal  areas  of  Orissa  and 
Jharkhand under OTELP and JTDP. The project will also invest in soil and  water conservation  activities 
especially suited to hill areas taking into account results of various pilot projects of the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research. 
127.  Extension  service  delivery:  The  concept  of  village  level  extension  service  modality  including 
provision of vaccination and first aid service coupled with a system of payment for services delivered has 
been well established by the TRWEP in Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh states. This modality will be 
implemented in this project by including Lead Farmers for delivery of extension messages related to jhum 
improvement and settled agriculture and also CAHWs for delivery of animal husbandry related extension 
messages and also for carrying out vaccination and first aid for livestock. These grassroots level workers 
would  be  provided  with  structured  training  coupled  with  technical  supervision  by  the  staff  of  line 
departments.    
128.  Market  access:  The  experience  of  TRWEP  and  CAIM  in  Maharashtra  and  PTSLP  in  Tamil  Nadu 
shows considerable enhancement of impact at the household level when livelihood activities are taken up 
in  a  value  chain  mode.  This  project  design  lays  significant  stress  on  market  access  and  value  chain 
development. A detailed value chain analysis study was done prior to the  project design and the interest 
of key private sector players has been explored. 
129.  Adherence  to  IFAD  policies.  The  project  is  fully  in  line  with  IFAD’s  Strategic  Framework  (2016-
2025),  and  adheres  to  IFAD  policies  for  targeting  and  gender  mainstreaming,  environment  and  natural 
resource  management,  climate  change  and  social,  environmental  and  climate  assessment,  nutrition 
sensitive agriculture, and scaling up. The environmental and social category is considered to be B, while 
the climate risk classification is deemed to be Moderate. The approach used will be aligned with  IFAD's 
Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples: (i) cultural heritage and identity; (ii) free,  prior, informed 
consent; (iii) community driven development; (iv) equitable access to land and resources; (v) building on 
indigenous  knowledge;  (vi)  environmental  issues  and  climate  change;  (vii)  access  to  markets;  (viii) 
empowerment; and (ix) gender equality. 
130.  Adherence  to  COSOP  2011-2017:  FOCUS  is  fully  aligned  to  the  RB-COSOP  2011-2015  which 
has been extended to 2017. The two strategic objectives of the RB-COSOP namely, increased access to 
agricultural  technologies  and  natural  resources,  as  well  as  to  financial  services  and  markets  are  very 
relevant for the design of the project.  
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
131.  Two  broad  principles  would  govern  the  management  structure  for  this  project.  They  include:  (i) 
alignment  to  the  existing  government  structure;  and  (ii)  flexibility  to  make  changes  based  on  the 
requirements  that  may  arise  during  implementation.  The  project  would  be  aligned  to  the  existing 
government  structure  by  making  the APC’s  Office  as  the  state  level  nodal  agency  in  Nagaland  and  the 
40Project Completion Report, NERCORMP-II, para 87, page 19 
27 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Department  of  Agriculture  as  the  state  level  nodal  agency  in  Mizoram.  The  state  level  Project 
Management Unit would be located within the Society for Climate Resilient Agriculture to be established 
in both the states. The Chief Secretary of the respective states would be the Chairperson of the Society 
and  the  Project  Steering  Committee.  The  APC  in  Nagaland  and  the  Secretary  Agriculture  in  Mizoram 
would be the Chairperson of the Project Management Committee. The APC in Nagaland and the Director 
of Agriculture in Mizoram would be the Mission Director of the project. The Deputy Commissioners/District 
Collectors of the project districts would chair the District Project Coordination Committee.  
132.  Support Agencies: The project would be supported by the government structure at the district level 
and block/circle level. This strategy is adopted as there are no agencies with rural development expertise 
available  within  both  the  states.  The  agencies  available  are  mostly  rights  based  and  social  service 
oriented  organizations.  However,  the  project  would  implement  its  activities    in  coordination  with  the 
community based organizations such as Village Councils, SHGs, FIGs, Women Societies, Site Allotment 
Advisory Boards, Village Development Boards and JRMCs, many of which are traditional community level 
institutions 
133.  Period of Implementation: Jhum improvement requires a long term approach to enhance the  jhum 
cycle  and  the  project  would  be  implemented  over  a  six  year  period.  Given  the  large  number  of  villages 
(650 villages in Nagaland and 272 villages in Mizoram), in order that the benefits of the project reach to 
all  the  project  villages,  planning  will  be  made  to  start  up  activities  in  all  the  villages.  It  is  planned  to 
undertake most of the preparatory activities during the pre-project period itself. During the first year of the 
project,  activities  related  to  capacity  building,  human  resource  engagement  and  launch  of  project 
activities  in  all  the  villages  will  be  taken  up.  This  strategy  of  front  loading  of  the  activities  is  planned  to 
ensure  that  the  project  completes  largely  all  the  activities  prior  to  the  end  of  fifth  project  year  and  the 
impact on jhum intensification and transformation can be adequately assessed.  
B.  Organizational Framework 
1. 
Executing Agencies 
134.  At the central level, the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) would be the nodal agency for the 
project. At the state level, the APC’s Office in Nagaland and the Department of Agriculture in Mizoram will 
be  the  nodal  agency.  In  order  to  implement  this  project,  both  GoN  has  established  a  Society  named 
Society  for  Climate  Resilient  Agriculture  in  Nagaland  under  the  APC’s  Office.  GoM  would  establish  a 
Society named Society for Climate Resilient Agriculture in Mizoram under the Department of Agriculture. 
This strategy of establishing a separate Society allows it to bring in persons of repute as members of the 
Governing  Council  as  well  as  facilitates  fund  management. This  Society  would  be  registered  under  the 
Societies Registration Act and would have its own bye laws and financial rules.  
135.  The society in Nagaland has been registered with the Chief Secretary as the Chairperson and the 
APC  as  the  Vice  Chair.    In  case  of  Mizoram,  the  Chief  Secretary  would  be  the  Chairperson  and  the 
Secretary, Agriculture would be the co-chair. In addition, The Governing Council of the society would have 
the  Principal  Chief  Conservator  of  Forests,  Secretaries  of  Planning  and  Programme  Implementation, 
Horticulture, Finance, Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services, Soil and Water conservation and Rural 
Development and the Deputy Commissioners of project districts as the members. The Governing Council 
may co-opt additional members based on requirement. An officer from the  Indian Administrative Service 
has been appointed as the Chief Executive Officer of the Society in Nagaland. A Joint Director or above 
level officer from the technical department would be appointed on a fulltime basis as the Chief Executive 
Officer of the Society in Mizoram. This person will be the Secretary of the Society and the SPD.  
136.  The Governing Council of the Society would be responsible for: (i) ensuring legal compliance and 
preparing,  reviewing    and  approving  overall  policies  of  the  Society  including  administrative,  human 
resource  and  financial  policies;  (ii)  providing  direction  and  guidance  for  project  implementation;  (iii) 
28 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
facilitating  coordination  and  convergence  between  the  project  and  other  government  programmes;  (iv) 
reviewing and approving overall AWP&B of the project; and(v) reviewing implementation performance of 
the project. 
2. 
Management Structure 
137.  The details of the project management structure and implementation arrangements are provided in 
Appendix 5 separately for Nagaland and Mizoram. 
138.  The  state  level  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  would  be  housed  within  the  Society  for  Climate 
Resilient Agriculture of each state vested with the project management responsibility. The Chief Executive 
Officer/Secretary of the Society would be the SPD. The SPD would be reporting to the APC in Nagaland 
and to the Secretary Agriculture / Director Agriculture in Mizoram. State budget allocations for the project, 
including parallel financing funds from Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs), IFAD loan proceeds, IFAD 
grant, GoN counterpart funds for IFAD loan and the state share for CSS funding, would flow through the 
APC’s office in Nagaland. All funds with the exception of CSS and state share for CSS funding will flow 
through the Agriculture Department in Mizoram by creating a separate line item in their respective annual 
budget.   
139.  PMU  would  be responsible for: (i) establishing District Management Units (DMUs) in each project 
district  within  the  District Agriculture  Office  and  recruiting  staff  for  PMU  and  DMUs;  (ii)  conceptualizing, 
supervising and monitoring project activities and their progress towards achieving physical, financial and 
outcome  related  targets;  (iii)  organizing  project  coordination  meeting;  (iv)  preparing  and  submitting 
AWP&B after consolidating AWP&Bs of districts and 18 month procurement plan for review by IFAD; (v) 
incorporating the budget requirements of the project into the overall budget of the state and ensuring flow 
of funds to the Society; (vi) ensuring release of funds to the DMUs and line departments for implementing 
project  activities;  (vii)  evaluating  bids,  and  finalizing  and  executing  contracts  with  service  providers  and 
suppliers  of  goods  and  services  for  implementing  various  project  activities;  (viii)    operating  Project 
Accounts  for  timely  release  of  funds  to  the  districts,  line  departments  and  other  partners;  (ix)  receiving 
statement  of  expenditure  and  supporting  documents  related  to  fund  release  and  keeping  an  account  of 
fund  release  and  utilization;  (x)  preparing  overall  project  financial  statements;  (xi)  preparing  and 
submitting  withdrawal  applications  to  GoI/CAAA  for  onward  transmission  to  IFAD;  (xii)  preparing  and 
submitting progress reports semi-annually and annually to IFAD;  (xiii) establishing an effective MIS and 
M&E system to track project progress; (xiv) undertaking knowledge management activities; (xv) preparing 
RIMS data for submission to IFAD; (xvi) ensuring  preparation and submission of annual audit reports and 
financial statements to IFAD and ensuring compliance to the audit observations; and (xvii) liaising with the 
State  administration  and  line  agencies  to  ensure  coordination  and  convergence  to  facilitate  project 
implementation.  Overall,  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  compliance  to  the  stipulation  of  the  Financing 
Agreement signed between GoI and IFAD. 
140.  The society would be provided with full time senior technical staff of the rank of Deputy Directors on 
deputation. In addition, a Finance and Accounts Specialist, a Manager - Planning and M&E, a Manager – 
Knowledge  Management,  a  Manager  –  Gender  and  Community  Institutions,  a  Finance  and  Accounts 
Officer and other support staff would be engaged on contract basis. Staff appointments, except those on 
deputation,  would be fixed  term contracts of at least three  years and the candidates  would  be recruited 
from  the  open-market  based  on  professional  competence  and  experience.  The  society  while  recruiting 
staff will give preference to women subject to other things being equal.  
141.  District Management Units: The project would establish a DMU in each district within the District 
Agriculture Office. The District Agriculture Officer would be the District Project Manager. A small team of 
professionals would be recruited to facilitate project implementation. DMUs would function as an outpost 
of society. DMU would be authorised to release funds based the sanctioned AWP&B.  
29 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
142.  The  DMU  would  be  responsible  for:  (i)  coordinating  with  the  Circle  level  officers  and  the  FIGs  to 
prepare  AWP&B  for  the  circle/block  and  incorporating  the  same  into  the  district  AWP&B;  (ii)  obtaining 
required sanctions for implementing activities; (iii) releasing funds to the FIGs and other implementation 
partners;  (v)  receiving  utilization  certificates  from  the  FIGs  and  other  implementation  partners  and 
reconciling  their  accounts;  (vi)  collecting,  collating  and  analysing  MIS  and  M&E  data  for  the  district  for 
onward  submission  to  PMU  and  for  providing  feedback  to  implementation  partners;  (vii)  ensuring 
convergence between project activities and activities of other line departments in the project villages; (viii) 
conducting audit of books of accounts of FIGs and other implementation partners on a sample basis and 
submitting  reports;  (ix)  maintaining  books  of  accounts  related  to  project  expenditure  of  the  district  and 
prompt settlement of advances with PMU; and (x) ensuring compliance to audit observations. 
143.  A  technical  team  comprising  officers  of  mid-level  seniority  drawn  from  the  Departments  of 
Agriculture, Horticulture, Animal Husbandry and Soil and Water Conservation would be attached full time 
for this project. In addition, the project  would also  engage professionals at the  state  level  on  a contract 
basis. The project would also engage a Planning and Monitoring Officer, a Finance and Accounts Officer 
and the required junior professionals at the district level on a contract basis. 
144.  The  project  would  fund  capacity  building  of  PMU  and  DMU  staff,  development  of  a  computerised 
accounting system and a Management Information System. The project would allocate funds for engaging 
Specialist  Organizations  /  Experts  to  help  the  project  management  in  conceptualising  various  project 
interventions and to provide expert technical advice. The project would also fund contracting of specialist 
agencies for conducting  baseline, impact evaluation and other surveys, and for  preparation of a Project 
Completion Report. 
3. 
Coordination 
145.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  society  in  both  the  states  would  also  function  as  the  state  level 
Project Steering Committee (PSC). The Chief Secretary of the respective state would be the Chairperson 
of the PSC. The PSC  would meet once in six months to review progress, provide overall guidance and 
policy support and to facilitate inter-departmental coordination specifically with regard to convergence. All 
the members of the Governing Council will be the members of the PSC. PSC will invite representatives 
from  the  National  Bank  for Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  (NABARD),  Civil  Society  and  Technical 
Experts  of  repute  to  participate  in  the  PSC  meetings.  The  SPD  would  be  the  member  secretary  of  the 
PSC. PSC would be largely responsible for policy decisions with regard to statutory obligations and also 
for approving AWP&B before incorporation into the state budget.   
146.  The  project  in  both  the  states  would  also  establish  a  Project  Management  Committee  (PMC) 
headed by the APC in Nagaland and the Secretary, Agriculture in Mizoram. The Directors of the relevant 
technical  departments  would  be  the  members  and  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Society  would  the 
Secretary. The PMC would meet quarterly and would be largely responsible for resolving implementation 
issues,  interdepartmental  coordination  and  allocation  of  funds  under  convergence  and  centrally 
sponsored schemes. 
147.  The project would also establish a District Project Coordination Committee (DPCC) in each project 
district. The DPCC would meet quarterly to discuss the project implementation progress, constraints and 
remedies. The most important function of this committee would be to ensure flow of MGNREGS funds to 
the  Village  Councils/Village  Development  Boards  for  implementing  Land  and  Water  Resource 
Development activities. The DPCC would be chaired by the Deputy Commissioner / District Collector of 
the  respective  project  district  and  the  District  Project  Manager  would  be  the  Vice  Chairperson.  The 
members  of  the  DPCC  would  important  district  level  officers.  Based  on  the  need,  representatives  of 
NABARD  and  Lead  Bank  would  also  be  invited  to  participate  in  the  DPCC  meetings. A  representative 
from PMU may attend any of the DPCC meetings if and when required.  
30 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
148.  A Block Project Coordination Committee (BPCC) would be established in each Block of the project 
area. The BPCC will meet bimonthly to discuss approval and review of the MGNREGS activities and their 
convergence  with  project  activities. This  committee  would  be  chaired  by  the  Block  Development  Officer 
and  the  Circle/Block Agriculture  Officer  would  be  the  Member-Secretary.  The  members  of  BPCC  would 
include: (i) Chairpersons of all project Village Councils; and (ii) All Block/Circle level officers. 
4. 
Implementation Arrangements  
149.  The  project  would  use  a  multi-pronged  approach  to  implement  project  activities.  The  grassroots 
level  implementation  partners  include  community  based  organizations  operating  the  villages  and  those 
that  would  be  promoted  under  the  project.  These  include  the  JRMCS,  Site  Allotment  Advisory 
Committees,  FIGs,  SHGs and  Societies. These  community  based  organizations  would  be  supported  by 
Lead  Farmers,  CRPs  and  CAHWs.  The  project  intends  to  identify  and  support  these  community  level 
workers  through  training  and  establishment  of  demonstrations.  Block/Circle  level  officers  of  the  line 
departments  would  be  the  main  link  between  the  community  level  workers  and  the  DMU  for  planning, 
implementation facilitation and supervision.   
150.  Capacity  building:  Capacity  would  be  built  at  three  levels.  The  project  would  engage  FAO  to 
prepare training curriculum and training materials and to train the trainers using a ToT modality. Once the 
trainers  are  trained,  the  project  would  train  all  the  technical  staff  at  the  district  and  sub-district  level. 
Thereafter, the project would identify the community level workers, build their capacity and support them 
in establishing demonstrations. These community level workers would be the focal points in the villages 
for implementing project activities 
151.  Land  use  Planning: The  project  would  use  the  Remote  Sensing  Centres  in  each  state  to  prepare 
land use maps and land suitability maps. These maps would be the basic documents for the community 
to  plan  jhum  cultivation  and  other  settled  agriculture  related  activities  taking  into  account  the  slope  and 
other  parameters.  These  maps  would  also  facilitate  the  community  to  identify  the  boundaries  of  the 
community forests /community and to take up conservation related activities. These maps would also be 
used to identify the soil and water conservation activities in the community forests. The project would train 
the Lead farmers and members of community based organizations to use the land use maps.       
152.  Jhum  Improvement  and  settled  agriculture:  Lead  farmers  would  be  the  focal  point  for  this 
intervention. Lead farmers would promote FIGs comprising members of jhum cultivating households. The 
FIGs  would  be  the  main  vehicles  for  implementing  this  activity.    These  FIGs  would  be  provided  with 
project support for implementing activities related to soil fertility improvement, nursery establishment, soil 
and water conservation activities, and cultivation of plantation and tree crops.   
153.  Value chain Development- Production Support: The project would identify and train CRPs to act as 
focal  points  to  start  cultivation  of  identified  crops  in  a  cluster.  CRPs  would  be  provided  with  project 
support  for  nursery  establishment  and  to  deliver  extension  messages  related  to  Good  Agriculture 
Practices  to  the  community.  The  project  would  introduce  digital  delivery  of  extension  and  using  this 
software,  a  data  base  would  be  developed  to  facilitate  the  procurers  from  outside  the  state  to  get 
information on area under cultivation, expected yield and package of practices used. CRPs would also be 
responsible digital delivery of extension and also for entering data into the database. 
154.  Value chain development – Marketing Support: The project would support marketing support related 
activities such as buyer seller meets, trade fairs, exhibitions, etc. This activity would be implemented by 
the  marketing  unit  to  be  established  in  the  Horticulture  Department  in  Mizoram  and  State  Agriculture 
Marketing Board in Nagaland. These units would invite entrepreneurs from outside the state and link them 
up with local persons to establish a system of aggregation of produce.  
155.  Livestock  Support:  CAHWs  would  be  the  focal  points  for  implementing  this  activity,  supported  by 
the Veterinary Field Assistants of the Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Department. These trained animal 
31 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
health  workers  would  provide  universal  vaccination  services.  The  officials  of  PMU  and  DMU  would 
implement the livestock related activities including demonstration using the CAHWs.  
156.  Market Access:  The  project  would  implement  the  market  access  activities  using  contractors.  The 
community  based  organizations  would  be  used  to  identify  the  infrastructure  needs  and  the  locations. 
Based on these initial assessments, PMU would engage contractors for construction of these roads under 
the supervision of Consulting Engineers. 
157.  Innovation Fund: PMU would take the lead in implementing this activity by seeking proposals from 
experienced  agencies  that  have  implemented  innovative  activities.  The  proposals  received  would  be 
appraised by the PMU and selected proposals would be funded by the project. 
158.  Knowledge Generation and Sharing: The project would engage ICAR in both the states to generate 
knowledge on various aspects of upland agriculture through action research using local institutions. The 
knowledge generated would be shared through documentation and regional level workshops.  
159.  Technical Assistance:  The  project  would  engage  FAO  to  provide  technical  assistance  in  both  the 
states. It would involve training of trainers in new technologies related to soil and water conservation and 
settled  agriculture  including  value  chain  promotion.  Technical  assistance  would  also  cover  provision  for 
handholding and also M&E related functions.  
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
160.  Planning: The AWP&B is the key planning document for FOCUS and  will serve as the instrument 
for identifying specific targets and activities and in relating these to project outcomes and objectives. Each 
year a draft AWP&B will be consolidated by the PMU with inputs from DMUs.  Each DMU will consolidate 
proposals for activities that have come from project villages. The draft AWBP would then be approved by 
the PSC before submission to IFAD for its concurrence. If required, the PMU may propose adjustments or 
revision in the AWP&B during the project year. The approved AWP&B would be used as a key document 
when reviewing performance and progress during the supervision missions. 
161.  Monitoring and evaluation: The project’s M&E system will measure performance against the project 
logframe as well as showing the contribution of project outcomes to the government’s strategic objectives 
for the agricultural and rural sector. The M&E system will also provide evidence of the results in terms of 
IFAD’s objectives at the country level, with data disaggregated by gender and by age to show impact on 
women and youth. The M&E system will also be a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection 
on project strategies and operations. It would support decision-making at various levels and be a basis for 
results-based management. More details on M&E are in Appendix 6. 
162.  Outline of a project M&E framework: The M&E framework is a system to collect, analyse and report 
on data at three different levels of project implementation: (i) outputs; (ii) outcomes; and (iii) impact.   
163.  Output  monitoring  will  measure  the  progress  of  activities  and  achievement  of  outputs  against 
annual  targets  in AWP&B  for  each  project  component.    Information  on  the  progress  of  the  annual  work 
plan will be measured against indicators in the plan, such as number of people trained, and area covered 
by  various  jhum  development  works.   This  can  be  linked  to  the  financial  expenditure  on  the  concerned 
activities,  and  data  may  be  stored  and  reported  via  a  computerised  MIS.  Data  would  be  collected  by 
DMUs  from  partners  involved  in  project  implementation  and  directly  from  village  level  institutions.  If 
needed information may come from the registers and accounts kept by community organisations.    
164.  Outcome  monitoring  measures  the  immediate  changes  coming  about  as  a  result  of  project 
interventions. In FOCUS this would include: 
 
Numbers of villages implementing land use plans. 
32 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
 
 
 
 
Number of farmers trained and adopting improved practices - such as planting high value trees on 
jhum land, using green manure on wet rice, and vaccination of livestock. 
Area under improved jhum, fallow management, terrace rice cultivation, upland orchards/plantation 
and livestock. 
Volumes of planting materials supplied by project-supported nurseries. 
Number of farmers linked to a spice value chain. 
165.  Information on indicators such as adoption and production are not easy for implementation staff to 
collect from every household, so M&E staff in the PMU (hiring enumerators if needed) unit would conduct 
Annual Outcome Surveys (AOS), interviewing a sample of 400 to 800 farmers/households to gather data 
on indicators such as those listed above.  An AOS may also be carried out on a thematic basis in order to 
focus on a specific area of project intervention, such as the spice value chain.  
166.  Related  to  outcome  monitoring  is  process  monitoring,  which  involves  monitoring  the  processes 
leading  to  outputs  and  outcomes.    Specific  areas  where  progress  monitoring  will  be  useful  include: 
provision of animal health services by CAHW and the functioning of FPOs. Information on these may be 
gathered  using  Participatory  M&E  tools,  as  well  as  from  the  records  of  community  organisations  and 
service  providers.    Such  tools  are  also  useful  in  getting  feedback  from  participating  households  on  the 
delivery of project outputs and in empowering communities to take ownership of key processes. 
167.  Impact evaluation is the  process which  will  assess achievement of the overall goal of the  project. 
The main tool for impact evaluation will be baseline and end-of-project surveys. These surveys will be the 
responsibility  of  FAO.  They  will  be  conducted  by  engaging  a  reputed  agency  with  specific  expertise  in 
such assessments.  In addition biological surveys will be carried out into the vegetation in  jhum fallows, 
and  economic  studies  of  farm  households  to  calculate  increases  in  farm  income  and  household  labour 
inputs.   
168.  RIMS  indicators:  The  Results  and  Impact  Monitoring  System  of  IFAD  generates  annual  report 
tables on a number of first and second level results indicators that correspond to the output and outcome 
indicators.    IFAD  has  recently  revised  its  list  of  these  indicators,  some  which  will  apply  to  this  project.   
Prior to mid-term review, the  project  will report on only  the first level results (corresponding to outputs), 
but after the mid-term report it reports on second level indicators (corresponding to outcomes).  
169.  Management  Information  System  (MIS):  Project  will  establish  an  MIS  system  in  the  first  year  of 
project  implementation.  The  MIS  would  generate,  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  progress  reports  on 
physical and financial progress and on project outputs and outcomes - and may have a GIS interface so 
that key data can be shown on maps.   FAO will engage an agency to provide assistance in the process 
of  drawing  up  a  system  specification  and  also  also  in  developing  a  computerized  management 
information system. It is likely that the system will need to be modified in the light of practical experience 
and emerging needs. Much of MIS data entered by the staff of partner line agencies, DMU staff including 
Block and Circle level officers. 
170.  As a part of computerized MIS, use of tablet computers for field data collection and monitoring will 
be piloted. If tablet computers are used down to the village level, then VCs, AFA, VFA and CAHW may all 
enter data.  A major part of the job for the MIS staff at the district level will be helping these people enter 
accurate  and  complete  data,  and  checking  on  data  quality.  FAO  will  employ  a  specialist  to  monitor  the 
performance of the system, and take a lead in adapting and refining the system so that it works better and 
meets the needs of project management. 
171.  Reporting:  The  project  will  develop  a  reporting  system,  with  some  reports  used  internally  and  for 
reporting  to  its  partner  agencies  within  the  states,  and  others  to  external  stakeholders  –GoN/GoM  and 
IFAD.  Progress reports for GoN/GoM and IFAD will be produced at six-monthly intervals.    
33 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
172.  Learning  and  Knowledge  Management:  The  project  will  develop  a  Knowledge  Management 
strategy and action plan. This will include internal learning through regular progress review meetings, and 
participatory M&E at the community level, Information will be shared at the village level via a village notice 
board,  posters  and  leaflets.  Knowledge  will  also  be  shared  with  external  stakeholders  and  the  wider 
development community through generation of knowledge products, such as newsletters, briefs, training 
materials, technical manuals, booklets, posters, videos, etc. The project will also aim to be a platform for 
learning  for  the  other  states  in  NER  wherever  jhum  is  being  practiced.  A  project  website  will  be 
established as a knowledge sharing tool, with information on good practices and innovations shared with 
NITI Ayog, DEA and Ministry of DoNER and also displayed on the IFAD Asia website.  
173.  Capacity building and knowledge sharing: This project is a part of a two state programme and ICAR 
will be engaged by the two states to conduct specific studies and to organize periodic learning events in 
the  region  to  facilitate  cross  learning  in  the  region,  undertake  documentation  and  dissemination.  The 
project has allocated USD 250,000 for Mizoram and USD 260,00 for Nagaland to generate knowledge on 
the  evolution  and  sustainability  of  upland  farming  systems  and  their  capacity  to  respond  to  climate 
change. The details of the activities to be undertaken by ICAR and ATARI have been detailed under the 
section on components of each state. 
D.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
1. 
Financial Management Capacity  
174.  The  observations  mentioned  in  the  2010  PEFA  (Public  expenditure  and  financial  accountability 
assessment),  are  outlined  also  in  the  latest  available  report  of  the  “Comptroller  and Auditor  General  of 
India on States Finances of Nagaland and Mizoram State”, related to the  year ended 31 March 2013 to 
the year ended 31 March 2016 which provides insights into PFM (Public Financial Management) at State 
level. 
175.  Nagaland:  The  PFM  issues  include:(i)  poor  financial  management  and  control  of  finances  at  all 
levels,  delay  in  sanction  resulted  in  delay  in  release  of  funds,  incorrect  reporting  and  submission  of 
Utilization  certificates,  delay  in  release  of  funds  from  1  to  14  months  by  the  State;  (ii)  a  rush  of 
expenditure during the last quarter of 2015-16 and in some cases in the month of March 2016  in which 
expenditure  of  more  than  50%  of  the  total  annual  expenditure  was  incurred;  (iii)  inadequate  monitoring 
and  internal  control  mechanism  which  needs  to  be  strengthened;  (iv)  untimely  submission  of  utilization 
certificates;  (v)  failure  in  exercising  the  statutory  checks  prescribed  under  various  rules  resulting  in 
fraudulent  withdrawals;  (vi)  non-submission  of  quarterly  progress  reports;  (vii)  excess/inadmissible 
payment of financial assistance due to improper classification of land holding; (viii) excess payment to a 
contractor  by  arbitrarily  increasing  the  rates  of  items  of  work;  (ix)  diversion  of  amounts  received  under 
Govt Scheme to private bank accounts; (x) expenditure incurred without prior approval; and (xi)  payment 
made  without  actual  supply/  procurement  of  equipment  and  some  items  were  not  sanctioned  by  the 
Competent Authority. 
176.  Mizoram: The  PFM  issues  include:(i)  limited  efforts  to  mobilize  additional  revenues  to  contain  the 
deficit,  expand  the  tax-base  and  reduce  tax  administration  costs;  (ii)  limited  efforts  to  ensure  timely 
release  of  central  assistance  by  taking  timely  action  on  required  conditions  for  disbursement;  (iii) 
inadequate  focus  on  expenditure  management  to  bring  qualitative  improvement  in  the  public  spending; 
(iv) limited prudence in expenditure pattern to maintain resource gap within manageable limits of the fiscal 
capability of the State; (v) increase in market borrowed funds put at risk debt sustainability; (vi) lack of a 
performance  based  system  of  accountability  should  be  put  in  place  in  State  owned  enterprises  as  to 
ensure  profitability  and  improve  efficiency  in  services  -  loss-making  companies  should  be  restructured; 
(vii)  lack  of  an  effective  mechanism  to  ensure  financial  discipline  and  prepare  realistic  budget  with 
inadequate budgetary control in all Government departments where savings/excess persisted in the last 
34 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
few years; (viii) limited compliance to procedures as well as its own instructions to honour Public Finance 
accountability norms- the heads of departments should ensure that departmental accounts are prepared 
and  submitted  for  audit;  and  (ix)  non-reconciliation  of  state  expenditure-  in  2014-15  only  72.29%  of  the 
total expenditure was reconciled and similarly, only 23.79% of total revenues was reconciled in 2015-16. 
177.  APC/ DoA Financial Management: Based the discussions with the APC/ DoA staff and also with the 
Auditor  General  in  both  the  States  it  was  found  that  financial  management  practices  in  APC/DoA  are 
performed  in  a  basic  and  fragmented  way.  The  main  issues  include:  (i)  weak  budget  preparation;  (ii) 
inadequate internal control systems; (iii) incomplete accounting covering only a part of the activities; (iv) 
no  control  on  the  reliability  and  completeness  of  the  information  provided  by  DoA  to  the  Accountant 
General Office; (v) high levels of cash transactions; (vi) lack of regular bank reconciliations. As a result of 
the  above  mentioned  shortcomings,  the  inherent  fiduciary  risk  associated  with  the  public  financial 
management system at State and the APC/ DoA level is considered high. 
178.  Considering  the  weakness  identified  in  the  existing  public  entities,  for  project’s  implementation 
proposes an autonomous public Society  governed by its  by-laws,  will  be created. It  will be staffed in its 
administrative/financial  section  with  resources  hired  on  the  market.    The  use  of  the  PFM  is  limited  to 
external audit by the Auditor General (AG). The PIM will will detail the procedures to be used for project’s 
administration.  
2. 
Control risks 
179.  Overall, the proposed project will be operating in a rather high inherent risk environment due to the 
persistence  of  some  weaknesses  in  the  public  sector  financial  management  systems  as  outlined  in  the 
PEFA analysis. The proposed financial management arrangements for the project incorporate a number 
of measures intended to reduce such risks to acceptable levels and ensure that: (i) the programme funds 
are used for intended purposes in an efficient and  effective  way; (ii) reliable and timely financial reports 
are prepared; and (iii) programme assets and resources are safeguarded from unauthorized or wasteful 
use.  After mitigation, the overall programme fiduciary risk remains high. 
Table 1: Summary of FM risks and mitigating actions 
Summary of Programme Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design 
Initial Risk Assessment 
Proposed  Mitigation 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
Inherent Risk 
  1. TI Index 
  2. RSP Score 
Control Risks 
  1. Organization and 
Staffing 
M 
Index: 40 in 2016 (ranked 
79 out of 176 surveyed 
countries) 
M 
Score:  4.00 (2016)41 
H 
  2. Budgeting 
H 
41http://www.ifad.org/operations/pbas/ 
- 
- 
  The  PMU  currently  does  not  exist  in  Mizoram  where  the 
society is to be formed. In Nagaland the society has been 
formed  but  so  far  the  finance  and  accounts  team  is  not 
recruited.  To  ensure  to  get  deputation  of  adequate  Govt 
Staff supplemented by contracted staff 
  Ensure 
the  recruitment  process  of  contracted  staff 
provides  the  project  with  qualified  and  experienced 
human resources 
  Comprehensive, user-friendly PIM 
  A  separate  line  item  for  the  project  will  have  to  be 
ensured in the State budget.  
M 
M 
M 
M 
35 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Summary of Programme Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design 
  3. Funds flow and 
Disbursement 
Arrangements 
  4. Internal Controls 
  5. Accounting 
Systems, Policies & 
Procedures 
  6. Reporting and 
monitoring 
  7. Internal Audit 
Initial Risk Assessment 
Proposed  Mitigation 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
  The project budget will be prepared annually be way of a 
AWP&B  which  will  be  compiled  at  the  PMU  based  on 
inputs from the districts and the Cos 
H 
  Ensure  timely  release  of  budget  to  the  Society  project 
H 
account 
  Support  early  release  of  the  DA  advance  in  RBI  to  the 
State 
  Ensure timely release of counterpart funding 
  The initial contribution of the Govt as endowment fund will 
act  as  a  buffer  and  will  be  used  in  case  of  delay/ 
irregularity in release of funds.  
  Internal  control  mechanism  has 
to  be  set  up  by 
disaggregation  of  duties,  monthly 
reconciliations, 
reporting  and  quarterly  internal  audit  of  the  project 
activities  
  Periodic physical verification of assets 
  Use of accounting software for the project is required. The 
current  Govt.  procedures  uses  manual  accounting 
systems 
  The  hiring  of  a  Finance  and  Accounts  Manager  and  the 
Accounts Officer from the market and training them in the 
use of the software should mitigate reporting risks 
  Regular back-ups of accounting records and reports 
  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  to  detail  reporting 
and monitoring requirements and rules 
  To  ensure finance staff contracted  in  the market  has  the 
means to fulfil IFAD reporting requirements 
  An  internal  auditor  will  be  engaged  for  the  internal  audit 
role 
  Hiring  of  a  dedicated  staff 
to 
follow  up  on 
the 
implementation of internal audit recommendations 
  Project management to act on internal audit findings and 
recommendations 
H 
M 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
  8. External Audit 
M 
  The AG/ CA firm will be appointed to conduct the audit of 
M 
the project.  
  AGs office will be requested to do the ‘certification audit’ 
of the project 
  The  project  to  ensure  timely  preparation  of  PFS  for 
enabling  timely  submission  of  acceptable  reports,  timely 
submission of annual audits and informative management 
letters 
Programme Fiduciary 
Risk @ Design 
H 
H 
3. 
Financial Management and disbursement arrangements  
180.  Finance unit organization of the Society at central and district level: The APC’s Office in Nagaland 
and the DoA in Mizoram will be the Lead Programme Agency. A society under the Societies Registration 
Act,  1860  has  been  registered  in  Nagaland  and  a  society  is  to  be  registered  in  Mizoram  which  will 
implement the project. The society  in Nagaland  is  named as Society for Climate Resilient Agriculture in 
Nagaland  (SoCRAN)  and  the  proposed  name  in  Mizoram  is  Society  for  Climate  Resilient Agriculture  in 
36 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Mizoram  (SCRAM)  which  will  implement  the  project  in  the  respective  state.  The  Society  will  have  a 
Project Management Unit  within the society in each state  and District Management Units  in the districts 
where the project will be implemented. 
181.  A Finance & Accounts Specialist (FAS) and a Finance and Accounts Officer (AO) shall be recruited 
by  the  project  at  the  PMU  for  the  project  period.  The  incumbents  will  have  a  sound  knowledge  of 
accounting  systems  and  preparation  of  financial  statements.  Computer  literacy  and  experience  in  using 
an  accounting  software  will  be  essential.  They  will  be  responsible  for  accounting,  reporting  and 
management  of  all  disbursements  to  the  districts  and  claims from  IFAD  and  the  Government. The  FAS 
shall  be  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  the  project’s  consolidated  financial  statements,  review  of 
financial  reports  and  getting  audit  completed  within  the  stipulated  time.  The  ToR  for  the  FAS  and  the 
F&AO will be provided in the PIM. At the district level, an Accounts Officer shall be recruited by the project 
who will be in charge for the accounting and record keeping of all financial transactions at the district level 
and  will be responsible for reporting to the  PMU, management  of all disbursements to the communities 
and claims to the PMU. 
182.  Budgeting:  The  PMU,  after  consultation  with  its  district  offices,  shall  prepare  its  annual  budget 
linking all the planned activities at the head office and district level to the cost categories outlined in the 
schedule II of the Financing Agreement. The annual budget of the project will be included into the budget 
of the Directorate of Agriculture by creating a separate line in the State Government’s budget. IFAD will 
provide an initial advance to the Government. The advance will serve as part of the counterpart funding 
from the Government. The Government will deposit a sum of INR 150 million towards as the endowment 
grant to the proposed society. The endowment is meant to be a buffer fund available with the society in 
case there are delays in release of funds or if funds are blocked in advances, the liquidation of which is 
delayed. The endowment fund will ideally be invested by the society in term deposits and it will be utilized 
only in case, regular funds as budgeted, are not available; as soon as the budgeted funds are available 
the  endowment  fund  should  be  reinstated  to  the  original  amount  by  repaying  the  amount  spent.  The 
endowment may be used by the Govt as part of its counterpart funds during the last stages of the project 
period, if the financial situation of the state so demands. 
183.  Disbursement  arrangements  and  Flow  of  Funds:  The  loan  and  grant  funds  from  IFAD  will  be 
designated in USD and not SDR as has been the practice hitherto. DEA has provided its concurrence on 
the matter as per letter D.O. No 10/7/2016-FB-VII dated 14 June 2017. Two Designated Account in USD, 
one for each state, will be opened by the Government at Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in which funds will 
flow from IFAD. In India, generally the Government pre-finances IFAD funded projects and the amount of 
initial  advance  is  managed  by  the  CAAA.  The  advance  funding  from  IFAD  to  the  each  Designated 
Account  is  fixed  at  USD  3  million.  This  is  equivalent  to  about  six  months  of  projected  allocation. 
Considering  the  weak  fund  position  in  Nagaland  and  Mizoram  states,  it  is  proposed  that  the  two  State 
Governments  firm  up  the  budget  requirements  for  the  domestic  counterpart  funding  in  accordance  with 
extant rules and procedures on the subject. 
184.  Nagaland  will  transfer  the  estimated  budget  chargeable  to  the  identified  missions  /  centrally 
sponsored schemes (CSS) including state share to the Society in a timely manner in two instalments. It 
has  been  agreed  upon  that  funds  of  4  CSSs  (RKVY,  ATMA,  PMKSY  and  MOVCD)  in  respect  of  the 
project districts will be deposited with the societies for project implementation. The society will utilize the 
amount in accordance with the AWP&B which will be dovetailed in accordance with such CSSs, account 
for such expenditure and report the same separately to the GoI. In case of Mizoram, the budget related to 
CSSs  will  flow  directly  to  the  respective  line  department.  However,  implementation  planning  will  be 
undertaken jointly. 
185.  The  societies  will  submit  WAs  for  the  IFAD  financed  eligible  expenditures  as  per  the  procedures 
and formats agreed with IFAD to the Office of CAA&A, Ministry of Finance, GoI. A separate bank account 
37 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
for  the  societies  shall  be  opened  at  the  PMU  and  all  the  districts.  Since  money  will  also  flow  to  the 
proposed community groups, they will also be required to open separate bank accounts. The funds from 
the Societies account both from the PMU and the DMUs.  
186.  Disbursements to the district offices shall be made by the PMU. The funds from the district offices 
shall  be  advanced/disbursed  to  the  communities  through  the  FIGs/community  organizations  or  directly 
depending on the activities. These organizations shall be required to provide utilization certificate for each 
quarter based on which further releases shall be made. The districts shall provide expenditure statements 
to the PMU every month based on which the PMU shall prepare and submit withdrawal applications every 
quarter  after  consolidating  the  actual  expenditure  incurred  at  the  PMU  and  districts.  The  counterpart 
funds,  other  than  salaries  to  the  Govt  staff,  (which  will  be  paid  directly  by  the  Govt),  will  also  be  made 
available  by  the  respective  Government  to  the  PMU  account  from  which  expenditure  will  be  incurred. 
Thus, there will be a single project account in all implementing units from which all funds would be spent. 
Details of expenditure incurred directly (salaries and allowances) towards the project will be provided, to 
enable consolidation and reporting of total expenditure of the project.  
187.  Internal controls: Procedures and record maintenance at all levels will be based on procedures of 
the  government  as  well  as  other  specific  project’s  procedures  documented  in  the  PIM.  The  PIM  shall 
include specific provisions  in respect of internal controls, PFS preparation procedure, financial reporting 
arrangements  between  the  districts  and  the  PMU,  contract  management,  financial  reporting  and  audit 
requirements.  The  FAS  shall  play  a  pivotal  role  for  the  effective  implementation  of  the  overall  internal 
control system. As far as possible all transactions will be by way of and through bank (cheques and direct 
transfers). There will be stringent limitations on cash transactions and it will be used only in exceptional 
cases with prior permission of the Competent Authority. 
188.  Accounting systems, policies, procedures and financial  reporting:  The project will follow a double 
entry cash system of accounting. The accounts will be computerized at all levels (PMUs and DMUs).  The 
F&AOs at the DMUs will submit monthly reports based on which the FAS at the PMU shall be responsible 
for the preparation  of consolidated quarterly financial  reports, templates of which will be provided in the 
PIM.  The  FAS  shall  be  also  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  the  annual  financial  statements  of  the 
project  which  will  be  subject  to  external  audit.  The  half  yearly  reports  prepared  by  the  FAS  shall  be 
submitted to the attention of the Project Steering Committee and forwarded to IFAD. 
189.  The  financial  statements  of  the  project  shall  be  prepared  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards-Cash (IPSAS). The PMUs shall prepare and deliver to 
IFAD  such  financial  statements  within  three  months  of  the  end  of  each  Fiscal  Year.  The  aforesaid 
statements duly audited should be delivered to IFAD within six months of the end of each Fiscal Year. 
190.  Internal  Audit:  The  Societies  will  appoint  an  independent  Chartered  Accountant  or  a  firm  of 
Chartered Accountants to undertake internal audit at all implementing levels (PMU/ DMUs/ COs) from the 
first  year  of  its  operations.  The  internal  auditors  will,  besides  the  financial  audit,  review  the  systems  of 
internal  control  and  suggest  improvements,  if  required,  thereto.  The  internal  audit  should  also  include 
statutory  compliances.  The  terms  of  reference  for  the  internal  audit  are  included  in  the  Project 
Implementation Manual. The quality of internal audit reports submitted by the internal auditors in the first 
year of implementation will be reviewed by the Review Mission/ IFAD ICO and if these reports are found 
to  lack  quality,  the  PMUs  may  be  requested  to  make  alternate  arrangements,  acceptable  to  IFAD,  for 
conducting the internal audit in later years. 
191.  External Financial Audit: The AGs office in Nagaland is not adequately staffed and it is possible that 
their performing the audit might delay submission of the report beyond the stipulated period of six months 
from  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year.  It  is  therefore  proposed  that  the  Society  in  Nagaland  shall  appoint  an 
external firm of Chartered Accountants to audit the accounts of the PMU and all district offices. However 
in Mizoram, it is proposed that the GoM shall engage the AG’s office at Aizawl to perform the audit of the 
38 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
project. This shall include the audit of the state level office and all district offices. The GoM is requested to 
write to the AG’s office requesting them to undertake the audit of the project for which concurrence of the 
CAG,  New  Delhi  will  be  required.  The  audit  shall  be  in  accordance  with Article  9  of  the  IFAD’s  General 
conditions  and  the  IFAD’s  Guidelines  on  Project  Audits  (for  Borrowers’  Use).  In  Nagaland,  since  an 
independent auditor will be appointed, the appointment of the auditor shall be through a fair, transparent 
and competitive process. The terms of reference of the auditor shall follow IFAD approved Audit Terms of 
Reference. The auditors shall adopt  the International Standards of Auditing  while auditing  and reporting 
on  the  Project Accounts.  In  case  of  Mizoram,  the AG  Mizoram  may  use  national  standards  and  not  be 
obliged  to  use  international  ones. The TORs for  the  statutory  audit  by AG  Mizoram  will  be  reviewed  by 
IFAD  and  the  Fund  may  eventually  request  the  availability  of  auditors  to  do  some  specific  activities 
beyond the basic, statutory, ones.  
192.  The  audit  report  shall  contain  a  clear  expression  of  the  auditor’s  opinion  regarding  the  financial 
statements.  It  should  include  a  financial  statements  audit,  a  compliance  audit  and  should  include  a 
Management  Letter.  It  should  also  include  a  section  on  the  project’s  compliance  with  loan  covenants, 
particularly  those  dealing  with  financial  matters.  The  auditor  shall  review  the  project  accounts  including 
the  financial  statements  and  the  SOEs  and  give  an  opinion  on  the  same.  The  audit  of  the  Designated 
Account will be done by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General. Besides this, the AG office at 
Nagaland will perform a “certification audit” for external funded projects. 
193.  The audited statement of accounts along with the audit report and the Management Letter shall be 
furnished by the project to IFAD within six months of the end of each Fiscal Year. The project shall submit 
the reply to the management letter of the auditors within one month of receipt thereof. 
194.  The Project shall maintain an Audit Log in respect of the audit observations and get it validated by 
the auditor during the subsequent audit or earlier. 
195.  Taxes:  The proceeds of the IFAD financing is not to be used to pay taxes which will be part of the 
contribution of GoI and the State Governments to the project. Social security benefits, if any, (employee’s 
portion) and income tax (employee deductions) are eligible for IFAD financing. GST has become effective 
from  July  2017.  The  project  shall  use  a  reimbursement  percentage  which  takes  into  account  the 
approximate tax applicable to the expenditure category. 
196.  Recommendations  for  project’s  preparedness  to  be  implemented  before    the 
negotiations 
loan 
Action 
1  –  Organization  –  To  develop  detailed  TORs  for  the  FAS  and  the  AO  to  be 
contracted from the market. Ensure high level of qualification and experience for the 
FAM, a more junior profile for the AOs 
2 – Budgeting – Ensure separate line item for the project under the APC/ DoA budget 
in the States of Nagaland and Mizoram.  
3 – Funds flow – Obtain DEA clearance that (i) funding will be in USD and not SDR. 
(ii) the funds received from IFAD will be transferred to the GoM as soon as it is 
received from IFAD (iii) make arrangements for opening a Designated account at RBI. 
Ensure that the endowment fund of INR. 150 million is made available to the society 
on its registration; INR 20.00 million immediately after registration and the balance 
during 2018-19.  
4 – Internal Control – Outline the fiduciary content of the PIM based on the 
formulation report.  
5 – Accounting/ Reporting – Set-up Chart of Accounts and reporting formats based 
on the cost components/ categories. Approach the software vendor for procurement of 
accounting software and customization during the second detailed design mission. 
6 – Internal Audit – Prepare TOR of the internal auditor 
Responsibility 
IFAD – TORs 
prepared 
DoA, Planning & 
Finance Secretaries, 
GoN/ GoM 
IFAD-ICO, GoN/ GoM 
IFAD, Mission team- 
completed 
IFAD, Mission team 
and GoN/ GoM-Draft 
chart of accounts 
prepared 
IFAD, Mission Team- 
39 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
7 – External Audit – Obtain DEA/ CAG concurrence for the appointment of AG-
Mizoram to perform the audit and prepare the ToR for the same 
ToR prepared 
IFAD ICO – Mission 
team 
4. 
Procurement arrangements 
197.  Procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  under  FOCUS  financed  from  resources  provided  or 
administered  by  IFAD  will  be  undertaken  in  accordance  with  IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines  and 
Handbook (dated September 2010) and as  amended from time to time as an exception to the provisions 
of  the  General  Conditions. As  the  project  will  be  directly  implementing  Central  Sector  Scheme  funds  in 
Nagaland,  to  maintain  uniformity  in  processes  and  procedures,  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  will  also 
apply for the procurement from CSS funds in Nagaland. In respect of Mizoram, procurements under CSS 
funding will follow the government procurement guidelines. 
198.  The  nodal  agencies  at  state  level  have  limited  prior  experience  in  managing  externally  aided 
projects. This apart, there  is inadequate staff capacity  in these agencies  to deal  with the  procurements. 
The  CAG  reports  of  both  the  states  also  indicate  inherent  risks  in  procurement. The  lead  implementing 
agency  is  yet  to  be  created  and  capacity  is  to  be  built.  Considering  the  complexities  involved  and 
capacity, the procurement risk assessment is high. 
199.  It  is  proposed  to  establish  the  following  risk  mitigation  measures  to  address  the  High  Risk 
assessment:  
a)  Engaging  one  Procurement  Consultant  on  a  retainership  basis  from  outside  the  State  with  the 
experience  and  skill  sets  of  procurement  and  compliance  to  established  procurement  norms  of 
international financial institutions. As the Procurement Consultant will be engaged from the market, 
it will be ensured that some of the Government staff should also be involved as counterpart staff to 
address the issues of attrition and continuity of capacity. 
b)  Appropriate and regular on site and combined procurement training of selected procurement staff in 
“IFAD Procurement Guidelines” to enable efficient and effective project procurement actions. 
c)  Procurement  manual  prepared  consistent  with  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  Procurement 
Handbook  which  will  require  IFAD’s  concurrence.  Any  changes/amendments  /modifications  in  the 
approved  Procurement  Manual  also  requires  IFAD’s  no  objection.  The  manual  could  be  a  stand-
alone document or included in the Project Implementation Manual. 
d)  Procurement  plan  for  the  initial  18  months  of  project  implementation  listing  out  all  procurement 
activities to be taken up by the project consolidated at the State level to be prepared and submitted 
along with the first AWP&B. For the subsequent years of implementation, procurement covering the 
12 month period will be sufficient. The procurement plan will be updated at least semi-annually or 
as  required  to  reflect  the  actual  project  implementation  needs.  All  procurement  plans  and  its 
revisions  will have to be approved  by  IFAD.  Any procurement undertaken  which is not as per the 
approved plan will not be eligible for IFAD financing. 
e)  Putting  in  place  an  effective  contract  management  system  which  includes  all  contracts  and  its 
administration.  The  Contract  Management  forms  will  be  submitted  to  IFAD  as  part  of  the 
Withdrawal Applications for IFAD loan assistance.  
f)  Use  of  model  Bidding  Documents  and  contracts  approved  by  IFAD  and  included  in  the 
Procurement  Manual/PIM;  and  maintain  throughout  the  period  of  implementation  of  the  Project,  a 
full procurement documentation and record keeping system. 
g)  During  Supervision  Missions,  the  post  review  procurements  will  be  reviewed  on  a  sample  basis 
selected  from  the  procurement  plan,  from  the  stage  of  preparation  of  bid  documents  till  contract 
award and amendments to contract to identify areas of performance improvement. 
40 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
200.  After  putting  in  place  the  above  risk  mitigation  measures  fully  and  effectively,  the  residual  risk 
assessment is Medium. 
201.  Good  governance  framework:  All  procurement  for  goods,  works  and  services  financed  from 
resources  funded  or  administered  by  IFAD  require  bidding  documents  and  the  contracts  to  include  a 
provision  requiring  suppliers,  contractors  and  consultants,  ensure  compliance  with  IFAD  zero  tolerance 
anti-corruption policy and to permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating 
to the bid submission and contract performance, and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors. 
202.  As part of the e-governance policy and framework, PMU of FOCUS in each State will disclose the 
following  minimum  documents  either  in  its  Project  Website  or  Directorate  of  Agriculture  Website:  (i) 
procurement plan and its revisions; (ii) procurement manual; (iii) invitation for bids for goods and works for 
all  NCB  contracts;  (iv)  request  for  expression  of  interest  for  selection/hiring  of  consulting  services,  (v) 
contract  awards  of  goods,  works  and  all  consultancy  services,  (vi)  list  of  contracts  following  Direct 
Contracting  or  Single  Source  Selection  (SSS);    (vii)  short  list  of  consultants;  (viii)  contract  award  of  all 
consultancy  services;  and  (ix)  action  taken  report  on  the  complaints  received.  In  addition,  the  PMU  will 
also  publish  any  information  required  under  the  provisions  of  suo-motu  disclosure  as  specified  by  the 
Right to Information Act and the  decisions of the  State Information Commissioners applicable to project 
implementation. 
203.  Other  details:  The  prior  review  modalities  and  thresholds  and  the  post  review  of  procurement 
actions are provided in Appendix 6. 
E.  Supervision 
204.  The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. During the start-up phase of the project, IFAD will 
attend  the  state  level  start  up  workshop  in  each  state  and  participate  in  the  discussions  on  the  project 
approach, strategy and implementation arrangements. IFAD  will  engage specialists depending  upon the 
need.  Special  attention  will  be  provided  to  establish  a  robust  financial  management  and  procurement 
system with training of the finance and  procurement  staff. Other implementation support  during the first 
year  will  include  assistance  to  prepare  standard  bidding  documents,  standard  design,  evaluation  and 
contracting  procedures  and  contract  management  systems  particularly  for  agricultural  link  road 
construction. It is envisaged that the first supervision mission will take place towards the end of the first 
year  of  operations.  It  will  include  specialists  in  water  conservation,  agronomy,  livestock  and  financial 
management, and will review project targets and, if needed, recommend adjustments.   
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
205.  There  are  a  number  of  risks  associated  with  the  project.  Key  risks  from  those  identified  in  the 
logframe are summarised in the table below. Overall the risk profile of the project is medium to low 
and the project has incorporated adequate risk mitigation strategies. There is high ownership of the 
project within the states. The respective state governments have taken a number of steps to ensure 
timely  and  quality  implementation. Accordingly  the  Special  Purpose  Vehicle  for  implementing  the 
project  has  been  formed  and  registered,  the  Mission  Director  and  Project  Director  have  been 
appointed.  Additionally,  in  Nagaland  the  state  government  has  already  appointed  a  number  of 
technical staff.  
Table 2: Risks and Risk Mitigation 
Risk (R) / Assumption (A)  
Goal level: 
Economic growth and social stability (A);  
Growth of the non-farm sector means that fewer 
households than anticipated participate in project 
activities (R) 
Long history of insurgent groups in Nagaland putting 
Risk before 
mitigation  
Low 
Medium 
Risk reduction Approach 
Residual Risks 
If needed, cover additional districts and include non-farm 
activities  
Low 
Project to transfer funds directly to the community groups 
Medium to Low 
41 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Risk (R) / Assumption (A)  
pressure on the government to comply with their 
demand for funds (R) 
Development Objective level:  
Extreme climatic events (R) 
Climate change and/or better non-farm opportunities 
makes farming unattractive (R) 
Improved jhum management: component level risks: 
Farmers find it worthwhile to adopt improved 
methods for jhum cultivation and settled agriculture 
(A) 
Farmers are prepared to replicate project pilots and 
demonstrations using own resources (A) 
Reduced levels of income from settled agriculture 
due to lack of appropriate knowledge and investment 
in improved productivity (R)  
Lack of a sharing pattern between land owners and 
share croppers in Nagaland for long term tree crops 
and orchard/plantation cultivation in jhum system will 
disincentivise jhum farmers who are share croppers. 
(R) 
Market access and value chain: component level 
risks: 
High transaction cost due to small volume and 
remote location (R) 
Policy changes discourage market engagement (R) 
Expansion of pig and poultry production constrained 
by competition from other states (R) 
Breeding animals/day-old chicks available (A) 
Govt supports role of CAHW in health care (A).   
Overall weak Financial Management (budgeting, 
accounting, reporting, internal controls, 
internal/external audit) may result in suspension of 
disbursements and consequent interruption of 
implementation activities 
Risk before 
mitigation  
Medium 
Risk reduction Approach 
Residual Risks 
and these community groups will be able to tackle the 
insurgent groups 
Low 
Low 
Project interventions increase productivity and resilience 
of crops to climate change. Focus on livestock, 
horticulture and agroforestry which are more resilient.   
Very low  
Medium 
Improved methods based on proven practices which are 
already adopted in some locations 
Medium to low 
Medium-High 
Medium 
Medium 
Careful monitoring of results of demonstrations with 
profitable technologies disseminated via training and 
extension efforts in each village. 
Project support through training and provision of 
materials and technology will demonstrate profitability of 
settled agriculture 
GoN has agreed to consult the community institutions 
and develop a system of sharing between the land 
owners and share croppers for long term tree crops, 
orchards and plantations 
Medium to low 
Low 
Low 
High 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
Medium-low 
High 
Build production clusters and aggregation centres, with 
improved road communications. 
Marketing units in Mizoram to provide policy advice in 
line with GoI pro-market strategies 
Increased efficiency and lower feed costs makes local 
production of pigs and poultry more competitive. 
Village level production of breeding pigs and chicks 
Strong links with state agencies reassures government     
Hiring of qualified staff, training and implementation 
support should facilitate the performance of good 
Financial Management. Finance and Accounts Specialist 
and a Finance and Accounts Officer on a contractual 
basis will be hired from the market (refer to para 139) 
Low 
Very low 
Very low 
Low 
Low 
Medium to Low 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project costs 
206.  Key assumptions used in estimating the project costs both for Mizoram and Nagaland are (i) price 
contingencies  assumed  at  4.7%  and  applied  on  all  items,  except  for  Grant  and  subsidies  category 
financed by IFAD and physical contingencies at 7.5% on civil work items; (ii) exchange rate at INR 68 per 
USD that is expected to prevail from the project start; (iii) taxes and duties as prevailing in July 2017 and 
broadly  at  15%  on  works,  consultancies,  equipment  and  vehicles;  (iv)  a  six  year  implementation  phase 
and the project starting in April 2018, (v) all unit costs were input in local currency unit, i.e. INR; (vi) cost 
tables are set in fiscal year basis and (vii) taxes, mostly excluded from IFAD financing rules42. 
207.  The  project  costs  estimated  separately  for  Mizoram  and  Nagaland  will  be  USD  79.31  million  and 
USD  89.16  million  respectively  and  totalling  USD  168.47  million.  Project  costs  are  organized  into  three 
major  components:  (i)  Improved  Jhum  cultivation;  (ii)  Market  access  and  value  chain  development  and 
(iv) Project management as summarised in Table- 3 below and detailed in “Appendix-9: Project Costs and 
Financing”. 
42  While estimating taxes, the provisions contained in the new GST-2017  introduced by GOI have been broadly  taken into 
consideration 
42 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Table 3: Project Cost Summary (amount in million) 
B.  Project financing plan 
208.  The project will be financed by multiple financiers, namely IFAD, respective governments, parallel 
financing  through  Central  Sector  Schemes  specifically  set  out  for  Tribal  Development  (CSS)  and 
convergence  funds  from  GoI  and  in  addition  to  beneficiary  contribution  in  the  form  of  locally  available 
materials and labour. IFAD would provide a loan of USD 35.25 million to Mizoram and USD 40.25 million 
to Nagaland out of the 2016-18 PBAS allocation for India. In addition IFAD would also finance a Grant of 
USD  1.00  million,  that  is,  USD  0.45  million  to  Mizoram  and  USD  0.55  million  to  Nagaland  for  FAO 
Technical Assistance  support. The  GoM  and  GoN  financing  would  be  largely  in  the  form  of  part  of  staff 
costs and operating costs and taxes.  
209.  Project  financing,  separately  for  Nagaland  and  Mizoram  by  financiers  and  components  are 
summarised in Tables 4 and 5 below and also a combined Table (Table 6) showing financing plan. IFAD 
will provide the loan on Blend Terms, with interest on the principal amount outstanding at a fixed rate of 
1.25% per annum, plus a service charge of 0.75% per annum.  The loan would have a maturity period of 
25 years, including a grace period of five years starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board 
of IFAD. 
43 
INRUSDINRUSDINRUSD1Improved jhum management1,378.9220.281,943.3228.583,322.2448.862Value chain and market access3,024.2444.472,658.0139.095,682.2583.563Project management551.078.11985.2314.491,536.3022.60Total baseline costs4,954.2372.865,586.5682.1610,540.79155.02Physical contingencies59.060.8745.110.66104.171.53Price contingencies379.745.58431.086.34810.8211.92Total Project costs5,393.0379.316,062.7589.1611,455.78168.47Project componentsMizoramNagalandTotal 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
Table 4: Project financing plans by Components by Financiers (Nagaland State) 
Table 5: Project financing plans by Components by Financiers (Mizoram State) 
Table 6:Project financing by Components and Financiers (Combined) 
44 
India FOCUS_Nagaland State Components by Financiers Parallel financeParallel(US$ '000) The GovernmentIFAD LoanIFAD Grant(CSS)Finance,GONBeneficiariesConvergenceTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Improved Jhum Cultivation 1. Better Jhum and Conservation 5,966.624.114,317.957.9--3,149.212.7349.91.4945.13.8--24,728.727.72. Support to settled agriculture 289.04.36,076.690.4------353.95.3--6,719.57.5Subtotal 6,255.619.920,394.564.9--3,149.210.0349.91.11,299.14.1--31,448.235.3B. Market access and value chain development 1. Value chain development 836.45.19,049.255.3--3,495.721.3390.02.42,602.115.9--16,373.418.42. Market Access Infrastructure 874.13.54,340.817.4--5,880.023.6727.52.9--13,134.852.624,957.328.0Subtotal 1,710.54.113,390.032.4--9,375.722.71,117.52.72,602.16.313,134.831.841,330.746.4C. Project Management 1. Project Management 9,363.357.26,466.039.5550.03.4--------16,379.218.4Total PROJECT COSTS 17,329.319.440,250.445.1550.00.612,524.914.01,467.51.63,901.24.413,134.814.789,158.1100.0India FOCUS_Mizoram State Components by Financiers Parallel financeParallel(US$ '000) GOVTIFAD LoanIFAD Grant(CSS)Finance,GOMBeneficiariesConvergenceTotalDuties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%TaxesA. Improved Jhum Cultivation 1. Better Jhum and Conservation 2,932.515.88,795.047.3--6,165.433.2685.03.7----18,577.923.4214.52. Support to settled agriculture 238.56.53,220.888.0------198.75.4--3,658.04.6103.4Subtotal 3,171.014.312,015.854.0--6,165.427.7685.03.1198.70.9--22,235.928.0317.9B. Market access and value chain development 1. Value chain development 1,819.612.27,680.751.4--2,938.019.7327.22.22,172.014.5--14,937.518.8614.42. Market Access Infrastructure 2,496.17.610,564.132.0--5,880.017.8965.02.9--13,134.839.833,040.041.72,311.9Subtotal 4,315.79.018,244.838.0--8,818.018.41,292.22.72,172.04.513,134.827.447,977.660.52,926.4C. Project Management 1. Project Management 3,653.640.24,992.154.9450.04.9--------9,095.711.5653.1Total PROJECT COSTS 11,140.314.035,252.744.4450.00.614,983.418.91,977.32.52,370.73.013,134.816.679,309.2100.03,897.4Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Project costs-Mizoram11,140.314.035,252.744.4450.00.614,983.418.91,977.32.52,370.73.013,134.816.679,309.2100.0Project costs-Nagalnd17,329.319.440,250.445.1550.00.612,524.914.01,467.51.63,901.24.413,134.814.789,158.1100.0Total28,469.616.975,503.144.81,000.00.627,508.316.33,444.82.06,271.93.726,269.615.6168,467.3100.0TotalGovtState GovtParallel financingIFAD LoanIFAD grantCSS*BeneficiaryConvergence** 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________ 
210.  Retro-active  financing:  Facilities  for  financing  certain  key  activities  from  10  June  2017  until 
entry into force of the IFAD financing will be provided as retroactive financing  as an exception to the 
general  conditions.  Accordingly  the  facilities  for  retro-active  financing  have  been  requested  by  the 
respective  governments  of  Mizoram  and  Nagaland  from  the  period  June  10,  2017  onwards.  These 
proposed  expenditures  will  fall  under  two  expenditure  categories,  namely  (i)  Goods,  services  and 
inputs  and  (ii)  Training  and  capacity  building.  The  estimated  total  expenditure  would  be  about  USD 
250,000  for  Mizoram  and  USD  300,000  for  Nagaland.  The  respective  state  government  would  pre-
finance  these  expenditures.  These  expenditures  would  be  reimbursed  when  withdrawal  applications 
are submitted adhering to the financing agreements.  
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
Nagaland State 
211.  Benefits and Beneficiaries:  The Project will benefit a total of about 137,000 households.  The 
beneficiaries include mostly Tribal  households including disadvantaged households. Women-headed 
and  poor  households  will  be  especially  targeted  under  the  programme.  Table-7below  gives  an 
estimate of the cumulative number of beneficiaries by year. 
Table 7:  Number of Benefited Households, cumulative - Nagaland 
Subproject households 
Year 1   
45,500 
Year 3   
91,000 
Food crops  jhum agriculture hh a/ 
91,000 
Spices & orchards jhum households b/ 
137,000 
Community Forestry  households c/ 
15000 
Livestock  households 
0 
Processing units households d/ 
18,700 
Farm to market link road households e/ 
Total outreach (# of households) 
137,000 
a/ includes jhum households, wet land paddy households and upland farming households 
a/ These households concentrated in 50 spices clusters; 
 b/ All 650 villages covered by community  forestry programme 
c/ concentrated in 200 spices villages and 210 households per village;  
d/ assumed at 187 households/km of road provided with better CD structure 
Year 2   
91,000 
45,500 
84,000 
7500 
0 
9350 
91,000 
42,000 
0 
0 
0 
45,500 
. 
Project year cumulative 
Year 4   
91,000 
91,000 
137,000 
22,500 
14,700 
28,050 
137,000 
Year 5   
91,000 
91,000 
137,000 
30,000 
29,400 
37,400 
137,000 
Year 6    Cumulative 
91,000 
91,000 
91,000 
91,000 
137,000 
137,000 
30,000 
30,000 
42,000 
42,000 
37,400 
37,400 
137,000 
137,000 
212.  Household  incomes:  The  immediate  benefits  from  the  programme  are  increased  productivity-
through  the  introduction  of  better  management  practices  and  improved  farming  practices.  This 
response is expressed in incremental household income of INR 24,008 per household in year 6 and 
36,600 at full development. These incomes are the resultant impact of the project interventions and do 
not  include  any  other  sources  of  incomes.  Broadly,  there  are  hardly  any  demands  on  incremental 
labour inputs which, is 53 person-days per household at present and this is marginally increased to 56 
person-days. 
213.  Economic  analysis:  Key  assumptions  as  mentioned  earlier  were  used  in  the  economic  and 
financial  analysis  of  the  Programme.  The  analysis  included  all  incremental  costs  and  incremental 
benefits  that  are  quantifiable  and  associated  with  the  project's  investments  in  development.  Current 
calculations show that the Nagaland state project yields an Economic Rate of Return (IRR) of 29%, a 
benefit-cost ratio of 1.78 and the Net Present Value of INR 6,593 million at a discount rate of 10% as 
shown in Table below: 
Table 8:Sensitivity  of NPV, IRR and BCR  to varying scenarios - Nagaland 
Indicators 
Base case 
Cost Increased by 
NPV-Benefit & cost streams discounted at 10% INR million  
IRR-Net incremental benefits stream for a 20 year period  
BCR-Cash flows  discounted at 10%  
6,593 
29% 
1.78 
10% 
5,747 
25% 
1.62 
20% 
4,901 
22% 
1.48 
Benefits down by 
20% 
3,583 
21% 
1.42 
10% 
5,088 
25% 
1.60 
214.  Sensitivity  analysis  was  also  undertaken  to  assess  how  varying  the  assumptions  change  the 
economic  parameters.  This  analysis  shows  that  the  project  investments  are  robust  and  sound  and 
45 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________ 
even under varying adverse conditions including the simultaneous increases in costs and decreases 
in benefits. A switching value analysis demonstrates that the costs would have to increase by 78% or 
benefits would have to decrease by 44% for the NPV to be zero. 
Mizoram State 
215.  Benefits  and  Beneficiaries:   The  Project  will  benefit  a  total  of  about  64,500  households.   The 
beneficiaries include mostly Tribal  households including disadvantaged households. Women-headed 
and  poor  households  will  be  especially  targeted  under  the  programme.  Economic  and  financial 
analysis of the project is provided in Appendix-10.Table-9 below gives an estimate of the cumulative 
number of beneficiaries by year.   
Table 9:Number of Benefited Households, cumulative - Mizoram 
Subproject households 
Year 1   
28,240 
Food crops &rice+fish agriculture hh 
600 
Spices & orchards households a/ 
2,370 
Forestry village households b/ 
5,136 
Livestock & fishery households 
0 
Processing units households c/ 
0 
Farm to market link road households d/ 
Total outreach (# of households) 
27,200 
a/ These households concentrated in 120 spices clusters; b/ All 272 villages covered by village forestry programme 
c/ concentrated in spices villages; d/ assumed at 136 households/km of gravelled road 
Year 3   
64,500 
10,600 
64,500 
19,488 
0 
13,600 
64,500 
Year 2   
61,520 
5,600 
30,810 
12,448 
0 
6,800 
54,200 
Year 5   
64,500 
12,040 
64,500 
26,528 
18,900 
27,200 
64,500 
Project year 
Year 4   
64,500 
12,040 
64,500 
26,528 
9,450 
20,400 
64,500 
Year 6    Cumulative 
64,500 
64,500 
12,040 
12,040 
64,500 
64,500 
26,528 
26,528 
28,350 
28,350 
27,200 
27,200 
64,500 
64,500 
216.  Household  incomes:  The  immediate  benefits  from  the  programme  are  increased  productivity-
through  the  introduction  of  better  management  practices  and  improved  farming  practices.  This 
response is expressed in incremental household income of INR 17,690 per household in year 6  and 
INR 28,190 at full development. These incomes are the resultant impact of the  project interventions 
and  do  not  include  any  other  sources  of  incomes.  Broadly,  there  are  no  demands  on  incremental 
labour inputs which is 68 person-days per household per year.  
217.  Economic  analysis:  Following  key  assumptions  were  used  in  the  economic  and  financial 
analysis  of  the  Programme-  (i)  the  benefits  have  been  estimated  over  a  20  year  timeframe  using  a 
discount  rate  of  10%;  (ii)  the  benefits  that  have  been  included  in  computing  the  economic  and 
financial analysis included only those benefits which could be realistically quantified; (iii) use of a SCF 
of  0.85  for  output  and  0.84for  most  of  the  inputs,  and  (iv)  average  financial  wage  rate  of  INR 
270/person-day.  The  analysis  included  all  incremental  costs  and  incremental  benefits  that  are 
quantifiable and associated with the project's investments in development. 
218.  Project performance indicators: Current calculations show that the Mizoram state project yields 
an Economic Rate of Return (IRR) of 25%,  a benefit-cost ratio of 1.51 and the Net Present Value of 
INR 3,141 million at a discount rate of 10%.  
Table 10: Sensitivity  of NPV, IRR and BCR  to varying scenarios - Mizoram 
Indicators 
Base case 
Cost Increases by 
NPV-Benefit & cost streams discounted at 10% INR million43 
IRR-Net incremental benefits stream for a 20 year period 44 
BCR-Cash flows  discounted at 10%45 
3141 
25% 
1.51 
10% 
2527 
21% 
1.37 
20% 
1913 
18% 
1.31 
Benefits down by 
20% 
1284 
16% 
1.21 
10% 
2213 
21% 
1.36 
43  The NPV is a very concise performance indicator of an investment project: it represents the present amount of the net 
benefits (i.e. incremental benefits less incremental costs) flow generated by the investment expressed in AFA (a single value 
with the same unit of measurement used in the accounting tables). The Net Present Value is the sum of a 20 year 
discounted net cash flows.   
44  IRR is defined as the discount rate that zeroes out the net present value of flows of costs and net present value of flows of 
benefits of an investment. The IRR was computed using incremental net benefits streams for 20 year period. As IRR 
rankings can be misleading, and given that the informational requirements for computing a proper NPV and IRR are the 
same except for the discount rate, it is always worth calculating the NPV of a project. There are many reasons in favour of 
the NPV decision rule (see Lev, 2007). 
45  BCR is independent of the size of the investment and it does not generate ambiguous cases and for this reason it can 
complement the NPV in ranking projects where budget constraints apply.  Being a ratio, the indicator does not consider the 
46 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________ 
219.  Sensitivity  analysis  was  also  undertaken  to  assess  how  varying  the  assumptions  change  the 
economic  parameters.  This  analysis  shows  that  the  project  investments  are  robust  and  sound  and 
even under varying adverse conditions including the simultaneous increases in costs and decreases 
in benefits. A switching value46 analysis demonstrates that the costs would have to increase by 51% 
or benefits would have to decrease by 34% for the NPV to be zero. 
220.  Other benefits 
221.  Environmental  and  other  benefits:  Overall,  the  project  is  environmentally  favourable  with  the 
planting and maintenance of 15,720 ha village forests along with water development facilities, 7,600 
ha of jhum plots planted with annual and perennial spices, 59,700 ha of jhum fallow land planted with 
annual and perennial legumes to enhance soil fertility, some 127,000 ha of jhum and low land treated 
with soil and water conservation measures such as contour bunds and trenches, 15,190 ha wetland 
treated with soil fertility enhancement measures etc. These measures would enhance organic carbon 
contents of soil. Farm-to-market roads are improved using the existing road alignments and no felling 
or  clearing  of  existing  jungles  or  excavation  of  new  road  alignments  proposed.  More  over  the  road 
improvement  work  include  adoption  of  climate  resilient  features  such  as  protection  of  side  slopes, 
construction of cross-drainage structures and side drains, etc. 
222.  An  attempt  was  made  to  use  FAO’s  EX-ACT  software  in  assessing  the  greenhouse  gas 
emissions in two project area states and the results are shown in Annex-H, Appendix-10. Accordingly 
tCO2eq is –(-2.5) for biomass and (-1.0) for soils per year per ha in case of Mizoram and tCO2eq is (-
1.9) for biomass and (-1.0) for soils per year/ha for Nagaland.  
H.  Sustainability 
223.  The  project  interventions  should  be  sustainable.  Improved  agricultural  practices,  if  found  by 
farmers to be useful and profitable will be sustained provided inputs and markets are available.  The 
project interventions in the market access and value chain component will aim to ensure this. 
224.  In  particular  the  project  seeks  to  build  capacity  at  the  village  level,  not  just  in  terms  of  the 
capacity  of  farmers  to  produce,  but  in  local  service  providers  -  such  as  Lead  Farmers,  CRPs  and 
CAHWs.  In  addition  the  project  will  establish  village  level  suppliers  of  inputs  -  plant  nurseries  and 
animal  feed  mills,  along  with  poultry  and  pig  breeding  farms.   All  of  these  will  be  operated  by  local 
people and make a profit from providing these inputs  - and so will be sustainable after the project is 
completed.  The project will also establish systems for the continuing provision of crop and vegetable 
seeds through community seed systems.  
225.  Marketing systems will very largely be in the private sector, with the project helping producers 
make links with agribusiness and marketing companies, as well as establishing local aggregation and 
primary processing enterprises.   There are a number of examples in both states of such enterprises 
continuing to operate after direct support has been ended.      
226.  Government will have some continuing responsibilities.  Road maintenance will be needed - but  
village  and  farm  link  roads  are  largely  the  responsibility  of  Village  Councils  who  will  mobilise 
resources  to  keep  roads  open.  The  provision  of  livestock  vaccine  is  a  continuing  GoI  responsibility 
which will be sustained after the end of the project.   
I. 
Assurances 
227.  GoM  shall  issue  a  notification  nominating  the  Department  of  Agriculture  as  the  lead 
implementing and nodal agency and the Department of Agriculture to register a new society under the 
total amount of net benefits and therefore the ranking can reward more projects that contribute less to the overall increase in 
public welfare 
46Switching values are yet another measure of sensitivity analysis They demonstrate by how much a variable would have to fall 
(if it is a benefit) or rise (if it is a cost) to make it not worth undertaking an option. 
47 
India 
Climate Resilient Upland Agriculture Systems in the Northeast 
Design completion report 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Chair  of  the  Chief  Secretary.  GoN  has  already  completed  activities  related  to  registration  of  the 
society.   
228.  GoM  to  appoint  a  Joint  Director  or  above  level  officer  from  the  technical  department  as  the 
Chief Executive Officer of the society.  
229.  GoN  and  GoM  shall  approve  release  INR  150  million  (INR  15  crores)  as  endowment  grant  of 
which  INR  20  million  (INR  2crores)  to  be  released  immediately  after  the  society  formation  to 
undertake  the  start-up  activities  and  make  budgetary  allocation  in  the  budget  of  2018-19  for  the 
balance INR130 million (INR 13 crores) which will be released in two instalments.   
230.  GoN  and  GoM  to  initiate  steps  to  include  budgetary  requirements  for  2018-19  into  the  state 
budget by creating a separate budget line in the budget of the APC’s Office/Department of Agriculture.  
231.  GoN  and  GoM  to  release  about  20%  of  the  MGNREGA  funds  for  the  project  districts  as 
convergence  funds  for  this  project  to  be  implemented  by  the  Rural  Development  Department  using 
the already prevalent procedures of implementation.  
232.  GoN  and  GoM  to  start  the  process  of  deputation  of  regular  government  staff  to  the  society, 
engagement  of  contractual  staff  for  the  society  and  also  engagement  of  staff  for  the  districts  and 
blocks/circles.  
48 
