India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AWPB          Annual Work Plan and Budget 
BMI             Body mass index      
CMRC          Community Managed Resource Centre 
DCO            District Coordination Officer
FPO             Farmer Producer Organization
GDP            Gross Domestic Product
GGAP          Global Good Agricultural Practices
GII             Gender inequality index
GNI             Gross National Income
GoI             Government of India
GoM            Government of Maharashtra
GSDP          Gross state domestic product
HACCP        Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
HH              Household
HO              Head Office
IFAD           International Fund for Agricultural Development
IGA             Income Generating Activity
INR             Indian Rupee
IPM             Integrated Pest Management
IT               Information Technology
KM              Knowledge Management
MAVIM        Mahila Arthik Vikas Mahamandal (Women Development Corporation)
M&E            Monitoring and Evaluation
MIC             Middle-Income Country
MIS             Management Information System
MoA&FW       Ministry of Agriculture as Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare
MoU            Memorandum of Understanding
NRLM          National Rural Livelihood Mission
NT               Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
ORMS          Operational Results Management System
PC              Producer Company
PMU            Project management unit
Pro-WEAI     Project-level Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
PSC            project Steering Committee
RDD            Rural Development Department
SDR            Special Drawing Right
SHG            Self-help group
SMART        State of Maharashtra’s Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project
SO              Strategic Objective (of IFAD)
TA              Technical Assistance
UNDP          United Nations Development Programme
VC               Value chain
VCD             Value chain development
VO              Village Organization
WA              Withdrawal Application
WFP            United Nations World Food Programme
Aadhar
Atal
Pension
Yojana
Gram
Panchayat
A 12 digit unique identity issued to all Indian residents based on their biometric and demographic data  
A guaranteed pension scheme for the unorganized sector
Village level local self-governance structure
Gram Sabha
Village level meeting of the local self-governance structure
Internet
Sathi
Jan Dhan
Account
Jan Dhan
Suraksha
Yojana
Jeevan Jyoti
Bhima
Yojana
Krushi
Sakhi
Village level internet assistant
Zero balance Aadhar enabled savings accounts
A government backed pension scheme targeted at the unorganized sector
A government backed life insurance scheme
Para Agricultural Assistant
Lakshmi
Mukti
Yojana
Panchayat
Raj
Institutions
Securing women’s rights in joint ownership of land and property
Local self-governance structures
Panchasutra
Five principles of SHG mobilization of MSRLM
Pashu Sakhi
Para vet
Sukanya 
samriddhi
yojan
Swachh
Bharat
Abhiyan
Zilla
Parishads
Government backed savings scheme targeted at the parents of girl children 
Clean India Campaign with focus on building toilets
District level local self-governance structure
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☐ Youth sensitive ☐ Nutrition sensitive ☐ Climate finance
1/21
Executive Summary
IFAD fielded a design mission  in Maharashtra, in September and December 2019, in collaboration with the Government of
Maharashtra (GoM) to design Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (Nav Tejaswini). The mission worked with
the Mahila Arthik Vikas Mahamandal (MAVIM) (the Women Development Corporation of Maharashtra) and Departments of Finance,
Planning, Rural Development, Agriculture, Livestock, and Women and Child Development, as well as with potential project partners in
the financial sector, non-governmental organizations and private sector farm and non-farm businesses. Together with MAVIM teams,
the mission visited MAVIM/CMRC activities in 9 districts that provided valuable insights into the opportunities of enterprise
development. Prior to the design mission, a project concept note had been approved by the Government of India.
Rationale. The rationale for IFAD’s involvement in this project is two-fold: (i) in consideration of persisting rural poverty in
Maharashtra, the vulnerability to climate shocks and increasing rates of malnutrition, targeted productive investments are required in
the rural areas to increase resilience of poor households, through diversification of livelihoods and ensuring household food and
nutrition security; (ii) secondly, the success of the preceding Tejaswini project, exclusively dedicated to empowerment of poor rural
women, and particularly successful in establishing strong institutions and financial discipline and well-functioning micro
entrepreneurial activities for poor women organized in SHGs, can be leveraged for successful smallholder woman farmer and woman
micro-entrepreneur integration within commodity value chains. With the strong capacity base created under Tejaswini, the women
SHG members are actively participating in and benefitting from  the growing economy of Maharashtra through their nano and micro-
enterprises. With increased economic empowerment, women are now aspiring not just to move out of poverty, but also out of a
situation of vulnerability and risk of slipping back into poverty.
Lessons from around the globe indicate that integration of small-farmers and entrepreneurs in profitable value chains with
comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential, lead to sustainably reducing poverty and food insecurity, improving
competitiveness, and generating employment opportunities in the rural economy. Furthermore, poverty reduction in all its forms
cannot be achieved unless gender inequalities are removed and biased social norms and cultural beliefs addressed. In light of the
above, the new project will: (i) leverage the institutional and capacity gains made in the Tejaswini project to promote women's
enterprise in rural Maharashtra; (ii) build on the successful model of the  CMRCs to themselves transform into profit making and profit
sharing enterprises; (iii) leverage successful partnership with commercial banks to start micro-enterprise loans for women
entrepreneurs; (iv) build on past convergence with Government schemes to leverage greater benefits for communities.
Goal and objective. The overall goal of the project is to enable one million poor rural households to overcome poverty sustainably
(sustainable in economic, social, and environmental terms, including climatic resilience). The Project’s development objective is to
improve capacity of rural women to diversify into sustainable  enterprises or engage in remunerative employment and enhance their
access to markets.
Project area. The project will work across the 34 rural districts of Maharashtra, in the blocks/talukas/villages where MAVIM have
organized SHGs, Village Organizations (VOs) and Community Managed Resources Centres (CMRCs).
Target groups. The project's direct target groups are the members of existing viable SHGs and their families who participated in the
previous Tejaswini project. By profession, the target beneficiaries are marginal farmers, livestock/fisheries micro-entrepreneurs,
producers of non-farm products, workers in service sectors and agricultural labourers. From gender perspective, 100% of present
direct beneficiaries are women. About 20% of SHG members are under 35 years of age (young adults).
Outreach. The project will directly service 1 million households; namely 801,979 households through the 66,524 SHGs under 248
CMRCs and an additional 200,000 households, through value-chain interventions and wage employment opportunity creation in the
micro-enterprises.
Project components. The project will have three inter-related components: (i) Component 1: Market-driven enterprise development;
and (ii) Component 2: Enabling support services; and (iii) Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management.
Component 1: Market-driven enterprise development. The component will support the establishment/expansion of micro and small
enterprises. It will enable farm and non/off farm producers and businesses to link with markets and buyers, increase sales and profit
through a combination of interventions in marketing, product development and quality improvement, productivity enhancement, and
sustainable business relationships with other businesses. It will facilitate new and expanding enterprises to establish/strengthen their
linkages with the agri/non-agri businesses and other value-chain actors. It is expected that 565 000 enterprises approx will be
supported through this component and that over 200,000 decent and permanent employment opportunities will be generated,
particularly for rural youth. The component will contribute to economic empowerment of women and rural youth and enhance climate
resilience through the adoption of climate smart technologies and agriculture practices. This component will comprise four (4) sub-
components: 1.1 Farm sector enterprise development; 1.2 Manufacturing and service sector enterprise development;1.3 Capacity
development of CMRCs;1.4 Supporting innovation.
Component 2: Enabling Support Services. This component will focus on providing an enabling environment at the enterprise levels
as well as at household levels, to optimise SHG member's HH's participation in the enterprise development process. To create an
enabling environment for ultra-poor households, the project will provide household mentorship and gradually integrate them in savings
and credits activities. Under this component, the project will also focus on nutrition security at household level and continue the work
on gender transformative activities initiated under the preceding Tejaswini project. The component has four (4) main sub-components:
(i) 2.1 facilitating financial linkages; (ii) 2.2 new pathways for ultra-poor households; (iii) 2.3 enhancing nutritional status and gender
relations at HH and community levels; and (iv) 2.4 policy engagement.
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management. This component comprises of two subcomponents to ensure
efficiency of the project: (i) Institutional strengthening of MAVIM to strategically assume broader roles of a) promoter of enterprise
development; b) centre of excellence in areas of SHG approach to community development; c) capacity builder for grassroots
institutions; and d) implementer of various government schemes for its beneficiaries; and (ii) Project Management.
2/21
Gender transformational. This is a gender transformative project. The project recognizes that being a women-led enterprise project
does not automatically lead to gender justice and equality. The project will additionally address root causes of gender inequalities, by 
consolidating  the gains and expanding the successes of the previous project in: i) work-load reduction through machinery and women
friendly technologies, ii) legal rights awareness training on gender responsive legislations including  domestic violence, dowry, sexual
harassment etc, iii) women's participation in public spaces and institutions such as local governance, markets and government
bodies; iv) promoting joint titling of land and property; v) decision making at community, group and household levels; vi) gender
sensitization and orienting services, including specific men’s sensitization workshops. These activities address key barriers to
women’s empowerment and full participation in enterprise development and are aligned to IFAD’s strategic objectives on gender
equality and women’s empowerment.
Nutrition focus. Micro-nutrient deficiency is a major health problem in Maharashtra, especially among women adolescent girls and
children in the rural areas. The project's investments will be nutrition-sensitive. The project will promote commodities/crops and its
related products that have high nutritional value. Furthermore, recognizing that improved incomes do not automatically lead to better
nutrition outcomes, the project will pursue behaviour change, awareness/education campaigns primarily through convergence with
government schemes.
Project costs. The total project cost is USD 421.87 million, to be financed through an IFAD loan (on ordinary terms) of USD 50.0
million, an IFAD grant of USD 1.4 million; Government contribution of USD 104.78 million (salary and operational expenses,
taxes/duties, and convergence schemes). An estimated USD 250.8 million from domestic financial institution contributing to bank
linkage programme, local private sector contribution of USD 9.9 million and beneficiary contribution of USD 4.9 million. There is
currently a financing gap of USD 12 million in the IFAD allocation.
Project benefits. Eighteen different subsectors were identified to implement sub-projects across the state, with foreseen participation
of 1 million households. Cost benefit analysis indicates that the cash flows for all the identified subsectors were positive. The Financial
Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of the project is 32%. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is 35% (base case) and a benefit to
cost ratio (BCR) of 2.93. The Net Present Value (NPV) for the 20 year period is US$1207 million at a discount rate of 7.5%.
Governance and management. The Women and Child Department will be the state-level nodal Department for the programme and
MAVIM will be the implementing agency. The Managing Director of MAVIM will be ex-officio Project Director with full responsibility of
proper management of the project as per design and achieving project goals/objectives. A Project Management Unit (PMU), headed
by Project Coordinator (General Manager- Programme of MAVIM), will manage planning and implementation of the project. An
appropriate number of full time officials of MAVIM at the Head Office will be responsible for various activities and all District Offices
will responsible for Nav Tejaswini at the respective district.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
Political and economic context. With a population of more than 1.3 billion, India is the world's largest democracy and the third
largest economy in purchasing power parity terms. In 2018, India's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at 8%. Long-term
average GDP growth is expected to be around 6% and with stable, diversified, and resilient growth. Agriculture continues to be
the primary source of livelihood for nearly 50% of the Indian population, although its contribution to GDP remains low at 12%[1].
Maharashtra, located in the western peninsular region of India is the second-most populous state and third largest by area.
Maharashtra’s gross state domestic product (GSDP) at current prices accounted for 14.89% of India’s GDP in 2017-18, the
highest among all states. In 2018, Maharashtra's economy grew by 7.5%. Service and manufacturing sectors dominate the
economy of Maharashtra (approx. 61%) and agriculture contributes approximately 13% of the state's GDP. As per the 2011
census, the population of the state is over 112 million of which  55%  is rural, and 45% is  urban based[2]. There is an increasing
trend of movement of rural men and women to urban areas, not only to tier 1 cities, but also to tier 2 and 3 cities, to participate in
the service sectors[3].
Poverty (SDG 1), food security and nutrition (SDG 2), and smallholder agricultural and rural development context. The
incidence of multidimensional poverty in India was almost halved between 2005-06 and 2015-16. Poverty levels are not uniform
across the states and poverty is still largely concentrated in the rural areas (80% of India's poor live in rural areas). India has also
made rapid strides in lowering the incidence of undernutrition. Owing to concerted efforts at all levels, stunting in children below
five years declined from 48 to 38% between 2006 and 2016.
In Maharashtra, the poverty head-count ratio is 17.4%[4], of which 4.5 million have access to BPL cards (Below Poverty Line) and
have assured access to the public distribution system. The National Food Security Act 2013 (NFSA) was enacted by the GoI,
which provides food and nutritional security through assured availability of adequate quantity of quality food at affordable prices.
In Maharashtra NFSA is being implemented since 2014, and about 62.3% of the state's population is entitled to food grains at
subsidised rates. As per the Food Security Outcome Index (FSOI) status of rural Maharashtra, all districts are to some extent
food insecure and 8 districts are severely food insecure (IHD, 2010). Despite improvement poverty reduction and overall
nutrition, micronutrient deficiency remains a challenge in India and in Maharashtra in particular[5].
3/21
Relevant national strategies, policies and programmes. The state and central governments have rolled out several policies to
tackle the big challenge of unemployment both in rural and urban areas, encouraging enterprise creation for income generation.
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME), launched a new programme called Udyog Aadhaar to facilitate
the easy registration of micro and small enterprises, facilitate loans with low interest rates, and other enabling measures. Under
this scheme, till date the GoM has deployed Rs 850 million for employment generation. The state Government also launched the
Women Entrepreneurs Policy in 2017 to encourage participation of women entrepreneurs and improve the women
entrepreneurship from the current 9% to 20%. The State is first in India to have a separate policy for women entrepreneurs.
Towards promotion of financial inclusion and rural livelihoods, the GoM is implementing the State Rural Livelihood Mission
(SRLM), which is part of the National Rural Livelihoods Mission being implemented across the country. Pradhan Mantri Mudra
Yojana (PMMY) launched in 2015 is a flagship scheme of Government of India to “fund the unfunded” by bringing enterprises to
the formal financial system and extending affordable credit upto Rs 10 lakhs for non-farm income generating activities.
5.
6.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
7.
8.
9.
Climate Change. Temperatures in India are projected to increase by approximately 4°C by 2080-2099, while the mean annual
precipitation will rise by 46.5 mm in 2050 (IPCC report), underscoring that the State of Maharashtra is highly vulnerable to
climate change. Climate projections for 2030, 2050, and 2070 presented in the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on
Climate Change (MSAAPCC) indicate that temperatures and rainfall will increase across the state, resulting in potentially
significant adverse impacts on agriculture productivity. Currently, crop productivity is already exposed to increased climate
variability and more frequent droughts (the state experienced 3 droughts in the last five years). Results of climate modelling
indicate that the mean temperature is projected to increase between 1.2–1.6oC in the 2030s which might likely further increase
by 2.2–3.5oC in the 2070s and result in frequent droughts in some areas. Rainfall is projected to increase from the 2030s to
2070s, with high spatial variability. Extreme rainfall events with longer dry spells are projected to increase in all districts of
Maharashtra, resulting in reduced crop yields. The project will contribute to reducing the risks and impacts of climate change and
variability by integrating climate smart agriculture and animal husbandry in business advice offered to the women entrepreneurs,
and incorporate measures for efficient use of water and energy conservation in processing, manufacturing, and service
enterprises. These measures are well aligned with the priorities identified in the Maharashtra State Action Plan for Climate
Change (2018). 
Gender. India ranked 127 out of 160 countries on the gender inequality index (GII=0.524 in 2017). The GoI is making concerted
efforts to bridge the gender gap, and is giving priority to women’s social and economic empowerment. This is reflected in the
Draft National Policy for Women (2016), and the strong support to livelihood improvement programmes and promotion of self-
help groups, which have created opportunities for women to access finance, extension services for crops and livestock
husbandry, and workload reducing equipment, thus improving household incomes and women’s decision-making power. Under
the purview of policy, the Central Government has launched several integrated programmes for women’s economic and social
empowerment in India, including Mahila Shakti Kendra (to empower rural women with opportunities for skill development,
employment, digital literacy, health and nutrition) and Mahila-e-Haat, a bilingual online marketing platform that leverages
technology to help aspiring women entrepreneurs, self-help groups, and NGOs to showcase their products and services.
In Maharashtra, out of 16.8 million women in workforce, 69% are highly dependent on agriculture. Maharashtra ranks fifth in the
country with regard to women-owned establishments (8.25% of total). While 83% of women owned enterprises are self-financed,
access to finance continues to be a constraint for women entrepreneurs besides issues of technical and business development
support. The political participation of women is having a positive impact on women’s empowerment. With one-third of village
government head positions reserved to women, women residing in areas with a female village government head show significant
higher levels of political participation and empowerment with improved outcomes for women from low socio-economic strata.
However, in rural India, women’s economic opportunities remain restricted by social, cultural, and financial barriers. Most notably
inheritance laws continue to marginalize women in the household and the larger community. Rural women, particularly of in
scheduled castes and tribes, have the lowest literacy rates, and therefore do not have the capacity to negotiate pay or contracts
and most often engage in the unorganized sector, self-employment, or in small scale industry. A small study on empowerment
indicators, among rural women of reproductive age in Maharashtra, concluded that 76.6% women were married below age of 21;
38.3% women were always involved in household decision making; regarding freedom of movement, 38.3% women have
complete freedom whereas 41.7% women have some control over economic resources, but only 30% women have personal
savings. 60% women have favourable attitude towards girls’ education, and only 33.3% women defy domestic violence.
10.
Youth. Youth account for almost a third of India's population and Project data indicates that 20% of Tejaswini's beneficiaries are
young women. GoI has formulated a National Youth Policy (2014) which defines youth as those in the age group of 15-29 years.
However, about 65% of the population is under 35 years of age. At present, about 34% of India’s Gross National Income (GNI) is
contributed by the youth. However, in 2018 India recorded 10% unemployment rate. There is an increasing trend of young men
and women's migration to the cities and often young people find the skills they have are not responding to the market
requirements. In this regard the state of Maharashtra has undertaken a substantive sector analysis to identify sectors lacking
sufficient skilled employees and focusing on buildings skills trainings around market needs. With regard to young rural women
specifically, unemployment rate is very low at 3%. There has also been significant reduction in early  marriages as  26.8% of
women aged 20-24 years were married before 18 years in 2015-16 as compared to 39.4% in 2004-5[7].
11.
Nutrition. Despite implementing the world's largest programme on Food Security and Nutrition, the nutrition status in the country
remains poor. The central government’s decision to launch a National Nutrition Mission reflects the Government's urgency to deal
with the situation. Maharashtra is often cited as a success story for creating a State Nutrition Mission and managing to reduce
stunting by 15% points during 2006-12[8]. However, the rise in incidences of wasting reflects interruptions in access to food and
increased risk of death. Wasting and severe wasting in Maharashtra have also increased from 16.5% and 5.2% in 2005-06 to
25.6% and 9.4% in 2015-16 respectively. Adult women and men in the rural areas also suffer from low BMI (30% women and
23% men). Furthermore, almost 50% of adult women in rural areas are reported to being anaemic, as against 20% of men. While
there has been improvement on many indicators the situation of anaemia has remained unchanged in the past decade which
calls for concerted efforts. A recent survey in Maharashtra observed that despite women’s knowledge of the nutritional benefits of
fruits and vegetables, there were seven key themes limiting their ability to obtain these foods for themselves and their children —
personal factors, household dynamics, social and cultural norms, workload, time pressures, environmental factors and cost. In
particular, household dynamics, and social and cultural norms were major factors[9].
4/21
12.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
The rationale for IFAD’s involvement in this project is two-fold: (i) in consideration of persisting rural poverty in Maharashtra, the
vulnerability to climate shocks and increasing rates of malnutrition, targeted productive investments are required in the rural areas
to increase resilience of poor households, through diversification of livelihoods and ensuring household food and nutrition
security. IFAD’s experience in Asia and other parts of the world have identified diversification of livelihood as one of the most
pertinent adaptation methods. Similarly, nutrition and resilience are strongly interlinked, nutrition is both an input and an outcome 
of strengthened resilience; (ii) Secondly, the success of the preceding Tejaswini project, exclusively dedicated to empowerment
of poor rural women, and particularly successful in establishing strong institutions and financial discipline and well-functioning
micro entrepreneurial activities for poor women organized in SHGs, can be leveraged for successful smallholder woman farmer
and woman micro-entrepreneur integration within commodity value chains. Lessons from around the globe indicate that
integration of small-farmers and entrepreneurs in profitable value chains with comparative advantage, market demand and
growth potential, lead to sustainably reducing poverty and food insecurity, improving competitiveness, and generating
employment opportunities in the rural economy.
The Executing Agency, Mahila Arthik Vikas Mahamandal or MAVIM, has been long associated with IFAD supported projects in
the state of Maharashtra. It was an implementing partner of the Maharashtra Rural Credit Project (1993-2002) and thereafter, the
lead implementing agency of the Tejaswini Rural Women Empowerment Project (2008-2018), implemented across all rural 34
districts of Maharashtra. Under this project, MAVIM organized 939,816 poor women into 78,318 SHGs across 10,495 villages. It
introduced the successful model of Community Managed Resource Centres (CMRCs), which are self-managed federations of
SHGs. This is a unique model, each CMRC covering approximately 300 SHGs and providing a range of social and economic
services to its members on a cost-recovery basis. At present, MAVIM directly works with 248 CMRCs, covering 66,524 SHGs,
with a membership of 801,979 women. Approximately 78% of the CMRCs are financially viable. The SHG-Bank Linkage
programme managed to leverage loans from commercial banks and gave access to finance to all members, and 81% members
have outstanding loans and saved Rs 650 crores. The project's greatest achievement is the financial discipline of its members,
which boasts of a 99.5% repayment rate.
With the strong capacity base created under Tejaswini, the women SHG members are actively participating in and benefitting
from  the growing economy of Maharashtra through their nano and micro-enterprises. With increased economic empowerment,
women are now aspiring not just to move out of poverty, but also out of a situation of vulnerability and risk of slipping back into
poverty. In this context, the pathway to resilience considered by the Nav Tejaswini project is diversifying and expanding
enterprise development by women to improve incomes and through remunerative and decent jobs and ensuring household
nutrition security.
In light of the above, the new project will: (i) leverage the institutional and capacity gains made in the Tejaswini project to promote
women's enterprise in rural Maharashtra; (ii) build on the successful model of the  CMRCs to themselves transform into profit
making and profit sharing enterprises; (iii) leverage successful partnership with commercial banks to start micro-enterprise loans
for women entrepreneurs; (iv) build on past convergence with Government schemes to leverage greater benefits for communities;
(v) build on gains under Tejaswini in addressing the root causes of gender inequalities and facilitating women’s economic
empowerment, strengthening their voice and representation as well as addressing women’s workload.
Overall, the rationale for IFAD's involvement in this project is related to (i) IFAD's extensive and successful experience in working
with women's community based organisations; (ii) ability to leverage global/technical expertise on micro-enterprise development
to take the achievements of Tejaswini to the next level; (iii) alignment with strategic focus of the Country Strategic Opportunities
Programme (COSOP); (iv) IFAD's overarching commitment to GoI’s strategic goal of doubling farmers’ incomes (by 2022); (v)
potential to leverage strong institutional capacity base; and (vi) opportunity to support MAVIM, as promoter of the CMRCs, to
transform from a predominantly livelihood promoter for women to an 'enabler' of enterprise development and women's 
entrepreneurship.
B. Lessons learned
18.
The most important lessons, relevant to the new project, are drawn from the implementation of the Tejaswini project in
Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh:
19.
Poor women willing to pay for quality services and their grassroots institutions enable continued access to services:
The enterprise development model of Tejaswini is based on reliable services to support women members' IGAs by CMRCs/
through public and bank financing, where no subsidy is provided at HH level. This demonstrates the fact that the poor rural
women are willing to pay for relevant and quality services they receive.
20.
Grassroots institution building is the key to empowerment of rural women including efficient delivery of last mile
services: CMRCs in Maharashtra excelled in financial inclusion whereas the Federations in Madhya Pradesh excelled in
empowerment and nutrition related activities. This demonstrates that the CMRCs and Federations have become an efficient, last
mile service delivery with least burden to the exchequer which can be leveraged to deliver a wide range of services to
households at the bottom of the pyramid and key to empower rural women. Furthermore, the nutrition initiatives of 7-Din 7-Saat
Ghar and Tiranga Thali from IFAD's supported project of Tejaswini Rural Development Programme (TRDP) in Madhya Pradesh
has significantly improved food intake and dietary diversity among beneficiary households through improved agriculture and
consumption practices.
5/21
Support services-led strategy impacts livelihoods of large number of households: Tejaswini  adopted a simple strategy of
providing support services to a large number of households as against providing subsidy.  Support services such as Pashu
Sakhis, Krushi-Sakhis, milk collection centres, produce aggregation units, agriculture service centres and farm machinery centres
were promoted. The results indicate that CMRCs and Federations are able to cover large number of households with limited
investment and the outcomes are sustainable.
Reducing women’s workload is important for women’s participation in economic activities and participation in public
spaces: Under the preceding Tejaswini project, women adopted a range of drudgery reduction techniques such as use of farm
machinery (tractor, rice transplanter and cono-weeder), processing equipment, accessible drinking water, latrines, home
appliances (such as mixers). The SHG members further initiated rural markets run and managed by the SHGs thus easing long
travels to the markets. All these activities freed women’s time for participation in SHGs as well as local governance institutions,
markets and government bodies. Women also reported taking holidays and enjoying leisure activities.
Vibrant and disciplined grassroots institutions attract both public and private sector service providers: Disciplined
financial behaviour and rigorous monitoring by the CMRCs attracted ICICI Bank with an enviable on-time recovery of over 97%.
This performance attracted other financial institutions such as IDBI Bank and NABFINS to provide credit to SHGs. The project
also attracted agencies such as Lupin Foundation for e-catering and cashew processing units, Tata Trusts and Google India for
Internet Sathi, UNDP and “Future Group” for pigeon pea aggregation and marketing. The CMRCs in Maharashtra also mobilized
approximately USD 30 million through Government programmes which they delivered to their membership base.
21.
22.
23.
24.
Important lessons from micro-enterprise development initiatives in other countries are:
25.
26.
Micro-enterprises are an effective instrument for rural poverty reduction and job creation. Lessons from Bangladesh's
Promoting Agricultural Commercialisation and Enterprises Project (PACE), demonstrates the positive employment effects of
investing in microenterprises. PACE financed 604,566 microenterprises, that generated 1,399,032 full time jobs (2.31 jobs per
microenterprise).
Service delivery. Experience of Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) in Bangladesh also demonstrated the importance of
combining financial and non-financial services to maximise results and impact at microenterprise level. Non-financial services
include advisory and business services, improved technologies, value chain integration, and market promotion. Where these two
services have been combined, there are proven positive effects on microenterprise turnover and income.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
27.
28.
29.
30.
Goal and objective. The overall goal of the project is to enable one million poor rural households to overcome poverty
(sustainable in economic, social, and environmental terms, including climatic resilience). The Project’s development objective is
to improve capacity of rural women to diversify into sustainable enterprises or engage in remunerative employment and enhance
their access to markets.
The project's development objectives contribute directly to SO1 of India's RB-COSOP: "Smallholder food and agricultural
production systems are remunerative, sustainable and resilient" and to the following specific indicators in the CRF: (i) number of
rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal partnerships for input/output supply with public or private entities and financially
sustainable; (ii) number of producers reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient technologies; (iii)
number of producers reporting increase of 10% in marketing margins; and (iv) number of HH reporting dietary diversity score > 8.
The project's outcomes will contribute to all three objectives of IFAD's Strategic Framework 2016-2025, namely, increased
production, increased market participation, and greater resilience.
Project area. The project will work across the 34 rural districts of Maharashtra, in the blocks/talukas/villages where MAVIM have
organized SHGs, Village Organizations (VOs) and Community Managed Resources Centres (CMRCs). It will support all existing
nano and microenterprise clusters, in addition to developing new commodity clusters. The project will look for synergies and
complementarities with government programmes and investments from similar projects, in overlapping project areas, without
duplicating work, e.g. the World Bank funded SMART project and PoCRA, etc.
Target groups. The project's direct target groups are the members of existing viable SHGs and their families who participated in
the Tejaswini project. There will be two targeting mechanisms: i) Below Poverty Line (BPL) card holders identified by the GOM;
and  ii) identifying poorest households through Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) and wealth ranking. Majority of them are
engaged in income generating activities (IGAs) and have a credit history. MAVIM is currently working with about 0.8 million rural
women, who broadly fall into three distinctive groups as explained in the table below.
31.
Table 1: Target groups, poverty indicators and pathway out of poverty
Type of target groups
Poverty indicators
Services and pathway out of poverty
6/21
Microentrepreneurs
(25-30%)
Annual income > Rs 58,000
(BPL)[10]
Land ownership > 2.5 acres
Moderately poor
(60-70%)
Annual income between Rs
25,000 to Rs 58,000
Land ownership is between
0.5 acre and 2.5 acres
Ultra poor
(5-10%)
Annual income less than Rs
25,000 (no regular income
and depends mainly on
manual labor)
Land ownership: landless to
0.5 acre
§   Participate in an organized value chain
§   Individual microenterprise loan more than Rs 100,000 from bank/non-
bank financial institution
§   Some farm/non-farm businesses may not join any organized value
chain subproject but grow as individual businesses. May receive
business services as per need for example productivity related training,
marketing support in case of farm sectors and design improvement in
case of non-farm product.
§  Participate in an organized value chain
§  Individual member may borrow up to  Rs 100,000 through SHG-bank
linkage
§  Some farm/non-farm businesses may not join any organized value
chain subproject but grow as individual businesses.
§   Some qualify for selected convergences schemes.
§  Vocational training for selected SHG or family members
§   Participate in a value chain if lives in the same cluster;
§   Individual member may borrow up to  Rs 20,000 through SHG-bank
linkage
§   Some farm/non-farm businesses may not join any organized value
chain subproject but grow as individual businesses.
§   Access pro poor  convergences schemes
§   Vocational training for selected SHG or family members for wage
employment.
§   Mentoring for IGA development
§   Village level wage employment for a subcontractor
32.
By profession, the target beneficiaries are marginal farmers, livestock/fisheries micro-entrepreneurs, producers of non-farm
products, workers in service sectors and agricultural labourers. From gender perspective, 100% of present direct beneficiaries
are women. About 20% of SHG members are under 35 years of age (young adults). The project would target these young adults,
women and men, from beneficiary families for skill development programmes to gain remunerative employment. It will indirectly
support all value chain actors (input suppliers, traders, processors, aggregators, and advisory service providers). The
percentages belonging to each group will be confirmed by conducting a baseline survey before the beginning of the project.
33.
Outreach. The project will directly service 1 million households; namely 801,979 households through the 66,524 SHGs under
248 CMRCs and an additional 200,000 households, through value-chain interventions and wage employment opportunity
creation in the micro-enterprises.
34.
Key mainstreaming features
35.
Gender transformative. This is a gender transformative project. The project recognizes that being a women-led enterprise
project does not automatically lead to gender justice and equality. The project will additionally address root causes of gender
inequalities, by  consolidating  the gains and expanding the successes of the previous project in: i) work-load reduction through
machinery and women friendly technologies, ii) legal rights awareness training on gender responsive legislations including 
domestic violence, dowry, sexual harassment etc, iii) women's participation in public spaces and institutions such as local
governance, markets and government bodies; iv) promoting joint titling of land and property; v) decision making at community,
group and household levels; vi) gender sensitization and orienting services, including specific men’s sensitization workshops. The
project's contribution to gender equality and women's empowerment will be tracked and measured through Project-level
Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index (Pro-WEAI). The Implementing Agency, MAVIM, is the GoM's State Women's
Development Corporation, with its seminal objective being the promotion of social, economic and political empowerment of
women in Maharashtra. Its in-house gender-related capacities, given this very specific mandate, envisages a staff primarily
specializing in the implementation of various women's empowerment programmes. 
36.
Nutrition. Anaemia is a major health problem in Maharashtra, especially among women adolescent girls and children in the rural
37.
38.
7/21
areas. Anaemia, and other micronutrient deficiencies, can result in maternal mortality, weakness, diminished physical and mental
capacity, and increased morbidity having a bearing on productivity. The relationship between anemia and reduced productivity
has also been well documented. A literature review examining the association between iron deficiency and work capacity
identified a strong causal effect of severe and moderate iron deficiency anemia on aerobic capacity, which translates into
reduced physical activity and therefore, productivity. Nearly half (47%) of women and 43% of men are either too thin or
overweight or obese. Undernutrition is particularly common in the younger age groups, in rural areas, and among scheduled
tribes. The project's investments will be nutrition-sensitive. The project will promote commodities/crops and its related products
that have high nutritional value. Furthermore, recognizing that improved incomes do not automatically lead to better nutrition
outcomes, the project will pursue behaviour change, awareness/education campaigns primarily through convergence. SHG
meeting will be the platform for nutrition awareness. It will partner with government programmes and leverage partnerships with
other agencies to support women members in SHGs and their households to make better-informed decisions about family's
nutritional habits and dietary diversification. The project will also replicate the successful models of Saat din Saat Ghar and
Tiranga Thali (nutrition models aimed at dietary diversification, including home gardens and meal plans) undertaken in Tejaswini
M.P where appropriate.
Youth. It is estimated that 20% of the 800,000 women SHG members working with MAVIM are below 35 years. Percentage of
youth is expected to increase as it is envisioned that the additional 200,000 beneficiaries will largely be young people. The
validation of actual number/percentage of youth in NT will be done at baseline, anticipated as pre-project activity, where the
target group will be disaggregated in terms of age, gender and other social categories. While NT is not flagged as ​
sensitive' project, as per IFAD’s criteria for social inclusion, NT envisions that young women will participate in and benefit from all
the project activities including  decent and remunerative employment. The young women consulted during field visits have
expressed interest in developing skills in the service and manufacturing sector, the project will envisage vocational training focus
for young women. Skills development trainings under sub-component 2.2 is designed with a focus poor rural youth who will
benefit in: facilitation to vocational training at formal institutions; upgrading skills in selected employment/self-employment
occupations; and apprenticeship with existing industries/ establishments.
​'youth
Climate: Temperatures in India are projected to increase by approximately 4°C by 2080-2099, while the mean annual
precipitation will rise by 46.5mm in 2050 (IPCC report), while the State of Maharashtra is highly vulnerable to climate change.
Climate projections for 2030, 2050, and 2070 presented in the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change
(MSAAPCC) indicate that temperatures and rainfall will increase across the state, resulting in potentially significant adverse
impacts on agriculture productivity. Currently, crop productivity is already exposed to increased climate variability and more
frequent droughts (the state experienced 3 droughts in the last five years). Results of climate modelling indicate that the mean
temperature is projected to increase between 1.2–1.6oC in the 2030s which might likely further increase by 2.2–3.5oC in the
2070s and result in frequent droughts in some areas. Rainfall is projected to increase from the 2030s to 2070s, with high spatial
variability. Extreme rainfall events with longer dry spells are projected to increase in all districts of Maharashtra, resulting in
reduced crop yields. The project will contribute to reducing the risks and impacts of climate change and variability by integrating
climate smart agriculture and animal husbandry in business advice offered to the women entrepreneurs, and incorporate
measures for efficient use of water and energy conservation in processing, manufacturing, and service enterprises  under
Component 1, financial services that support resilience such as insurance for livestock under component 2, and capacity building
of grassroots organizations on climate adaptation approaches under component 3. These measures are aligned with the
priorities identified in the Maharashtra State Action Plan for Climate Change (2018) and are in line with ongoing Government of
Maharashtra’s  climate adaptation programme called Jalyukt Shivar. This is a water conservation programme which has created
an irrigation potential of 2,274,744 ha and a water storage capacity of 1,727,229 TMC (thousand million cubic feet) across 16,521
villages in 34 districts of the state since 2015.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
39.
The project will have three components: (i) Component 1: Market-driven enterprise development; and (ii) Component 2: Enabling
support services; and (iii) Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management.
40.
Component 1: Market-driven enterprise development
41.
Outcome: The outcome of the component is ‘Creation of sustainable business linkages for farm and non/off farm enterprises’.
The component will enable farm and non/off farm producers and businesses in identified clusters to increase sales and profit
through a combination of interventions in marketing, product development and quality improvement, productivity enhancement,
and sustainable business relationships . It will facilitate new and expanding enterprises to strengthen their linkages with the
agri/non-agri businesses and other value-chain actors. It is expected that the enterprises supported through this component will
also generate remunerative and permanent employment opportunities. 
42.
This component will comprise four (4) sub-components: 1.1 Farm sector enterprise development; 1.2 Manufacturing and service
sector enterprise development; 1.3 Capacity development of CMRCs; and 1.4 Supporting innovation. 
43.
Sub-component 1.1 Farm sector enterprise development. The core approach for enterprise development will be to develop
organized and well-functioning climate resilient value chains for a product or group of similar products. Within farm sector the
project will identify high-value climate resilient crop varieties that enhance tolerance to heat, drought, or flooding such as aromatic
and special rice, soya, cotton and others, fruits and vegetables, pulses/seeds and nuts, spices and medicinal plants, poultry and
livestock and pond fisheries in selected districts that showed opportunities for farming families and microentrepreneurs. Through
these targeted sub-projects, the project will support women to capture higher value, climate resilient and better price realization in
collection, aggregation, processing, grading, packaging, licenses, quality control, and certification for products. These sub-
projects will also promote machinery and technology targeted at reducing women’s workload and promote climate smart
agriculture practices to enhance climate resilience through the adoption of climate adaptation measures such as water harvesting
and micro-irrigation schemes, micro-insurance, and water efficient technologies/water reuse consistent with the Maharashtra
State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change. In each sub-project, the following activities will be supported (i) organization of
8/21
producers at higher level, such as at the producer collectives; (ii) access of producers to technical assistance from service
providers, to improve input quality, improve farm productivity and enhance climate resilience through production practices also
aimed at reducing women’s workload and building their adaptive capacity to climate change, farmer/entrepreneurs skill
development, introduction of new commodity, Global Good Agricultural Practices (GGAP) certification which incorporates climate
smart agricultural practices in form of in-situ soil and water conservation, mulching, drought tolerant varieties, soil fertility
management, protective irrigation; (iii) forward linkages and identifying opportunities for supplying to big farms, contract farming,
setting up chilling plants, processing and so on; (iii) aggregators and post-harvest processors to secure their supply chains; and
(iv) provide to participating entrepreneurs business advisory services to develop skills in technology and management (e.g.
business plans and cash flow planning; packaging and marketing planning and so on). Where required, the project will invest in
appropriate modern technology (mostly equipment). See Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual for further details on selected
commodities, value chain profiles of selected commodities.
Stand-alone micro-enterprises. In many cases, expansion of individual businesses (increase in sales and profit) can be made
possible by increasing land (for rice, vegetables, lentils etc), increasing herds (goat, dairy), improving farm productivity using
climate smart technologies and practices. The project through the CMRCs and village-based agricultural facilitators (Sakhis), will
provide/facilitate production and market related assistance to standalone farm/businesses. Access to finance will be facilitated
through individual loans under the SHG-Bank Linkage program.
Subcomponent 1.2 Manufacturing and services sector enterprise development. A number of non-farm and off-farm
products have been identified with potential for value enhancement, enterprise development and marketability. These
products/services are, among others: a) Wood works, bamboo products, handicrafts; b) spice processing, small food processing;
c) Bag, saree, mini-garments (multi-machine tailoring); c) Jewellery and allied products; d) rural eco-tourism and e) wider range of
services. New service enterprises such as rural eco-tourism have been preliminarily identified as having potential. The range of
products in non-farm sector is numerous and fewer people form one cluster. The main challenges that will be addressed by the
project for these value chains are: (i) low-quality and low-priced products targeted to price sensitive, low income buyers; (ii)
absence of packaging and recognition; and (iii) poor design. Value chains are short, that is, produced and sold locally and in small
volumes. Expansion is difficult at present quality and production quality mix.
A similar approach of value chain development will be followed in case of off-farm/non-farm products and services. To address
the constraints outlined above the main interventions will be to: (i) train designers and assist design of products through
professional designers and design institutions; (ii) introduce mechanization for quality improvement and standardization; (iii)
develop skilled workers; d) identify subcontracting arrangement if feasible in case of bamboo products, garments, and wood
works, jewellery and handicrafts; e) develop business plans and maintain records; and establish linkage with mainstream
marketing channels.  
Stand-alone micro-enterprises. Numerous existing microenterprises/IGAs from non-farm sector such as shops, collection units,
can be expanded by providing larger loans, production/design training and linkages with bigger markets. About 20% of
beneficiaries are currently engaged in such activities. MAVIM, after need assessment among the entrepreneurs of different
trades, will shortlist business development service providers and facilitate availability of their services on fee basis.
Employment generation. The expansion of micro and small enterprises will generate decent and remunerative employment
opportunities. Furthermore, the CMRCs will identify opportunities for connecting SHG members with sub-contractors in selected
product supply chains, like IKEA or garments, wood and bamboo works, high value handicrafts etc. Other opportunities may be
explored. The project will support the training of participating women to deliver production to specifications required by bulk
buyers. This will be done through partnership with businesses to develop supply chains from villages.
Formation of Producer Collectives. MAVIM will facilitate producer members of CMRCs to form multi commodity producer
collectives (cooperatives) to aggregate their output and procure inputs and services in bulk. To maximize the benefit from market
opportunities, and deliver economies of scale, about 30 commodity-based producer companies (PCs) will be formed with
adequate market savvy capabilities. Co-operatives will subscribe to the share capital of the producer companies. Producer
companies will be provided operational cost support and also working capital support to leverage further loans. The machinery
and equipment[11] provided for value chain facilitation will be owned and managed by the cooperatives and producer companies.
An Apex PC, if found essential, will be formed for standardizing quality and packaging across the various suppliers and
for tapping export markets. The Project Management Unit will engage the services of institutions such as Samunnati Agro
solutions for institutions building and market linkages.
Each CMRC will be supported for hiring a value chain facilitator for ensuring implementation of VC activities. For the 20 CMRCs
which have been identified to be comparatively weak, with low manpower, additional staff cost has been provided for ensuring
VC facilitation. These staff will be part of the producer collectives once they are formed.
Subcomponent 1.3: Capacity development of CMRCs. CMRCs have accumulated extensive experience in facilitating micro-
finance, undertaking profitable social enterprises and livelihood support services. Based on this experience CMRCs have the
potential to become service delivery hubs. The new project will be transformative for CMRCs as they move focus from livelihoods
and SHG formation to enterprise development and market interventions. That requires reorientation of institutional focus of the
CMRCs and process of project implementation through training and systems development at CMRCs. The project will organize
training of CMRC staff in areas of enterprise development, value chain development and management, financial services for
microenterprises, skill development program, M&E and knowledge management (KM), and strategic planning and leadership.
Trainings related to skills development, M&E and KM will also be applied to climate-smart technologies and agriculture practices
identified in sub-component 1.1. The project will be organizing training through reputed trainers/training providers. Besides, new
microfinance software and project management software will be installed and accounting software will be upgraded.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
Subcomponent 1.4: Supporting innovations. This subcomponent will be piloting new enterprises, technologies and products
that have not been fully tested or adopted in the project area, but appear to have potential of replication to benefit project
beneficiaries and enhance climate resilience. This will focus on supporting niche crop and non-farm products, climate smart
approaches and technologies (such as drip-irrigation, water harvesting systems, diversified cropping patterns, soil conservation,
and value addition), renewable energy, waste management and any product/process that supports enterprise development and
enhances climate resilience. A few examples have been tried by MAVIM such as small-scale fish fry nursery, neem oil, goat milk
products, bio-fertilizers etc., in an isolated manner. The strategy is to develop a commercially successful venture as a pilot
initiative and replicate that in wide project areas in enterprise development, green energy, waste management, irrigation etc.
9/21
53.
Component 2: Enabling Support Services
54.
Outcome. The outcome of the component is ‘an enabling environment to facilitate women's enterprise development and
employability in remunerative jobs’. This component will provide the critical complementary services with focus on providing an
enabling environment at the enterprise levels as well as at household levels, to optimise SHG member's HH's participation in the
enterprise development process.
55.
The component has four (4) sub-components: (i) 2.1 Facilitating financial linkages; (ii) 2.2 Evolving new pathways for ultra-poor
households; (iii) 2.3 Enhancing nutritional status and gender relations at HH and community levels; and (iv) 2.4 Policy
engagement.
56.
Subcomponent 2.1: Facilitating financial linkages. This subcomponent will have five main areas of focus:
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
(i) Strengthening of SHG-Bank Linkage Program. The previous Tejaswini project has developed strong bank linkages especially
with ICICI Bank (80% of SHG loans are from ICICI Bank), and the recovery rate is 99.5%. The CMRCs and SHGs are well versed
with the system. Two issues will be prioritised in this project: increasing loan size per SHG and partnerships with other
commercial banks. The bank loans to SHGs will be enhanced to support livelihood plans of the members by increasing SHG
member savings to demand higher credit limit from banks, detailed credit plans to assure banks of loan absorption and
repayment and Memorandum of Understandings (MOUs) with additional banking partners on similar lines that of ICICI bank.
(ii) Facilitation of micro-enterprise (ME) loan. About 30% of SHG members want more that Rs 100,000 individually to expand their
businesses but unable to receive such amount from existing SHG-Bank linkage. The mission explored the possibility of such
loans with a number of banks including ICICI Bank and HDFC Bank. The project will undertake steps to mitigate risks and
develop partnership with banks to: a) provide training to prospective microentrepreneurs on business management and preparing
cash-flow and income statement; b) train Sahyoginis (banking facilitators) on the same issues, who in turn will help micro
entrepreneurs to develop bank loan proposals ; c) launch a pilot ME loan program with 2-3 banks to reach to 10,000 MEs in two
years, in order to develop a successful ME loan program; d) train/orient bank officers at the branch level of partner banks on ME
management and financing, and e) provide risk mitigation instruments in the pilot phase to reduce risks from bank’s point of view.
The expectation is that a successful pilot program will lead to larger expansion across MAVIM SHGs to eventually reach about
100,000 MEs with individual loans.
(iii) Facilitation of loans to producer collectives. Producer collectives based on their business plans will be facilitated to access
working capital by Rural Finance Specialist at PMU. Innovative value chain financing such as receivable financing, warehouse
receipt financing, will also be piloted for producer collectives in collaboration with financial institutions (such as Samunnati
Financial Intermediation and Services). For equipment, plant and machinery, the PMU will pilot patient capital financing; the
collectives based on business plans and viability analysis will be offered long term loans of 3 to 5 years at low interest rates of 4
to 6 percent. In very resource poor regions such as Marathwada and Vidarbha, partial grant cum patient capital will be structured.
The idea is to replicate and finance more value chain based interventions than what grants will help establish.
(iv) Advance financial literacy trainings on digital finance, insurance and pension will be offered to all women. Sahyoginis will be
trained as trainers on these aspects so that they in turn will train women during SHG meetings. CMRCs will facilitate access of
women to crop insurance, health insurance of Government (Ayushman Bharat) apart from pension. MIS will capture data on
insurance and pension enrolment and renewal. Where possible CMRCs will enrol as insurance agents.
(v) Financial innovation. The project will explore the piloting of a livestock health service cum insurance program in collaboration
with vet service providers and private insurance firm to develop a low-cost and reliable livestock health and insurance service.
This pilot will be managed by an organization with successful experience of such project. Livestock insurance is unpopular due to
high premium. The premium of livestock is high due to high mortality and morbidity rate, a result of unreliable vaccination and
animal health services, and over dependence on government livestock department. Occasionally vaccination camps are
organized in the village that do not cover all animals, and curative service is expensive and not always available. The project will
offer reliable livestock health services that would reduce mortality and morbidity and consequently, insurance premium. The pilot
project will ultimately address the issue of animal health service as well as insurance commercially.
Subcomponent 2.2: Evolving new pathways for ultra-poor households. The objective is to facilitate the ultra-poor families (5
to 10% of SHG members) to shift to more secure, sustainable and climate resilient livelihoods and improve their incomes. Ultra
poor families who are already members of self-help groups will be identified by CMRCs and VOs based on select criteria such as
a) depend on insecure livelihoods, including casual farming labor with irregular or seasonal income of less than 50% of the
poverty line income per year, b) no borrowing or negligible borrowing from self-help groups, c) household without proper shelter,
d) vulnerability to climate variability.
Building on lessons from IFAD's Household Mentoring Approach, Sahyoginis will be trained to provide counselling, coaching,
and encouragement to the ultra-poor households. Through frequent visits better understanding and solutions for the households
to improve their incomes and resilience will be provided, which can include; a) village level training for improving skills and
mentoring for small IGAs and participate in a resilient value chain (both farm and non-farm) if lives in the same cluster, otherwise
on a standalone basis, b) encourage women to take small loans from self-help groups and counseling to Self-help group leaders
and other members to be supportive, c) identify Government schemes for convergence both for livelihoods as well as for social
entitlements, d) Vocational training for selected SHG or family members for wage employment. Project MIS will monitor the
performance of the ultra-poor households separately.
64.
10/21
Skill development training. Three pronged approach will be adopted by the project for provision of skill trainings aimed at
increasing wage/self-employment and incomes (these are apart from trainings provided under value chain interventions). a)
Vocational training at formal institutions through existing flagship government skills training programs with the objective of
enhancing access to services and employment outcomes for youth from poor/ultra-poor households. CMRCs will support
Government skill training programmes in provision of pre training services including identification and mobilization of target youth,
sharing information packs on types of training and training schedules, providing pre-training counselling services to poor youth to
assist them in interpreting available information and making optimal training choices. b) Village based skill development is aimed
at enhancing productivity, climate resilience and incomes of poor women through upgrading skills in selected employment/self-
employment occupations. Master trainers/Certified trainers will be selected to offer village level trainings thus increasing access
to such training for women and other marginalized groups. c) Apprenticeship with existing industries/ establishments for youth in
ultra-poor/poor household where by the youth will be absorbed in the establishment after the apprenticeship period/ or set up own
establishment. Support will be provided for out of pocket expenses for travel, stay etc., during the apprenticeship period.
65.
Subcomponent 2.3: Enhancing nutritional status and gender relations at HH and community levels. This subcomponent
has two distinct activities: nutrition and health improvement; and women’s empowerment.
66.
67.
Nutritional and health improvement. The project will have a number of distinctive activities for promoting behavioural change, at
the household level, with regard to dietary diversification and water and hygiene practises. The activities will include: (i) inputs
and training for homestead vegetable gardens, dietary diversification and good diet practises at the household level (tiranga
plate) and introduction of dietary supplements; (ii) WASH training through GOM's existing programmes, delivered through
participating SHGs; (iii) tracking of SHG members body mass index (BMI) and haemoglobin levels through Primary Health Care
centres and targeted follow-up and mentoring of those women recording low rates on either indicator; (iv) support for enrolment in
health insurance schemes of the Govt (Ayushman Bharat). Apart from these HH level targeted interventions, the project will also
promote nutrition-sensitive value-chains, e.g. vegetables and dairy. These activities will be implemented in partnership with
Department of Women and Children and MH Rural Health Mission programmes (NRHM), one of whose major mandate is the
implementation of the National Nutrition Strategy. The partners will be responsible for implementation of the micro-nutrient and
dietary diversity programme for Nav Tejaswini. 
Women's empowerment. MAVIM through SHG/CMRC structure has successfully promoted gender equality at the family level. A
two-pronged approach is applied for gender transformation i) ensuring empowerment of women throughout the project as
described under the components; and ii) having gender specific activities that address root causes of gender inequalities that
inhibit women’s full participation in enterprise development. For gender specific activities, the project will: i) continue to promote
gender equality through training, sensitization and orienting services - including specific gender awareness workshops for men
focusing on equitable work distribution, family nutrition, women’s economic contribution to households; ii) encourage co-
ownership by registration of agricultural land in joint names; iii) address women's drudgery in order to ensure time for
participation in enterprise related activities. Work-load reduction will be addressed through machinery and women friendly
technologies as well as encouraging women to hire labour as their enterprises grow. Further, MAVIM will actively seek
convergence with on-going Government schemes on interventions that promote gender equality and women's empowerment as
well as address gender related constrains that hinder women-led entrepreneurship. The successful initiatives under Tejaswini will
be scaled up including:  a) Mitra mandals of men supporting women’s strategic gender initiatives, b) registration of houses and
land in joint names of husband and wife, c) paralegal counselling and rights awareness training on gender responsive legislations
including  domestic violence, dowry, sexual harassment etc., d) supporting women's participation in public spaces and institutions
such as local governance, markets and government bodies; e) promoting decision making at community, group and household
levels; etc. Recognizing that women are not homogeneous, the project will ensure that gender disaggregated data tracks specific
variables such as age, women-headed households as well as different vulnerabilities of the target groups. The project's
contribution to gender equality and women's empowerment will be tracked and measured through Project-level Women's
Empowerment in Agriculture Index (Pro-WEAI). 
68.
Subcomponent 2.4: Policy engagement. This subcomponent will focus on specific policy issues identified during project
implementation. Some issues that are identified during design stage include: (i) lack of access to individual ME loan, to women
graduating from SHGs, from commercial banks and other financial institutions; (ii) develop a more systematic procedure of
receiving resources under convergences programs; (iii) define MAVIM's role in skill development and vocational training in the
state; (iii) explore long-term collaboration with MSRLM/RDD[12]; (iv) explore the possibilities to pilot supply of millet (a drought
tolerant crop) and other nutritional and climate resilient crop varieties and products made by SHGs to Aanganwadi to boost
nutritional values while enhancing climate resilience.; and (vi) feasibility study on setting up an apex financial institution based on
need assessment of enterprises. The PMU will also commission policy specific studies where needed along with reputed
institutions. The project will also prepare in-house capacity within MAVIM to prepare policy documents and effective advocacy.
69.
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management
70.
Outcome: The outcome of this component is  to institutionally strengthen MAVIM in areas of grassroots institution building and
enterprise development, and ensure the project is satisfactorily managed.  
71.
This component comprises of two subcomponents to ensure efficiency of the project: (i) Institutional strengthening and (ii) Project
Management.
72.
Subcomponent 3.1 Institutional Strengthening. MAVIM is expected to strategically pursue the following broad areas: a)
promoter of enterprise development; b) centre of excellence in areas of SHG approach to community development; c) capacity
builder for grassroots institutions including training on climate adaptation approaches; d) facilitator of financial services to the
SHG members; and e) implementer of various government schemes for its beneficiaries. This component will strengthen
MAVIM’s future roles as a development institution to promote enterprise development and manage large projects with diverse
activities. The project will finance training for MAVIM officials in business management and financial analysis, value chain
analysis, project and sub-project design, management, M&E systems, financial services, and strategic planning. Besides,
exchange visits and senior management trainings are recommended. In addition, the project will assist MAVIM to establish an
environmental and social management system to screen, manage and monitor environment and social risks and impacts of the
sub-projects. This includes building the capacity of MAVIM to: (i) review and categorize business plans submitted by CMRCs,
according to the potential environmental and social risks and impacts; (ii) screen/categorize business plans against exclusion list
and applicable national laws; and (iii) monitor environmental and social performance of the business.
11/21
MAVIM as a centre of excellence for community institutions. MAVIM has accumulated extensive experience in developing a
model for financially-viable and sustainable SHGs that could be replicated within India and also in other countries. The new
project offers a unique opportunity to show case the growth of SHG members to be entrepreneurs accessing appropriate
technical support, business development services and access to micro enterprise loans on a sustainable basis. Nav Tejaswini
will offer learning opportunities for other SHG programmes in Maharashtra, in other states in India as well as in other countries,
on individual and collective enterprise promotion, and this will be coordinated with the Departments for Women and Child
Development, Rural Development and Medium and Small Enterprises at both state and national levels. MAVIM will be supported
to document their experiences, develop training and learning modules and training capacity of staff and specialists to become a
paid training resource centre.
Specialized technical assistance will also be provided to MAVIM to explore the possibility of establishing a consumer brand for
the sale of selected products. The TA will be to identify market potential of the MAVIM brand, to build a brand identity and identify
sales and market linkage platforms for these specialised products.
System upgrading development. The project will support procurement of a) a robust microfinance software that can handle SHG
and individual loans and real time tracking of transactions including mobile phone based financial transactions; b) project
management software to manage all subprojects; c) human resources and office management software; and d) upgrading of
TALLY software to monitor all transactions real-time.   
Sub-component 3.2: Project Management. The project will be managed by a Project Management Unit (PMU), established
within MAVIM, headed by Project Coordinator (GM- Programme of MAVIM) to manage planning and implementation of the
project reporting to the Managing Director of MAVIM. An appropriate number of full time officials of MAVIM at the HO will be
responsible for various activities and all District Offices will responsible for Nav Tejaswini at the respective district. MAVIM will
need to recruit additional experts as required to implement the project. The PMU will be supported by Regional Coordinating and
District Coordinating Offices. Further details provided under the section on Organizational Framework.
73.
74.
75.
76.
E. Theory of Change
77.
78.
Contextual challenges. The major contextual challenges to be addressed by the project are primarily two-fold: (i) women-led
enterprises in rural Maharashtra are still facing challenges in areas of productivity, market participation, financial services, and
business capacities.  Improving production quality would entail having access to bigger individual loans (more than Rs 100,000),
quality inputs, and know-how to expand their enterprises, but currently they are unable to access such services. Eighty percent of
women are still marginal farmers and nano-entrepreneurs and unable to optimise market opportunities in the absence of access
to larger markets and market information. Most microenterprises produce small, low quality, low-price products that are targeted
to price sensitive local buyer. The SHG loan amount is small and inadequate to support livelihoods and enterprise needs. Finally,
management capacity within existing producer groups and businesses promoted by individual entrepreneurs are still weak.
These challenges are compounded by asymmetry in prices and business information available to producers; poor access to
business development services; limited available labour time of women; women's poor nutrition status that further undermine
their productivity and increase risk of illness; women without agency to start-up enterprises have limited IGA opportunities other
than paid seasonal agricultural labour; policy gaps in financing for small enterprise development. (ii) The second contextual
challenge is the persisting rural poverty and vulnerability among households in Maharashtra. Lack of livelihoods diversification
makes rural households vulnerable to climate and market shocks. Similarly, lack of nutrition security also impacts the resilience of
households, and especially of women and children, to deal with vulnerability. Numerous studies have shown the detrimental
impact of lack of micronutrients on productivity of women.  
Underlying assumptions. It is assumed that targeted productive investments are required in the rural areas to increase
resilience of poor rural women and their households, through diversification of livelihoods and ensuring household food and
nutrition security. Furthermore, poverty reduction and resilience, in all its forms, cannot be achieved unless gender inequalities
are removed and biased social norms and cultural beliefs addressed. IFAD’s experience in Asia and other parts of the world have
identified diversification of livelihood as one of the most pertinent adaptation methods. Similarly, nutrition and resilience have
been found to be strongly interlinked, as nutrition is both an input and outcome of strengthened resilience. The IFAD-supported
Tejaswini project, which recently closed, had successfully reduced the income vulnerability of households living below poverty
line and raised social awareness on gender empowerment issues. The next level of development will be to transform the present
small income generating activities into microenterprises to become an important source of income for the rural poor households
and not only come out of poverty but also become resilient to shocks. That requires, simultaneously, assured access to market
and demand-driven financial services of a higher order, strong support services including financial and skill development for
poorer section of the SHG-members, and enhanced capacity of MAVIM and CMRCs to facilitate enterprise development process.
Economic empowerment will have to be complemented by social empowerment, to ensure that women have the productive
space, agency at institutional and household levels and capacities to be able to be successful entrepreneurs. To build on the
gains of the Tejaswini-MH, social awareness village level programmes including gender sensitisation will be conducted by
MAVIM. Focused group discussions will be held with SHG-members and their spouses to ensure that increased economic
empowerment does not lead to unintended negative impact for women.
79.
Pathways. The above assumptions will be operationalised through Nav Tejaswini's key interventions, which will include: (i)
market-driven enterprise development, with key activities that will provide technical support to women and women’s groups to
develop farm, manufacturing and service enterprises (economic empowerment of women); (ii) provision of an enabling
environment at enterprise level for women to access  financial linkages and services (enhanced access to services and
participation in public spaces for women); (iii) mentoring the ultra-poor households to find pathway out of extreme poverty
(gender and socially inclusive targeting); (iv) enhancing nutritional status and gender relations at household and community levels
as well as policy engagement on specific issues (equal voice and equitable workload for women and opportunity to influence
gender responsive policies).
12/21
80.
Outcomes. It is expected that the project’s interventions will achieve the following outcomes: (i) women establish sustainable
and profitable enterprises; (ii) women's enterprises are not considered high-risk for commercial loans; (iii) sustainable and
profitable enterprises create incremental employment opportunities; (iv) members of ultra-poor households engage in decent paid
employment; (v) income increases of all targeted households; (vi)  nutrition status of women/families improve; and (vii) women led
enterprises are recognised as profitable models for replication and scaling up.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
81.
82.
83.
Alignment with SDGs. The project will contribute to the government's target of increasing incomes of rural households, while
delivering on improved nutrition security at household and community levels. With its focus on largely women and women's
enterprises, the project will contribute significantly to the achievement of SDG 1 - end poverty; SDG 2 - zero hunger; SDG 5 -
gender equality; and SDG 8 – decent work and economic growth.
Ownership. MAVIM with support from its parent Department of Women and Child Development, GOM, spearheaded the drafting
of the concept note for the Nav Tejaswini Project, which was approved by the Department of Economic Affairs, GoI in June 2019.
MAVIM will be the implementing agency for the project and will be responsible for project management.
Alignment with IFAD corporate priorities. With the specific focus on strengthening women's enterprise development, Nav
Tejaswini is well aligned with the single strategic objective of IFAD's RB-COSOP for India (2018-2024): smallholder food and
agricultural production systems are remunerative, sustainable and resilient. The project further adheres to the IFAD's targeting
policy and the new targeting guidelines. The mainstreaming themes under Nav Tejaswini are informed by the following IFAD
thematic Action Plans: Mainstreaming gender transformative approaches at IFAD Action Plan 2019-2025; Rural Youth Action
Plan 2019-2021; the Nutrition Action plan; Mainstreaming nutrition at IFAD Action Plan 2019-2025; IFAD strategy and action plan
on environment and climate change 2019-2025.
84.
Partnerships. The project will promote convergence and partnerships with existing Government programmes in Maharashtra. It
will also partner with agricultural advisory service providers, private businesses for component 1 and with banking and non-
banking financial institutions for component 2. It will partner with research institutions as well as other donors such as BMGF for
policy engagement activities.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
85.
Project costs. The total project cost is USD 421.87 million, to be financed through an IFAD loan (on ordinary terms) of USD
50.0 million, an IFAD grant of USD 1.4 million; Government contribution of USD 104.78 million (salary and operational expenses,
taxes/duties, and convergence schemes). An estimated USD 250.8 million from domestic financial institution contributing to bank
linkage programme, local private sector contribution of USD 9.9 million and beneficiary contribution of USD 4.9 million. There is
currently a financing gap of USD 12 million in the IFAD allocation, that will be covered either through IFAD12 PBAS or through
finances made available from restructured problem projects in India. In the case the grant finances are not available, the
activities to be covered under the grant will be covered under loan proceeds and the total IFAD allocation would be USD 51.4
million loan on ordinary terms. 
86.
Allocations by component. Of the USD 50 million of IFAD loan, USD 34.30 million is allocated for Component 1, followed by
USD 9.14 million for component 2 and USD 6.56 million for Component 3 that includes institutional strengthening of MAVIM and
contribution for incremental project expenses. Table 5 presents details cost by component and financier, Table 6 by expenditure
category and financier, and Table 7 by component and project year.
87.
Climate Finance. The IFAD total climate finance for this project is USD 22.9 million or 58% of the total IFAD financing (calculated
as per MDB Methodologies for Tracking Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Finance). The share of finance for climate change
adaptation represents 100% of the IFAD total climate finance.
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
88.
Project financing strategy: The following Table 8 summaries the financing strategy of the project where banks/financial
institutions are the main co-financiers of the project followed by convergence schemes. The project will be leveraging funds via
MAVIM.
89.
Table 8: Summary of project finances
13/21
90.
Lending terms: India is on IFAD ordinary terms. The maturity period for the loan is at the choice of the borrower, subject to a
ceiling of 35 years and to a maximum average repayment maturity of 20 years. IFAD reference rate that the GoI will be charged
will be based on the average repayment maturity bucket which is a pre-defined range of average repayment maturities. There
are currently six average repayment maturity buckets, and GoI can choose any of the average repayment maturity buckets. The
grace period is variable at the choice of GoI, subject to a ceiling of 10 years. Interest is paid on the loan principal disbursed and
not yet repaid by the Borrower. GoI can choose either the fixed spread or variable spread and denomination currency in either
EURO, SDR or USD. The terms related to the loan assistance will be as per the Guidelines for IFAD Lending Terms and
Financing Conditions.
c. Disbursement
91.
92.
The total loan allocation of IFAD will be USD 38.0 million on ordinary lending terms as per policies of IFAD financing.
Additionally, IFAD will fund a grant of USD 1.4 million. Two Designated Accounts in USD for Loan and Grant will be opened by
the GoI at Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to which funds will flow from IFAD. GoI will transfer IFAD funds to GoM. The advance
funding from IFAD to the Designated Account will be USD 4.2 million which is equivalent to about six months of the total loan
allocation and USD 0.1 million for the Grant. The project will have a separate bank account at each of the implementing units
wherein the amounts received from GoM including IFAD and its own share will be deposited and used for project activities. IFAD
encourages the use of pre-approved start-up advance for specific activities that enable project fast-start between the date of
signature of the Financing Agreement (Entry into Force) and the conditions precedent to the first withdrawal having been met. In
addition, as an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, IFAD is seeking Executive Board
approval for retroactive financing from the loan of up to US$1.0 million for eligible expenditures incurred as from 1 November
2019 until the date of entry in force of the financing agreement.
Close attention will be paid during implementation to ensure that Government of Maharashtra funds are released timely and that
the justification of advances to service providers are not delayed. The Enterprise Development Fund represents over half of the
loan financing and as such no IFAD funds will flow until the controls including procedures have been fully agreed. These
controls will be implemented to mitigate the risks pertaining to: inaccurate claims (mathematical errors in the costings);
incomplete claims; entitlement issues (the recipient or the individual proposal are not compliant with the Fund's requirements in
terms of value limits and eligibility, including  any potential fraudulent claims); and operational issues such as the satisfactory
performance of applicant screening and award controls (including the relevant contractual paperwork); and controls over the
Management Information System used to track the claims and communicate the CRMC awards to their respective banks.
93.
Submission of withdrawal applications (WAs):The project will prepare and submit to IFAD WAs once every quarter, or after
incurring expenditures of up to 30% of the amount advanced to the DA, whichever is earlier, through DEA. All financing and loan
service payments shall be exempt from taxes. The current accounting and reporting system of MAVIM is robust enough to
generate report based withdrawal applications and the WA should be quarterly Interim Unaudited Financial Report (IUFR). 
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
94.
Beneficiaries. The project, with multiple components and activities, will have many different direct beneficiaries. An estimate of
beneficiaries by category presented in Table  9. It is understood that one person may belong to multiple categories making the
total 3.05 million compared to actual one million person of direct beneficiaries.
95.
Table 9: Project beneficiary category
14/21
96.
97.
Economic rate of return. Models were developed for main value chains such as dairy, goat keeping, poultry, fruits, vegetables,
bamboo/woodwork, jewellery making, handicrafts and similar common products. The Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of
the project is 32%. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is 35% (base case) and a benefit to cost ratio (BCR) of 2.93.
The Net Present Value (NPV) for the 20 year period is US$1207 million at a discount rate of 7.5%. These figures along with
sensitivity analysis will be revised with final estimates.
Sensitivity analyses were carried out for several scenarios with variations in benefits and costs along with delays in realizing the
benefits (See Table 10). Two scenarios of increase in cost by 10% and 20%, the EIRR decreases to 31% and 28% respectively.
Similarly, 10% and 20% decrease in benefits reduces EIRR to 31% and 27% respectively. Similarly, a simultaneous increase in
cost by 10% and drop in benefits by 10% the EIRR comes down to 28%.
98.
Table 10: Sensitivity analysis
Economic DR =
7.5%
Sensitivity Analyses
EIRR
B/C Ratio
NPV (USD mn)
NPV (Rs Mn)
Base Case
35%
2.93
1,207
84,500
All cost increase by 10%
31%
2.66
1,144
80,115
All cost increase by 20%
28%
2.44
1,082
75,730
All benefits decrease by 10%
31%
2.63
1,024
71,665
All benefits decrease by 20%
27%
2.34
840
58,830
Cost increase by 10% and benefits decrease by 10%
28%
2.39
961
67,280
1-year delay in getting benefits
27%
0.38
1,024
71,706
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
99.
The project builds on the largely self-sustaining community institutions- CMRCs- supported by an existing government institution-
MAVIM- which is mandated to promote social and economic empowerment of women and is not a Special Purpose vehicle
created for the project. These factors lay the ground for the project’s sustainability and exit strategy. Whereas the previous
project (Tejaswini) had contributed in building strong CMRCs which in turn helped in strong SHG- Bank linkages, this project will
focus on (i) filling any gaps in ensuring full self reliance of CMRCs (ii) promoting an ecosystem for sustained income generation
of HHs and (iii) consolidating the capacity of MAVIM to handhold CMRCs in their new role. In this way when the project ends,
HHs, CMRCs and MAVIM would be in mutually supportive role and have the capacity to engage with markets as well as deal
with temporary shocks that can affect their livelihoods.  
100.
Market-led enterprise development. Nav Tejaswini’s market-led enterprise development approach is at the core of sustainability
and exit strategy of the project. The value chain approach is primarily led by market demand where producers (in this case SHG
members, and other producers) respond to market demand to produce goods and services. The quality, quantity, price etc are
determined by market forces. The project will actively establish linkages of producers with buyers, for example, via contract
farming and subcontracting arrangement, and other supply arrangement such as to chilling plants/milk processors. These
business transactions are, once established, inherently sustainable in absence of the project. At the same time it is not the
subprojects that need to be sustainable but the various technologies, business services, production techniques, and marketing
arrangements are expected to be adopted and sustained beyond the project period. The project’s main objective is to bring
systematic changes in production and marketing system that includes SHG members and other small producers in rural areas.
15/21
101.
Sustainability of technologies and practices. The project will promote agricultural technologies such as IPM which reduces cost of
production and ensure food safety without affecting output, promote already environmentally adaptive animal breeds
(cows/buffalos, goat and chickens) and fish varieties, farm practices to improve productivity, commercial animal health services
etc that are expected to continue as these practices will increase profitability. Introduction of GGAP in the supported commodity
value chains allow for improved health and sustainable agricultural practices. Likewise, introduction of bio agent for pest control
through adaptation of IPM and the introduction of new crop varieties tolerant to climate change, pest pressure, increase nutritional
values and high productivity will also contribute to sustainable agriculture and food security. Similarly in case of non-farm sector,
improvements in design, introduction of machineries, skill enhancement of producers, linkage with mainstream buyers are key
elements of the project which are sustainable without continued project support.
102.
Access to finance. The present SHG-Bank Linkage program is self-sustaining as banks are providing basic loan products to all
SHG members through facilitation of CMRCs. The process not only meet demand for small loans up to Rs 100,000 but also
brings income to CMRCs. The proposed ME loan is also expected to sustain because the larger loans are profitable for banks,
meet demand of entrepreneurs and bring higher income for CMRCs. The SHG-Bank is the most robust sustainable institutional
arrangement beyond the project period.   
103.
Sustainable CMRCs. About 80% of CMRCs are already financially viable due to sustainable income from SHGs and microfinance
program, and participation in convergence scheme. The sustainability is expected to be further enhanced with implementation of
Nav Tejaswini by strengthening institutional and financial capacity. Besides, cooperatives set up CMRCs are expected to be
successful businesses/trading entities.    
104.
Institutional sustainability of MAVIM. GoM is providing MAVIM’s operational expenses through budgetary allocations. The
institutional capability of MAVIM will be enhanced through various training and technical assistance to become an effective
promoter of enterprise development for rural women. In addition, MAVIM is increasingly implementing GoM/GoI convergence
schemes. The main challenge is to ensure the market led implementation for sustainability of enterprises. 
105.
Since Nav Tejaswini is built on a successful project and implemented through a network of strong CMRCs and SHGs and coupled
with the commercial approach for provision of services and inputs the project will ensure a high likelihood for long-term
sustainability and ensure safe exit of the project support. See Annex 10 for further discussion on exit strategy and sustainability.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
106.
The overall project risk probability is rated Low and the impact of these risks is rated as Medium-Low. The risk probability from
political and governance, macro-economic, sector strategies related issues are rated Low. The risk probability from technical
design of the project, institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability and stakeholder related issues are rated Low
whereas the risk probability for financial management, procurement, and environment and social issues are rated low-medium
(See Annex 9).
107.
The financial management risk is assessed as Medium, MAVIM has established accounting and financial system in place with
adequate human resources. Additional staff will be recruited to handle the extra workload of the project. Accounting software will
be upgraded.
I. Environment and Social category
108.
 Nav Tejaswini is focused on enterprise development with two technical components: i) market-driven enterprise development
(for farm and non/off farm businesses); and ii) enabling support services. The project will not involve land pooling, land
acquisition, resettlement or Rehabilitation. As such, the project is rated as ‘Category B’ with Medium overall Environmental and
Social risk. The potential environmental impacts posed by the project are likely to be limited, site specific and constrained to
production (including land development and agrochemical management issues), agro-processing facilities (including use of
firewood, waste and effluent management, unhealthy working environment, etc.), and possible risks from construction of market
infrastructure including market connected feeder roads, and small scale irrigation and drainage development including, tube-well
and watering points  construction. Most of these impacts would be readily remedied and/or considerably reduced with
appropriate mitigation plans. The project will not have any severe negative impacts on the livelihoods of other peoples or social
groups including involuntary taking or restriction on the use of land resulting in physical or economic displacement. It is not
envisaged to negatively affect indigenous peoples or sites of historic, religious or cultural significance. In line with the campaign of
the state government against child labour, the project and MAVIM will have a zero tolerance policy against child labour. The
project will not support land use change affecting forests, protected areas, important bird areas, and or new clearing of
contiguous area of above 100 ha in a single location. The mitigation options proposed for environmental concerns provide
opportunities to mainstream environment and climate-resilient production and processing systems and creating additional chains
(such as waste valorization) within the existing system established by the previous project without extensive additional costs.
16/21
J. Climate Risk classification
109.
The project is categorized to have a high climate risk. The target group of the area is substantially dependent on climate-sensitive
natural resources especially rainwater-fed agricultural plots. Cotton, Soybean, Sugarcane and livestock production value chains
have a high propensity to improve the economic status of these rural women if properly implemented. However, owing to the high
variability in precipitation and temperature changes, these agribusinesses are prone to be adversely impacted if adequate
measures like crop-based insurance and early warning systems are not in place. Projected future climatic changes suggest that
the project areas will experience fluctuations in temperatures and precipitation due to increased climate variability. This suggests
the possibility of increased dry spells, drought and delayed rains during the wet season. Increased rainfall intensity, coupled with
land clearing increases the risk of surface runoff (flood), erosion and landslides, and risk of river damage to road infrastructure.
However, the project has the potential to integrate climate resilience measures without extensive additional costs through
capacity building programmes in climate smart agricultural strategies, strong collaboration with extension and weather/climate
monitoring institutions for regular agro-climatic information and use of the right/appropriate cultivars. The project will build on the
successes of the previous project to scale up activities promoting the use of clean energy infrastructures including production of
biogas from effluents, briquettes and other energy saving innovations. Early warning systems, weather information dissemination
channels and weather index insurance to cover losses to floods will be deepened to improve the resilience of the target group.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
110.
Governance and oversight. There will be two oversight entities: (i) Empowerment Committee, Chaired by the Hon. Chief
Secretary Maharashtra; and (ii) the Executive Committee, Chaired by the Secretary of Women and Child Department.
111.
Project management. The loan and grants from IFAD will be transferred to MAVIM which will implement the project as per
project design report and project implementation manual (PIM). The project will be implemented in association with CMRCs and
SHGs and in partnership with other government and non-government institutions, and private sector businesses as per needs of
specific business sector. MAVIM has management autonomy and receives resources annually from GoM for staff salary and
other management costs.
112.
Project Director: The Managing Director of MAVIM will be ex-officio Project Director with full responsibility of proper
management of the project as per design and achieving project goals/objectives.
113.
Project Management Unit (PMU): The project will be managed by a Project Management Unit (PMU) headed by Project
Coordinator (General Manager- Programme of MAVIM) to manage planning and implementation of the project. An appropriate
number of full time officials of MAVIM at the HO will be responsible for various activities and all District Offices will responsible for
Nav Tejaswini at the respective district. MAVIM will need to recruit additional experts including a) Market and Business
Development Specialist, b) Value Chain and Project Supervision Specialist (3), c) Financial Services Program Specialist, d) M &E
Specialist, e) Procurement Specialist, f) KM and Communication Specialist, g) short-term consultants to do specific jobs.
MAVIM’s support divisions such as Audit, Administration, Human Resources, Accounts and Finance, Research, Training, MIS,
and IT will provide relevant services to the project. The PMU will be supported by Regional Coordinating and District
Coordinating Offices.
114.
Regional Coordinating office of MAVIM: The Regional Coordinating Officer will be responsible for overall monitoring of
activities of the project in the Region.
115.
District Coordinating Office: DCOs will be responsible for overall implementation of the project in collaboration of CMRCs.
Since the project will implement several value chain development subprojects in each district, it deploy a full-time Project
Supervisor and Monitoring Officer in each district who will report to DCO/MAVIM.
116.
CMRCs: CMRCs will be grassroots implementers of the project. The project will deploy one Project Supervisor in each CMRC
when a CMRC starts implementation to supervise and monitor progress.
117.
MAVIM’s role in project Management: MAVIM as the lead implementing agency will: (i) be responsible for implementation of
the project; (ii) continue to review and evaluate all enterprise development proposals through an Evaluation Committee headed
by Project Coordinator and represented by senior officials, and from time to time attended by sector experts; ii) MD will be final
approver of all subprojects; (iii) organize and fund the capacity building of its own staff as well as CMRCs, banks and other
organizations and value chain actors; (iv) identify potential market and market players; (v) provide clear guidance to CMRCs on
preparation and management of enterprise subprojects; (vi) contribute to the preparation of enterprise proposals by CMRCs by
providing guidance as well as relevant sector and marketing studies; (vii) share experiences with other enterprise development
projects/agencies and rationalize common activities; (viii) engage in policy advocacy for necessary changes in rules, laws, and
standards; (ix) identify suitable technical assistance providers or individual experts to provide capacity building to MAVIM staff,
and value chain actors and associations.
118.
119.
Management of Convergence: The District Coordinators will be responsible for management of convergence projects as per
standard government process and design of each convergence scheme. 
17/21
Coordination with other development investment projects: MAVIM is one of the implementing agencies of the World Bank
funded SMART project, which is somewhat similar in scope of Nav Tejaswini. Similarly, MAVIM is also functioning in areas where
other projects such as IDH and BCI are active. The project will avoid investment in same value chain (product or groups of
products) in same CMRC and SHG to avoid the duplication of works and implementation complications.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
120.
During design, a Financial Management (FM) risk assessment has been completed in accordance with Financial Management
Division (FMD) guidelines in consultations with MAVIM-HO, and sample district offices and Community Managed Resource
Centres (CMRCs).  The inherent risk assessment is based on the latest national Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
assessment (PEFA) conducted in 2010 and the audit reports of MAVIM. The TI Corruption Perception Index of India has
improved from score 38 in 2015 to score 41 out of 100 in 2018 and ranking 78 least corrupt country out of 180 countries thereby
indicating “medium” risk. However, corruption continues to be perceived as a major obstacle to efficient and equitable
development. The strength of MAVIM lies in its uniform computerized accounting, synchronization of accounts, reconciliation and
reporting procedures, as well as capacity and previous experience in the successful implementation of IFAD funded projects,
indicating thereby its robust organizational arrangements.
121.
 Control risks
122.
The project will be operating in a medium inherent risk environment due to the persistence of some weaknesses in the public
sector financial management systems as outlined in the PEFA analysis. The proposed financial management arrangements for
the project incorporate a number of measures intended to reduce such risks to acceptable levels and ensure that (i) the project
funds are used for intended purposes in an efficient and effective way; (ii) reliable and timely financial reports are prepared; and
(iii) project assets and resources are safeguarded from unauthorized or wasteful use. After mitigation, the overall project fiduciary
risk will continue to be Medium.
123.
Based on the combination of inherent with control risks,  the overall FM risk rating assigned to the project  at this stage is
MEDIUM. Further analysis, especially in the control area, will need to be performed during project implementation. However,
project implementation will still contain some risk elements. Risk m
124.
MAVIM is a registered not for profit company registered under the erstwhile section 25 of Companies Act, 1956 (currently section
8 of Companies Act, 2013). MAVIM regularly complies with its legal obligations. The FM assessment concludes the rating of
financial management system at MAVIM as Medium risk. This will be further assessed during project implementation. In view of
IFAD’s positive experiences with FM under TEJASWINI, the new project NAV TEJASWINI will continue to use the national
project financial management systems to the extent they are consistent with IFAD guidelines and procedures. Annual budgeting
will be undertaken by the project in line with the Government's budget framework and calendar as part of its regular budget
submission.
125.
Subsidiary agreements: Subsidiary agreement between DWCD and MAVIM will be executed for the project duration. The
provisions of the subsidiary agreement will include all aspects of implementation and good governance.
126.
FM staffing and responsibilities: MAVIM has adequate qualified and experienced finance and accounting staff to implement
the project where GM (Accts and Finance) is responsible for the overall functioning of the section, for coordination with the
Government for disbursement of counterpart funds, taxation issues, preparation of the project’s consolidated financial statements,
review of financial reports and getting audit completed within the stipulated time.
127.
Accounting systems, policies, procedures and financial reporting: The project will follow a double entry and computerized
accounting system at all levels. The accounting will be in accordance with Standards of Accounting accepted in India MAVIM
currently uses Tally software for its accounting at the HO and the districts. CMRCs also use the same software. The system
works well with a uniform chart of accounts and consolidation of accounts at the HO every month using the synchronization
feature of the software. The group heads are based on the financing categories and data needs to be exported to excel to
prepare the financial reports on components. It is proposed that the software be used more efficiently by using groupings and
cost centres function to record transactions by components and categories. Customization of the software should be undertaken
to generate reports from the system itself in the format required for preparation of the PFS. The accounts at the districts are
synchronized every month at the HO based on which the GM/ CAFO at the HO shall be responsible for the preparation of
consolidated quarterly financial reports. The reports will be useful for preparation of the quarterly withdrawal applications. The
GM shall be also responsible for the preparation of the annual financial statements of the project which will be subject to external
audit. The AWPB, six-monthly reports prepared by the project and the audited accounts shall be submitted to the Project
Empowered Committee for approval and then forwarded to IFAD.
128.
Budgeting: The budget will be finalized by MAVIM HO that will be included into the budget of the Department of Women and
Child Development (MWCD) of the Government of Maharashtra (GoM) in the state government’s budget.
129.
Counterpart Funds: The GoM shall ensure timely and adequate release of the funds to the project in accordance with the
approved budget so that the implementation of the project is in line with the approved AWPB. This will be one of the agreements
reached between the Borrower/State and IFAD. Further beneficiary contribution shall also be recorded in the books of the project
to arrive at the total project expenditure.
130.
External Financial Audit:The external audit of MAVIM is conducted by an empanelled firm of Chartered Accountants. The office
of the C& AG also conducts transaction audit. For the project, besides these two audits, MAVIM will appoint a CA firm to conduct
audit of the HO and the districts to specifically conduct the audit. The audit needs to be conducted in accordance with the IFAD
Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing for IFAD financed projects and auditing standards as prescribed by the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India will be adhered to. The audited financial statements shall be submitted to IFAD within six months
of the end of each financial year. The audit report shall also include a Management Letter should indicate any weaknesses and
opportunities for efficiencies, if any, observed by the auditor in the internal control systems and the recommendations for
overcoming them.
18/21
131.
The proceeds of the IFAD financing will not to be used to pay taxes which will be part of the counterpart funding of GoM to the
project. The estimated tax amount is USD 4.6 million which will be borne by the MAVIM besides its contribution as counterpart
funding.
132.
Procurement
133.
Procurement under the project will be done in compliance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines and IFAD Procurement Handbook.
It is recommended that IFAD Procurement Guidelines shall be followed both at the central level and at the decentralized level by
all implementing entities. The PIM will detail procurement procedures, processes and management arrangements. All
procurement requiring IFAD prior review will be uploaded in IFAD No Objection Tracking and Utilities System (NOTUS) portal.
The prior review thresholds for different categories will be included in the Letter to the Borrower. To ensure effective
implementation of project procurement activities in line with the above, the project will have an effective procurement unit in
place, and recruit a dedicated full-time procurement officer.
134.
A risk analysis has been undertaken based on the Procurement Risk Matrix which indicates a Medium/ Moderate risk. The
summary of the risk matrix is provided below
135.
Procurement Risk Mitigation Measures
Risk Factor
Initial Risk
Mitigation measures
Residual risk
No dedicated procurement unit
High
Procurement Specialist will be engaged on full time basis,
and the appointment will require IFAD's approval.
Medium
Standard bidding documents and
contracts
Medium
IFAD Procurement Guidelines and Procurement
Handbook will be adopted. IFAD Standard Bidding
documents and contract templates will be prescribed for
compliance to the project. A Procurement Manual will be
developed. IFAD will also undertake capacity building
measures for the procurement staff.
Inadequate contract management Medium
Contract Registers and Monitoring Form will be
introduced.
Low
Low
Contract disputes redressal
system
High
Formalize system of dispute redressal including
arbitration
Medium
136.
Governance and transparency framework: IFAD’s applies a zero-tolerance approach in cases where investigation determines
that fraudulent, corrupt, collusive, or coercive actions have occurred in projects financed through its loans and grants. Project
design includes several measures to promote transparency: (i) autonomous central project office and relevant district project
management offices, operating on the basis of good governance; (ii) annual independent audit; (iii) verification of fiduciary
compliance during supervision; (iv) independent impact assessments; and (v) more efficient public financial management
systems and ensuring of transparency by strengthening state oversight. In line with the IFAD General Conditions on Agricultural
Development Financing and IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations, the project should
provide a commitment to abide by these provisions and establish a credible deterrent mechanisms and cooperate fully with IFAD
and the notified Government investigative agencies/authorities. In particular, the independent and competent investigating
authority responsible for receiving, reviewing, investigating allegations of fraud and corruption will be the additional Secretary,
Vigilance Department, GoM.
137.
The procurement section is described above. The procurement plan for the first 18 months is available in annex 7.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
138.
Planning: The logframe of the project (see Annex 1) will guide  the development of work plans and budgets. Planning and
budgeting will be integrated in the GoM processes and budgets and will be based on Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs).
The planning process will start at CMRC level under the guidance of the DCO, MAVIM taking into consideration the overall
activities under different components and sub components. District plans and budgets will be consolidated into a comprehensive
state level AWPB.  Yearly AWPB will be submitted to the PSC for review and approval and then to IFAD for review and the
issuing of no objection. The AWPB will clearly indicate the project expenditure, resources to be mobilised from the Government
programmes through convergence, credit from financial institutions and beneficiaries’ contribution. The approved AWP&B would
be used as a key document for reviewing the performance and progress during the supervision missions and project steering
committee meetings.
19/21
139.
Monitoring and Evaluation: Nav Tejaswini will develop a robust M&E system in compliance with IFAD and the GoM
requirements and fully aligned with IFAD’s Operational Results Management System (ORMS). The M&E system will (i) collect,
and analyse information on project results and impact; (ii) support PMU in planning and making informed decisions especially on
course correcting actions; (iii) review the performance of partnerships with technical service providers, marketing players
including contract farming, financial institutions etc.; (iv) create opportunities for learning and sharing results.
140.
Project M&E indicators and means of verification are defined in the logical framework (Annex I) which includes relevant core
indicators from the ORMS. All people-specific indicators will be disaggregated by gender and youth. The PMU will fine-tune
progress, performance and outcome indicators at the Start-Up Workshop with support from IFAD and will report on targets bi-
annually as part of the internal planning processes. The project will use IFAD’s revised Core Indicators to enhance the
measurement of IFAD's results at the outcome level and will launch the core indicator survey at baseline, mid-term and end-line.
141.
Tejaswini Maharashtra established a robust MIS system in 2012 with the introduction of the SHE software, through which MAVIM
could monitor physical and financial progress of SHGs portfolio regularly. This also generated SHG data that was shared with
private commercial banks as credit history of SHG members, to facilitae provision of loans to the SHGs. This system continues to
function even after the closure of Tejaswini and will be further strengthened under Nav Tejaswini. Under the new project, the
monitoring progress and reporting will be systematized for: (i) management information for project activities, i.e. customized
installation of MIS system that will track progress in outreach, activities implemented, and corresponding financial progress; (ii)
installation of a robust microfinance software that can handle SHG and individual loans and real time tracking of transactions
including mobile phone based financial transactions; and (iii) upgrading of TALLY software to monitor all transactions real-time.
142.
Based on the Project Logical Framework (Annex 1), the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will be further developed to define
the responsibilities of each implementation level in collected and aggregating data for selected indicators that to be monitored
and their frequency and reporting requirements. Within each unit of implementation, namely PMU, Regional Coordination Office
and District Coordination Office, a focal person will be designated to report on specific monitoring and outcome indicators, which
will then be aggregated at the PMU level. The Project will produce regular statistical reports and annual reports that document
the performance of the project and provide lessons for further refining the project approach.
143.
The Nav Tejaswini M&E and MIS systems will be prepared during the project preparation period, to ensure that the key tools are
ready and all key information is recorded from the start of the project. In line with recommendations IFAD Financial Management
Team, the MIS will also track beneficiary contributions and private sector contributions to project costs so that these can be
consolidated in project accounts.
144.
A Impact and Outcome Survey of beneficiary households will be undertaken to capture baseline, mid-term and end-line data
through a focused survey of expected beneficiaries in the 34 districts of Maharashtra. Sample size will be determined based on
the guidelines established by the new COIS methodology. The Impact/Outcome Survey will primarily measure indicators for the
Project Development Objective and Outcomes indicators. Data on skills, technology and entrepreneurship will be collected in the
survey and will be cross-compared with a treatment group at completion.
145.
Annual Outcome Surveys will be carried out starting from PY3. The surveys will cover (i) emerging intermediate outcomes of the
services provided, the uptake of new technology; (ii) the views of participants about effectiveness of services provided by project;
(iii) assessment of the emerging impact on incomes, employment, growth in businesses and rural enterprise.
146.
Nav Tejaswini is expected to provide lessons that can be important to shape the government policy regarding graduation of
SHGs from savings and credits groups to established micro-enterprises. The new project offers a unique opportunity to show
case the growth of SHG members to be entrepreneurs accessing appropriate technical support, business development services
and access to micro enterprise loans on a sustainable basis. Nav Tejaswini will offer learning opportunities for other SHG
programmes in Maharashtra, in other states in India as well as in other countries, on individual and collective enterprise
promotion. MAVIM will be supported to document their experiences, develop training and learning modules.
147.
Knowledge Management and Learning: The project's KM activities will support the effective flow of relevant information
between project staff, beneficiaries and other stakeholders. A comprehensive KM action plan will be developed in the early stage
of implementation. Output, outcome and impact data generated by the M&E system will inform high-quality case studies, briefs
and reports. These will be used for policy dialogue, peer-learning, and potential scaling-up of activities. KM products will be
communicated through multiple sources including, blogs, written publications, video and social media. Knowledge Management &
Learning will involve Departments of Women and Child Development, Rural Development and Medium and Small Enterprises, at
state and national levels. 
b. Innovation and scaling up
148.
The project will introduce innovations in its approach, activities and products to be introduced.(i) Approach. Systematic
Graduation from micro-livelihoods to enterprises for rural poor with CMRCs functioning as  enterprise promoters is a new
approach. This will be done through building their capacity and  promoting systems such as a) robust microfinance software that
can handle SHG and individual loans and real time tracking of transactions including mobile phone based financial transactions;
b) project management software to manage all subprojects; (ii) Activities. Subprojects will promote piloting of new enterprises,
technologies and products that have not been fully tested or adopted in the project area. This will include promotion of niche
crops and non-farm products, innovations related to environment, irrigation, renewable energy, waste management and any
product/process that supports enterprise development; and (iii) Products. The project will pilot new financial products including a
livestock health service cum insurance program in collaboration with vet service providers and private insurance firm to develop a
low-cost and reliable insurance service. As the enterprises have not yet been fully identified the list of innovations will be
elaborated when the list of enterprise become finalised.
20/21
M. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
149.
The project will be implemented over a period of six years beginning 2020. The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) presents
project implementation plan in details (See Annex 8).
150.
AWPB: The PMU will prepare Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for approval by IFAD. It will follow IFAD’s prescribed format
and be consistent with PDR.
151.
Procurement plan: The project will also prepare procurement and follow IFAD approval requirement as prescribed in the Letter
to Borrower.
152.
Implementation preparedness. MAVIM has agreed with the design team to pre-finance and undertake the following activities in
order to ensure implementation readiness.  These activities are:
Identify potential sectors/value chain development sectors/products by district;
Identify potential partners and enter into partnership arrangements for production/ marketing;
Identify and map out skill training services provider, and most prospective and effective approach for skill development;
Organize training on business management of MAVIM and CMRCSs senior officials;
Organise capacity building of the weak CMRCs in preparation for implementation of project activities.
Procure microfinance management software to monitor in real-time SHG and individual credit of one million of beneficiaries;
Develop/procure project management software for management of all enterprise development activities of the project;
Make MAVIM accounting software online/real time linked with Head Office;
Procure human resources software;
Conduct baseline survey (sample survey) SHG families to determine all baseline values of log-frame indicators. The baseline
will include pro-WEAI;
Complete recruitment process of new staff members;
153.
Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
154.
Supervision: IFAD will conduct regular supervision and implementation support missions of Nav Tejaswini and support the PMU
as and when necessary. These missions will review progress made with physical targets, compliance with fiduciary
responsibilities, follow-up audit recommendations etc. IFAD will carry out mid-term review no later than the midpoint of the
project implementation period, and meet requirements for project completion review. Necessary surveys/studies including annual
outcome surveys and impacts will be conducted. 
155.
Participatory monitoring: Beneficiaries participation in project monitoring will be ensured through three primary tools: (i)
participatory supervision: focus group discussions and consultations with randomly selected SHGs and CMRC executive
committee will be organized during supervision missions. These consultations will assess if participants are receiving the
services requested at design, if services are timely provided, if participants are involved in deciding activities and services; (ii)
annual outcome surveys: satisfaction of beneficiaries with quality of services provided will also be assessed through annual
outcomes surveys, to be initiated from PY2. The annual outcome surveys are an efficient and effective way of receiving feedback
from beneficiaries on which activities they most benefit from and their satisfaction with the package of service delivered. The
survey is designed in a simple yes/no format which is easy and time effective for respondents; (iii) grievance redressal
mechanism: the Government of Maharashtra has a grievance redressal portal to register complaints about all government
financed schemes and departments. The portal is also accompanied by a 24x7 call centre helpline to register complaints. During
orientation workshop for all CMRCs, the helpline numbers of the Government of Maharashtra and IFAD’s SECAP complaints
email address will be distributed among participants for information. The redressal phasing and systems will be spelt out to
participants for future reference.
Footnotes
[1] EIU
[2] Census Info India 2011, available at:
http://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/censusinfodashboard/stock/profiles/en/IND027_Maharashtra.pdf
[3] 2017-18 Economic Survey of Maharashtra, available at:
https://mahades.maharashtra.gov.in/files/publication/ESM_17_18_eng.pdf 
[4] 2017-18 Economic Survey of Maharashtra, available at: https://mahades.maharashtra.gov.in/files/publication/ESM_17_18_eng.pdf
21/21
[5] Gongmei and Toteja, 2018, Micronutrient status of Indian population, Indian Journal of Medical Research
[6] Tackling Climate Change in Maharashtra: Maharashtra Action Plan on Climate Change. February 2018. Govt of Maharashtra.
[7 National Family Health Survey-4 (2015-16): Maharashtra state Fact Sheet
[8] 2014, Haddad et al, Maharashtra’s Child Stunting Declines: What is Driving Them? Findings of a Multidisciplinary Analysis
[9] Kehoe,S et al., 2019, Barriers and Facilitators to Fruit and Vegetable Consumption Among Rural Indian Women of Reproductive
Age, Food and Nutrition Bulletin
[10] For the State, poverty line as of 2011-12, is estimated at Rs. 967 per capita per month in rural areas and with average family size
of 5, the annual income per family is estimated at Rs. 58,000. Source; Economic Survey of Maharashtra, 2018-19.
[11] Bulk milk coolers, dal processing machines, oil expellers, equipment in common facilitation centers etc.,
[12] especially in the areas of a) geographical area delineation, b)  sharing of data on institutions and financial services, c)  facilitating
 interest subvention scheme for SHG loans, d)  implementing the  skilling initiatives of DDUGKY, and e) modalities for facilitating CIF
funds flow to CMRCs
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
1/5
Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by
the project
Project monitoring
framework/MIS
Quarterly
MAVIM
Project is
implemented
effectively
Females
Males
Young
Total number of
persons receiving
services
Female
Young
168315
200000
841579 1000000
20
20
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Project monitoring
framework/MIS
Quarterly
MAVIM
Women-headed
households
Households
117821
117821
841579 1000000
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of
households members
Project monitoring
framework/MIS
Quarterly
MAVIM
Household members
3364000 4500000
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
2/5
Name
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Project Goal 
Enable rural poor to sustainably overcome poverty
Rural households sustainably out of income poverty (>
58,000 Rs/ year)
Impact Study, AOS
Baseline,
Endline
MAVIM
Households
1000000
Development Objective 
Improve capacity of rural women to diversify into
sustainable enterprises or engage in decent and
remunerative employment and enhance their access to
markets
Targeted women are engaged in sustainable
enterprises or gainful employment
% of targeted women
35
80
1) Baseline survey
report, 2) Mid term,
3) AOS, 4) End
line/Impact Study
Targeted women report an increase in score on pro-
WEAI survey
% of targeted women
1) Baseline survey
report, 2) Mid term,
3)AOS, 4) End
line/Impact Study
75
MAVIM
MAVIM
1) One time,
2) One time,
3) Annual, 4)
At the end
1) One time,
2) One time,
3) Annual, 4)
At the end
Women reporting improved quality of their diets
Percentage
30
70
Economy maintains
or increases growth
rates; Terms of
trade for rural
communities shall
not deteriorate;
Price inflation for
staple food remains
below 10%; Rural
and peri-urban
infrastructure
available
Government
maintains
favourable policies
for small
businesses;
Government
continues to support
programmes for
development of
women
entrepreneurs
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
3/5
Name
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
Creation of sustainable business linkages for farm and
non/off farm enterprises
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and
practices
1) AOS, 2)Thematic
study, 3) Yearly
Survey
Annual
MAVIM
Households
200000
565400
2.2.2 Supported rural enterprises reporting an increase
in profit
1) AOS, 2)Thematic
study, 3) Yearly
Survey
Annual
MAVIM
200000
565400
Number of
enterprises
Farm
Non-farm
Output 
Creation of sustainable business linkages for farm and
non/off farm enterprises
Batches of standalone businesses receive
technical/management training
Number of batches
700
2000
Number of cooperatives formed
Number
100
250
MIS
MIS
Annual
MAVIM
Annual
MAVIM
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural
resources and climate-related risks
Project M&E system Annual
MAVIM
Groups supported
20000
45000
2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business
development services
1) Project M&E
system
Yearly
MAVIM
Rural enterprises
250000
765400
MAVIM successfully
establishes
collaborative
business
arrangements
between enterprises
and mainstream
businesses; Private
business companies
are interested in
sourcing products
from
microenterprises
and willing to
engage in
partnership; CMRCs
successfully identify
technologies and
products for small
producers within
value chain
subprojects and
outside.
Programme is able
to foster an
entrepreneurial spirit
amongst SHG
members; Groups
and clusters able to
manage collective
enterprises in a
cohesive manner
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
4/5
Name
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Development of value chain project management
capacity of CMRCs
CMRC staff trained in enterprise development and
management
MIS, Training report
Annual
MAVIM
No. of staff trained
1000
1500
Output 
Supporting innovation
Innovations scaled up by the project
No. of innovations
20
20
MIS, Enterprise
reports
Annual
MAVIM
Outcome 
An enabling environment to facilitate women's enterprise
development and employability in decent and
remunerative jobs
Women accessing financing for enterprise development
of Rs 1 lakh or more
MIS reports
Monthly
Females
50000
100000
Output 
Financial linkages
Financial institutions offering > 100,000 Rs financing for
enterprise development
MOUs
NA
Banking
Partner,
MAVIM
Banking
Partner,
MAVIM
No. of institutions
1
3
SHG members continue to receive loan under SHG-
Bank linkage program
MIS
Quaterly
MAVIM
No. of Members
800000
800000
800000
Increase in loan outstanding under SHG-Bank Program MIS
Quaterly
MAVIM
Amount
93000
107000
140000
Loan repayment rate (%)
MIS
Quaterly
MAVIM
Rate %
99.5
99.5
99.5
Livestock health and insurance recover operating cost
MIS
Quaterly
MAVIM
Percentage
10
60
100
Social and cultural
constraints in the
material and social
environment of
women can be
effectively
overcome;
Banks remain
enthusiastic about
lending to SHG
members with
strong credit history
Output 
Mentoring the ultra-poor and skill development training
Ultra-poor persons trained in income-generating
activities (CI 2.1.2) (M/F/Age)
MIS, Ultra poor study
reports
Quarterly
MAVIM
Total no. of persons
10000
26800
MAVIM is fairly able
to identify the ultra-
poor households
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
5/5
Name
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Remunerative wage employment generated
Number
10000
34000
MIS, ultra-poor study
reports
Quaterly
MAVIM
Output 
Improved nutritional status of households
Persons provided with targeted support to improve their
nutrition (CI 1.1.8)
MIS reports
Annually
MAVIM
Beneficiaries are
eager to participate
No. of persons
300000
800000
Output 
Policy engagement
Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Policy papers
Annually
MAVIM
Relevant policy
issues are identified
Outcome 
Capacity of MAVIM strengthened and project
satisfactorily managed
Output 
Training of MAVIM officials on enterprise development
and system upgraded
No. of products
4
Center of Excellence set up and well-functioning
Number
1
8
1
MAVIM report
Annual
MAVIM
MAVIM officials trained
MAVIM report
Annual
MAVIM
Number
80
80
Institutional assessment of MAVIM completed
MAVIM report
Once
MAVIM
Number
1
All four computerized system installed and upgraded
Number
4
1
4
MAVIM report
Once
MAVIM
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
1 million households out of poverty
Outcome
Women establish sustainable and 
profitable enterprises and create 
employment opportunities
Women's enterprises 
are considered 
credible borrowers
Women are 
trained in 
production 
practices 
and/or 
technologies
Women's enterprises 
accessing business 
development services
Women's 
enterprises 
generating 
employment
ME loans of  Rs 1 lakh and 
over are disbursed to 
women's enterprises
Members of 
ultra-poor 
households 
engaged in 
renumerative 
employment
Social and 
nutritional 
status 
increases of 
targeted 
women
MAVIM 
established 
as a 
knowledge 
and training 
centre for 
women-led 
enterprises
Members from 
ultra-poor 
households 
develop agency 
to acquire 
decent and 
remunerative 
jobs
Women are 
aware of ways 
to improve 
their and their 
HH's nutrition 
status
MAVIM's capacity 
to provide 
business advisory 
services improved 
and it becomes a 
knowledge and 
training centre
Training on 
production 
technology 
(farm and 
off-farm)
Provision of 
business 
development 
service 
Linkages with 
buyers and 
markets
Market driven 
enterprise 
development 
and inclusion 
in value chains
Access of women 
(CMRCs/SHGs) to new 
financial linkages and 
services
Ultra poor SHG 
members receive 
mentoring/coachi
ng; Provision of 
skill development 
trainings for wage 
employment 
enhancing 
nutritional 
status and 
gender 
relations at 
HH level
MAVIM is 
supported to 
transition to a 
resource 
centre
Challenges
Most 
microenterpri
ses produce 
small, low 
quality, low-
price products 
Management 
capacity 
within 
producer 
groups and 
individual  
businesses are 
weak
Farmers and 
nano-
entrepreneurs 
and unable to 
optimise 
market 
opportunities
Asymmetry in 
prices and 
business 
information 
available to 
producers
MEs 
percieved as 
high risk 
borrowers
Loan amount 
are small and 
inadequate to 
support 
livelihoods 
and enterprise 
needs
Prsisting rural 
poverty: Poor HHs 
without agency,  
limited IGA 
opportunities 
other than paid 
seasonal 
agricultural labour
Lack of nutrition 
security: 
especially 
women and 
children 
suffering from 
anemia and 
micro-nutrient 
deficiency
MAVIM does not 
have the guidance 
and internal 
capacity to 
transition into a 
resource centre
Output
Pathways
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Financing of Investment/Recurrent Costs and 
Financial Charges by Year
(US$ '000)
I. Investment Costs
 IFAD Loan
 IFAD Grant
 Funding Gap
 MAVIM Kind
 MAVIM Tax
 Convergence
 Banks / Financial Institutions
 Beneficiaries
 Enterprise
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
 IFAD Loan
 IFAD Grant
 Funding Gap
 MAVIM Kind
 MAVIM Tax
 Convergence
 Banks / Financial Institutions
 Beneficiaries
 Enterprise
Total Recurrent Costs
III. Financial Charges
 IFAD Loan
 IFAD Grant
 Funding Gap
 MAVIM Kind
 MAVIM Tax
 Convergence
 Banks / Financial Institutions
 Beneficiaries
 Enterprise
Total Financial Charges
Total Financing of Costs
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
20/21
21/22
22/23
Financing
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
3 341
882
625
-
674
6 036
  15 960
495
989
  29 003
666
-
-
4 090
19
-
-
-
-
4 774
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
  33 777
7 435
182
1 942
-
766
15 631
30 815
1 009
2 018
59 797
734
-
-
4 575
19
-
-
-
-
5 329
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
65 125
9 827
172
3 086
-
1 097
20 018
39 049
1 466
2 932
77 647
824
-
-
5 120
22
-
-
-
-
5 966
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
83 613
8 452
80
1 638
-
871
17 459
61 634
1 330
2 661
94 124
924
-
-
5 726
24
-
-
-
-
6 674
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100 799
2 556
84
3 640
-
760
7 847
50 301
650
1 300
67 137
1 035
-
-
6 408
27
-
-
-
-
7 471
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
74 608
1 031
-
1 101
-
399
-
53 082
-
-
55 613
1 143
-
-
7 167
28
-
-
-
-
8 338
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
63 951
32 643
1 400
12 032
-
4 566
66 991
250 840
4 950
9 900
383 321
5 326
-
-
33 086
139
-
-
-
-
38 552
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
421 872
Page 1
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Inflation and Exchange Rates
Inflation (in %'s) /a
Enterprise Development Fund
Annual rates
Local
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Workshops
Annual rates
Local
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Training, Study and Campaign
Annual rates
Local
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Consultancy
Annual rates
Local
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Equipment and Material
Annual rates
Local
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Vehicles
Annual rates
Local
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Operating Costs
Annual rates
Local
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Salaries and Allowances
Annual rates
Local
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Up to
Negotiation
Up to
Project
Start
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
5.0
5.0
2.5
2.5
5.0
5.0
2.5
2.5
4.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
4.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
4.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
4.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Page 2
4.0
4.0
6.1
6.1
5.0
5.0
7.6
7.6
5.0
5.0
7.6
7.6
4.0
4.0
6.1
6.1
4.0
4.0
6.1
6.1
4.0
4.0
6.1
6.1
4.0
4.0
6.1
6.1
5.0
4.0
4.0
10.3
10.3
5.0
5.0
13.0
13.0
5.0
5.0
13.0
13.0
4.0
4.0
10.3
10.3
4.0
4.0
10.3
10.3
4.0
4.0
10.3
10.3
4.0
4.0
10.3
10.3
5.0
4.0
4.0
14.7
14.7
5.0
5.0
18.7
18.7
5.0
5.0
18.7
18.7
4.0
4.0
14.7
14.7
4.0
4.0
14.7
14.7
4.0
4.0
14.7
14.7
4.0
4.0
14.7
14.7
5.0
4.0
4.0
19.3
19.3
5.0
5.0
24.6
24.6
5.0
5.0
24.6
24.6
4.0
4.0
19.3
19.3
4.0
4.0
19.3
19.3
4.0
4.0
19.3
19.3
4.0
4.0
19.3
19.3
5.0
4.0
4.0
24.1
24.1
5.0
5.0
30.8
30.8
5.0
5.0
30.8
30.8
4.0
4.0
24.1
24.1
4.0
4.0
24.1
24.1
4.0
4.0
24.1
24.1
4.0
4.0
24.1
24.1
5.0
Inflation and Exchange Rates
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Non Inflation
Annual rates
Local
Foreign
Compounded rates
Local
Foreign
Exchange rates (Local/Foreign) /b
Enterprise Development Fund
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
Workshops
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
Training, Study and Campaign
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
Consultancy
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
Equipment and Material
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
Vehicles
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
Operating Costs
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
Salaries and Allowances
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
Non Inflation
Rates actually used
Constant purchasing parity rates
% deviation
\a Yearly values are within Each Project Year
\b Yearly values are at Project Year Midpoints
Up to
Negotiation
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Project
Start
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
5.0
13.0
13.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
5.0
18.7
18.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
5.0
24.6
24.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
5.0
30.8
30.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
5.0
2.5
2.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
5.0
7.6
7.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
70.0
70.0
0.0
Page 3
Unit
20/21
21/22
22/23
Quantities
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
Unit Cost
(INR)
Unit Cost
(US$)
20/21
21/22
Base Cost - Negotiation (US$ '000)
23/24
24/25
22/23
25/26
Total
20/21
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
23/24
22/23
24/25
25/26
21/22
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$
'000)
Parameters (in %)
Total
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
Total
Phy.
Cont.
Rate
Summary Divisions
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
For.
Exch.
Gross
Tax Rate Component
Expenditure
Account
20/21
21/22
22/23
IFAD Loan
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
Funding Gap
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
MAVIM Tax
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
Convergence
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
Beneficiaries
23/24
22/23
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
Enterprise
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Table 1. Market Led Enterprise Promotion
Detailed Costs
 I. Investment Costs
A. Farm sector enterprise developmnet
1. Value chain subprojects (Farm)
Dairy
Goat/poultry/poultry hatcheries/
Fisheries
Vegetables
Fruits
Lentils/Pulses/Millets
Nuts/etc
Special rice/other field crops
Second round expansion
Subtotal
2. Beneficiary contribution
Farmer Beneficiary
Enterprise
Subtotal
3. Standalone Business (Farm)
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
2
10
-
7
1
3
1
4
4
4
40
1
14
2
7
2
10
10
6
40
2
20
3
10
3
10
10
6
30
2
20
3
10
3
10
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
LS
LS
49 250
98 500
99 500
199 000
144 500
289 000
144 500
289 000
49 250
98 500
75
20
19
75
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
2
2
2
2
3
1
5
2
3
3
150
-
38
150
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7
3
4
4
4
10
2
10
3
7
7
450
-
19
450
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
5
6
6
6
10
3
10
5
10
10
450
-
-
450
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7
3
4
4
4
10
2
5
4
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
11
7
1
3
300
300
2
7
3
4
4
4
-
2
4
-
-
-
Farm sector ME training (20 trainees per batch) [3 day @CMRC/clusters]
Training materials development (module)
Training of trainers/shakis training (@ 5 per CMRC) [3 day training at CMRC/cluster] [@20 per batch] 
Advance farming/agro-processing training [At cluster level; 3 day training; @ 20 per batch]
Exchange visits (5 day within India) [5 day exchnage visit within India; @ 40 per batch]
Number
Number
Number
Batch
Batch
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Funding Gap: Farm sector enterprise developmnet
1. Value chain subprojects (Farm)
Dairy
Goat/poultry/poultry hatcheries/
Vegetables
Fruits
Lentils/Pulses/Millets
Subtotal
2. Standalone Business (Farm)
Farm sector ME training (20 trainees per batch) [3 day @CMRC/clusters]
Advance farming/agro-processing training [At cluster level; 3 day training; @ 20 per batch]
Exchange visits (5 day within India) [5 day exchnage visit within India; @ 40 per batch]
Subtotal
Subtotal
C. Manufacturing and Service Sector Enterprise Development
1. Non-farm Sector Porducts Subprojects
Garments/textiles/looms/similar products
Bamboo-products/allied products
Wood products
Handicrafts
Jewelry (non-gold metal/stone/wood/lac etc)
Food processing/spice processing/dal/millet processing
Eco/ Agri Tourism etc.
Restaurants/ Catering services
Services / Electronic Platform
Other non-farm products
Second round expansion
Subtotal
2. Beneficiary contribution
Farmer Beneficiary
Enterprise
Subtotal
3. Standalone Business (non-farm)
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Batch
Batch
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
LS
Number
Number
LS
LS
20 000
40 000
41 750
83 500
60 750
121 500
41 750
83 500
41 750
83 500
  Lump Sum
Non-farm sector ME training (20 trainees per batch) [3 day @CMRC/clusters]
Training materials development (module)
  Lump Sum
Training of trainers/shakis training (@ 5 per CMRC) [3 day training at CMRC/cluster] [@20 per batch]  Lump Sum
Advance farming/agro-processing training [At cluster level; 3 day training; @ 20 per batch]
  Lump Sum
Exchange visits (5 day within India) [5 day exchnage visit within India; @ 40 per batch]
Marketing and Branding and E-commerce linkages
BDS Services for Standalone Bussiness
Batch
Number
LS
Subtotal
Subtotal
D. Funding Gap: Manufacturing and Service Sector Enterprise Development
1. Non-farm Sector Porducts Subprojects
Services / Electronic Platform
Other non-farm products
Second round expansion
Subtotal
2. Standalone Business (non-farm)
LS
Number
Number
Training of trainers/shakis training (@ 5 per CMRC) [3 day training at CMRC/cluster] [@20 per batch]  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
Advance farming/agro-processing training [At cluster level; 3 day training; @ 20 per batch]
Exchange visits (5 day within India) [5 day exchnage visit within India; @ 40 per batch]
Batch
Subtotal
3. Institution building and enterprise Dev. Facilitation
50
2
7.5
10
1
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
100
4
15
20
2
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
150
6
22.5
30
3
5
-
-
-
-
-
-
100
4
15
20
2
-
-
-
7
-
-
-
100
4
-
-
-
-
3
7
7
15
20
2
Institution Building for Co_Ops
Value chain facilitation cost at CMRCs (250 + 20 extra for weak CMRCs + other expenses)
Producer Company formation TA and Management Support
Producer Company working capital grants
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
LS
LS
-
3 240
-
-
30
3 240
10
10
100
3 240
20
20
120
3 240
-
-
-
3 240
-
-
-
3 240
-
-
250
19 440
30
30
100.000
15.000
1.600.000
2.500.000
1.428,571
214,286
22.857,143
35.714,286
Subtotal
Subtotal
E. Capacity Development of CMRCs
1. CMRCs (Managers and Sayoginis)
Basic small business management (3 day) (at district level) [@ 20 per btach]
Value chain project design and management (3 day) [CMRC managers and VCD supervisors]
Contract farming, subcontracting, contract negotiation (1 day) [@25 pr batch]
Project monitoring (3 days)
Vocational training program management (2 days)
Institutional transformation - CMRC to Coops [at district; 20 per batch]
Exchange visits (projects and businesses)
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
Subtotal
F. Funding Gap: Supporting Innovations
1. Farm/non-farm sector innovations
Innovative Business/technolgy (pilot) - Farm/non-farm
Renewable energy
Irrigation technology
Waste Managment
Others
Subtotal
  Lump Sumr
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
LS
  Lump Sum
30
10
-
2
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
30
10
-
2
3
15
2
5
1
1
2
2
15
5
2
2
3
15
2
5
1
1
2
2
-
-
4
2
3
-
2
5
1
1
3
3
-
-
4
2
3
-
2
5
1
1
3
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
75
25
10
10
12
30
10
20
4
4
10
10
120.000
120.000
40.000
120.000
60.000
60.000
400.000
1.714,286
1.714,286
571,429
1.714,286
857,143
857,143
5.714,286
1.000.000
1.000.000
1.000.000
1.000.000
1.000.000
14.285,714
14.285,714
14.285,714
14.285,714
14.285,714
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
75
75
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18
120
5
61
9
30
10
34
34
12.156.900
8.104.600
8.104.600
12.156.900
8.104.600
8.104.600
4.052.300
8.104.600
12.156.900
487 000
974 000
500
500
173.670
115.780
115.780
173.670
115.780
115.780
57.890
115.780
173.670
7,143
7,143
1 125
20
76
1 125
7
108.000
100.000
108.000
108.000
1.600.000
1.542,857
1.428,571
1.542,857
1.542,857
22.857,143
2
11
7
1
3
375
375
3
34
16
20
20
20
33
10
34
14
27
20
12.156.900
8.104.600
12.156.900
8.104.600
8.104.600
173.670
115.780
173.670
115.780
115.780
108.000
108.000
1.600.000
1.542,857
1.542,857
22.857,143
11.142.840
8.357.130
5.571.420
5.571.420
5.571.420
8.357.130
11.142.840
5.571.420
11.142.840
5.571.420
5.571.420
159.183,429
119.387,571
79.591,714
79.591,714
79.591,714
119.387,571
159.183,429
79.591,714
159.183,429
79.591,714
79.591,714
206 000
412 000
500
500
7,143
7,143
500
20
60
80
8
10
3
7
14
15
20
2
108.000
100.000
108.000
108.000
1.600.000
3.500.000
1.542,857
1.428,571
1.542,857
1.542,857
22.857,143
50.000
11.142.840
5.571.420
5.571.420
159.183,429
79.591,714
79.591,714
108.000
108.000
1.600.000
1.542,857
1.542,857
22.857,143
347
1 158
-
1 216
116
347
58
463
695
4 400
352
704
1 055
116
29
29
116
23
312
5 767
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
478
239
159
159
159
358
159
398
318
239
239
2 905
143
286
429
77
3
12
15
23
100
29
258
3 592
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
694
-
-
694
694
51
17
-
3
-
-
11
83
-
-
-
-
-
-
695
4 631
116
2 431
232
810
116
1 158
1 737
11 925
711
1 421
2 132
231
-
59
231
23
544
14 602
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 114
358
318
318
318
1 194
318
796
478
557
557
6 328
298
596
895
154
6
23
31
46
150
71
481
7 703
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 042
4 631
232
3 473
347
1 158
174
1 158
1 737
13 951
1 032
2 064
3 096
694
-
29
694
46
1 464
18 512
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 592
597
478
478
478
1 194
478
796
796
796
796
8 477
434
868
1 302
231
9
35
46
69
250
43
682
10 461
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
43
694
229
357
1 323
1 323
143
694
457
714
2 009
2 009
51
17
-
3
3
13
11
99
71
14
14
29
29
157
26
9
1
3
3
13
11
66
71
14
14
29
29
157
1 042
3 473
232
3 473
347
1 158
174
1 158
1 737
12 794
1 032
2 064
3 096
694
-
-
694
69
1 457
17 347
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 114
358
318
318
318
1 194
318
398
637
557
-
5 532
298
596
895
154
6
23
31
46
-
-
260
6 686
-
-
557
557
-
-
-
-
171
694
-
-
866
1 423
-
-
2
3
3
-
11
20
71
14
14
43
43
186
-
-
-
-
-
-
58
-
-
58
352
704
1 055
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 113
347
1 274
1 216
116
347
3 300
463
463
46
971
4 271
1 114
358
318
318
318
-
318
318
-
-
-
3 064
298
596
895
154
6
-
-
-
-
-
160
4 119
478
557
557
1 592
23
31
46
100
-
694
-
-
694
2 386
-
-
2
3
3
-
11
20
71
14
14
43
43
186
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
116
116
23
254
254
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
694
-
-
694
694
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 126
13 894
579
10 594
1 042
3 473
579
3 937
5 905
43 128
3 479
6 957
10 436
1 736
29
117
1 736
160
3 777
57 341
347
1 274
1 216
116
347
3 300
579
579
69
1 226
4 525
5 412
1 910
1 592
1 592
1 592
3 940
1 592
2 706
2 229
2 149
1 592
26 305
1 471
2 943
4 414
771
29
93
123
183
500
143
1 842
32 561
478
557
1 114
2 149
23
31
46
100
357
4 166
686
1 071
6 280
8 529
129
43
6
17
10
26
57
287
286
57
57
143
143
686
372
1 240
-
1 302
124
372
62
496
744
4 712
352
704
1 055
125
31
32
125
25
336
6 103
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
511
256
170
170
170
384
170
426
341
256
256
3 111
143
286
429
83
3
12
17
25
107
31
277
3 817
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
747
-
-
747
747
55
18
-
4
-
-
12
90
-
-
-
-
-
-
774
5 158
129
2 708
258
903
129
1 290
1 934
13 283
711
1 421
2 132
262
-
66
262
26
615
16 030
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 241
399
355
355
355
1 330
355
887
532
621
621
7 048
298
596
895
174
6
26
35
52
167
80
540
8 483
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 207
5 365
268
4 024
402
1 341
201
1 341
2 012
16 161
1 032
2 064
3 096
824
-
35
824
54
1 737
20 994
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 844
691
553
553
553
1 383
553
922
922
922
922
9 819
434
868
1 302
275
10
41
55
81
290
50
801
11 922
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
785
255
398
1 485
1 485
170
824
530
827
2 350
2 350
58
19
-
4
3
15
13
112
80
16
16
32
32
175
31
10
1
4
3
15
14
78
83
17
17
33
33
182
1 255
4 185
279
4 185
418
1 395
209
1 395
2 092
15 413
1 032
2 064
3 096
865
-
-
865
85
1 815
20 325
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 342
431
384
384
384
1 438
384
479
767
671
-
6 664
298
596
895
192
7
29
38
57
-
-
324
7 882
-
-
671
671
-
-
-
-
214
865
-
-
1 079
1 750
-
-
3
4
3
-
14
25
86
17
17
52
52
224
-
-
-
-
-
-
73
-
-
73
352
704
1 055
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 128
435
1 596
1 523
145
435
4 134
606
606
60
1 271
5 405
1 396
449
399
399
399
-
399
399
-
-
-
3 839
298
596
895
202
7
-
-
-
-
-
209
4 943
598
698
698
1 994
30
40
60
130
-
908
-
-
908
3 033
-
-
3
4
3
-
15
26
89
18
18
54
54
233
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
159
159
31
349
349
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
954
-
-
954
954
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 608
15 948
676
12 218
1 203
4 011
674
4 522
6 782
49 642
3 479
6 957
10 436
2 075
31
133
2 075
190
4 503
64 581
435
1 596
1 523
145
435
4 134
764
764
91
1 620
5 754
6 335
2 226
1 861
1 861
1 861
4 535
1 861
3 113
2 562
2 469
1 798
30 482
1 471
2 943
4 414
926
34
109
145
215
564
160
2 152
37 048
598
698
1 369
2 666
30
40
60
130
432
5 083
784
1 225
7 523
10 320
144
48
7
20
13
30
68
330
338
68
68
170
170
813
902
3 987
169
3 055
301
1 003
168
1 130
1 696
12 410
-
-
-
1 701
25
109
1 701
156
3 693
16 103
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 240
436
364
364
364
888
364
609
501
483
352
5 966
-
-
-
759
28
89
119
176
462
131
1 765
7 731
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
118
39
6
17
10
24
56
270
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
613
-
-
613
613
40
643
209
398
1 290
1 290
139
676
434
827
2 076
2 076
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
80
16
16
32
32
175
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
83
17
17
33
33
182
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
131
131
-
-
-
-
175
709
-
-
884
1 016
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
86
17
17
52
52
224
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
109
399
381
36
109
1 034
497
497
49
1 042
2 076
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
117
137
137
390
25
33
49
107
-
745
-
-
745
1 242
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
89
18
18
54
54
233
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
130
130
26
286
286
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
782
-
-
782
782
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
109
399
381
36
109
1 034
627
627
75
1 328
2 362
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
117
137
268
522
25
33
49
107
354
4 168
643
1 225
6 390
7 018
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
338
68
68
170
170
813
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
22
6
6
22
4
60
60
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
15
1
2
3
4
19
6
50
50
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
135
-
-
135
135
10
3
-
1
-
-
2
16
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
47
-
12
47
5
111
111
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
31
1
5
6
9
30
14
97
97
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9
141
46
-
196
196
10
3
-
1
1
3
2
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
148
-
6
148
10
313
313
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
2
7
10
15
52
9
144
144
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
31
148
95
-
274
274
5
2
0
1
1
3
2
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
156
-
-
156
15
327
327
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
35
1
5
7
10
-
-
58
58
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
38
156
-
-
194
194
-
-
1
1
1
-
3
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
109
109
11
229
229
29
29
6
63
63
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
373
6
24
373
34
811
811
-
-
-
-
-
-
138
138
16
292
292
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
167
6
20
26
39
101
29
387
387
-
-
-
-
5
7
11
23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
172
-
-
172
172
78
915
141
-
1 134
1 157
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
26
9
1
4
2
5
12
59
-
-
-
-
-
-
279
930
-
977
93
279
47
372
558
3 534
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 534
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
411
206
137
137
137
309
137
343
274
206
206
2 502
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 502
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
580
3 869
97
2 031
193
677
97
967
1 451
9 962
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 962
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
998
321
285
285
285
1 070
285
713
428
499
499
5 668
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5 668
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
905
4 024
201
3 018
302
1 006
151
1 006
1 509
12 121
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12 121
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 483
556
445
445
445
1 112
445
742
742
742
742
7 897
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 897
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
942
3 138
209
3 138
314
1 046
157
1 046
1 569
11 560
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11 560
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 080
347
308
308
308
1 157
308
386
617
540
-
5 360
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5 360
-
-
540
540
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
540
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
54
-
-
54
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
54
326
1 197
1 142
109
326
3 101
-
-
-
-
3 101
1 123
361
321
321
321
-
321
321
-
-
-
3 088
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 088
481
561
561
1 604
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 604
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
36
1
-
-
-
-
-
38
38
-
-
-
-
5
7
11
23
-
163
-
-
163
187
-
-
1
1
1
-
3
5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 706
11 961
507
9 164
902
3 008
505
3 391
5 087
37 231
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
37 231
326
1 197
1 142
109
326
3 101
-
-
-
-
3 101
5 095
1 791
1 497
1 497
1 497
3 647
1 497
2 504
2 061
1 986
1 446
24 516
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24 516
481
561
1 101
2 144
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 144
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
352
-
352
-
-
-
-
-
-
352
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
143
-
143
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
143
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
711
-
711
-
-
-
-
-
-
711
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
298
-
298
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
298
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 032
-
1 032
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 032
1 032
-
1 032
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 032
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
434
-
434
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
434
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
298
-
298
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
298
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
352
-
352
-
-
-
-
-
-
352
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
298
-
298
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
298
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
66 991
495
1 009
1 466
1 330
650
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 479
-
3 479
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 479
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 471
-
1 471
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 471
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
704
704
-
-
-
-
-
-
704
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
286
286
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
286
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 421
1 421
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 421
-
2 064
2 064
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 064
-
2 064
2 064
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 064
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
596
596
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
596
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
868
868
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
868
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
596
596
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
596
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
704
704
-
-
-
-
-
-
704
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
596
596
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
596
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 950
989
2 018
2 932
2 661
1 300
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 957
6 957
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 957
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 943
2 943
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 943
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 900
Total
10 137
23 884
31 204
25 662
12 095
949
103 929
10 758
26 285
35 527
30 205
14 768
1 303
118 846
24 104
613
1 465
2 258
1 240
3 550
1 068
10 194
261
424
745
584
458
235
2 706
6 036
15 631
20 018
17 459
7 847
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 608
15 948
676
12 218
1 203
4 011
674
4 522
6 782
49 642
3 479
6 957
10 436
1 701
25
109
1 701
156
3 693
63 770
435
1 596
1 523
145
435
4 134
627
627
75
1 328
5 463
6 335
2 226
1 861
1 861
1 861
4 535
1 861
3 113
2 562
2 469
1 798
30 482
1 471
2 943
4 414
759
28
89
119
176
462
131
1 765
36 661
598
698
1 369
2 666
25
33
49
107
354
4 168
643
1 225
6 390
9 162
118
39
6
17
10
24
56
270
338
68
68
170
170
813
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
373
6
24
373
34
811
811
-
-
-
-
-
-
138
138
16
292
292
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
167
6
20
26
39
101
29
387
387
-
-
-
-
5
7
11
23
78
915
141
-
1 134
1 157
26
9
1
4
2
5
12
59
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 608
15 948
676
12 218
1 203
4 011
674
4 522
6 782
49 642
3 479
6 957
10 436
2 075
31
133
2 075
190
4 503
64 581
435
1 596
1 523
145
435
4 134
764
764
91
1 620
5 754
6 335
2 226
1 861
1 861
1 861
4 535
1 861
3 113
2 562
2 469
1 798
30 482
1 471
2 943
4 414
926
34
109
145
215
564
160
2 152
37 048
598
698
1 369
2 666
30
40
60
130
432
5 083
784
1 225
7 523
10 320
144
48
7
20
13
30
68
330
338
68
68
170
170
813
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
COMP1
COMP1
BENEFICIARY_EA
BENEFICIARY_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
0.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
COMP1
COMP1
BENEFICIARY_EA
BENEFICIARY_EA
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
COMP1
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
CONSULT_EA
CONSULT_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
CONSULT_EA
GRANTS_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
GRANTS_EA
93
310
-
326
31
93
16
124
186
1 178
-
-
-
102
25
26
102
20
275
1 454
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100
50
33
33
33
75
33
83
67
50
50
609
-
-
-
68
3
10
14
20
88
25
228
837
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
45
15
-
3
-
-
10
74
-
-
-
-
-
-
193
1 290
32
677
64
226
32
322
484
3 321
-
-
-
214
-
54
214
21
504
3 825
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
243
78
69
69
69
260
69
174
104
121
121
1 379
-
-
-
143
5
21
29
42
137
65
443
1 822
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
16
-
3
2
12
11
92
-
-
-
-
-
-
302
1 341
67
1 006
101
335
50
335
503
4 040
-
-
-
676
-
29
676
44
1 424
5 464
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
361
135
108
108
108
271
108
180
180
180
180
1 922
-
-
-
225
8
34
45
67
237
41
657
2 579
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25
8
1
3
3
13
11
64
-
-
-
-
-
-
314
1 046
70
1 046
105
349
52
349
523
3 853
-
-
-
709
-
-
709
70
1 489
5 342
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
263
84
75
75
75
282
75
94
150
131
-
1 304
-
-
-
158
6
24
32
47
-
-
265
1 570
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
4
3
-
12
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18
-
-
18
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
273
88
78
78
78
-
78
78
-
-
-
751
-
-
-
166
6
-
-
-
-
-
172
923
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
4
3
-
12
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
116 140
2 706
118 846
2 364
5 739
8 107
6 932
962
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Page 4
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Table 2. Enabling Support Services
Detailed Costs
 I. Investment Costs
A. Facilitating Financial Linkages
1. Credit Workshops
Unit
20/21
21/22
22/23
Quantities
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
Unit Cost
(INR)
Unit Cost
(US$)
20/21
21/22
Base Cost - Negotiation (US$ '000)
23/24
22/23
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$
'000)
Parameters (in %)
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
23/24
22/23
24/25
25/26
Total
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
Total
Phy.
Cont.
Rate
Summary Divisions
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
For.
Exch.
Gross
Tax Rate Component
Expenditure
Account
20/21
21/22
22/23
IFAD Loan
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
Funding Gap
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
MAVIM Tax
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
Banks / Financial Institutions
23/24
24/25
22/23
25/26
Total
District level Workshop to share credit plans (one in every year with bankers and govt officials)
  Workshop
2. Improving financial services
Savings improvement campaign and awards to CMRCs (@Rs 5000*34+Rs 10,000*105)
Training of trainers on additional savings mobilisation and  interest on savings (2 day training to 1084 Sahyoginies )
Training on interest on savings to CRPs (2 day training to CRPs at CMRC)
Training on detailed credit planning to improve credit flow (2 day training to all CMRC staff - 20 per batch - 1084 
Sahyoginies, 246 managers and 246 Accountants)
Lump Sum
Events
Sessions
Sessions
Subtotal
3. Micro enterprise loans
Exposure visit to institution/ programmes with ME loans along with banking partners (Visit to institutions like 
SKDRDP disbursing ME loans to SHG members)
Training to CMRC key staff on ME loan proposal preparation - farm sector (3 day training )
TOT for trainers on ME (5 days training )
Training to CMRC key staff on ME loan proposal preparation - non farm sector (District level workshops)
Bankers' training for RRB and co operative bank staff (partners for mE loans (Training for a batch of 20 senior 
management and branch managers)
Risk sharing instrument ( Estimated at 5% with project contribution of 2% and the rest by CMRC and borrowers)
Visits
Sessions
Sessions
  Workshops
Batch
Lump Sum
Subtotal
4. FPO/PO loans
Training to FPO/PO staff on new instruments for bank loans - VCF, receivable financing, Warehouse receipt 
financing etc., (3 day training organised by CAB/BIRD @20 per batch, 80 persons)
5. Insurance related
TOT crop insurance literacy training (1 day training to sahyoginis and CRPs )
Advanced Fin literacy - digital transactions, pension, insurance, (10 trainers per district -340 trainers)
Subtotal
6. Policy workshops
Studies, policy workshops (Jointly with CAB/ BIRD/ IGIDR/Dvara Research)
7. Policy workshops
Studies, policy workshops (Jointly with CAB/ BIRD/ IGIDR/Dvara Research)
8. Feasibility study on Setting Apex Financial Institution
Exposure visit to other apex financial institutions
Independent feasibilty study
TA to set up systems and products
Subtotal
9. Funding Gap: Financial Innovations
Feasibility study of Livestock Health/ Insurance
Management cost for Piloting of Livestock Health / Insurance for 3 years
Subtotal
10. Credit Support FROM Banks to SHGs
SHG Loan FROM Banks/NBFCs  (Annual incremental loan)
ME Loan from Financial Institutions
Loan to FPOs from Financial Institutions
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Mentoring program for Ultra-poor Households
1. Mentoring/Coaching
Personal counselling coaching
2. Skill Development (ultra-poor/poor families) -COST
Batch
Sessions
Batch
Seminars
Seminars
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
LS
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
34
1
20
100
30
2
10
10
10
1
-
-
-
-
-
0.5
-
-
1
34
1
34
146
44
2
20
20
24
1
1
246
15
1
-
0.5
1
-
-
34
1
-
-
-
1
44
44
34
1
2
-
19
1
-
-
-
1
-
34
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
34
-
1
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
34
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
34
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
204
6
54
246
74
5
74
74
102
3
4
10.000
142,857
2.280.000
40.000
12.500
32.571,429
571,429
178,571
40.000
571,429
300.000
60.000
100.000
5.000
4.285,714
857,143
1.428,571
71,429
125.000
1.785,714
150.000
2.142,857
246
34
5.000
60.000
71,429
857,143
6
2
1
1
1
1
1.000.000
14.285,714
1.000.000
14.285,714
600.000
1.000.000
1.000.000
8.571,429
14.285,714
14.285,714
1.000.000
14.285,714
Lump Sum
10 000
10 000
10 000
10 000
10 000
-
50 000
1.000
14,286
Skill Training at formal institutions (3-4 weeks)/allied training
Skill developments at group/village level (3 day hands on technical skill training, 20 per batch)
Apprentice program
Number
Batch
Number
-
-
-
680
200
680
680
200
680
680
200
680
680
200
680
Subtotal
Subtotal
C. Enhancing nutritional status and gender relations at HH and community levels COST
1. Gender integration
Gender eaqulity campaign, male sensitzation workshop, MAVIM Mitra Mandal ( 1 day) [One day event per village]
Joint ownership campaign, joint activity /prg with help of of KS &  MAVIM Mitra Mandal ( Awareness, competition, prg 
to enhance male participarion / involvement
Events
Events
Subtotal
2. Health  & Nutrition
Nutrion campaign (SHG/CMRCs)
Competition  ( Healthy baby & health mother competition) competition of nutrition receipes
Information, Education, and Communication material
Dietary change training (teranga Thali)
Subtotal
Subtotal
D. Policy Engagement
Policy paper preparation and lobbying (ME loan program)
Document and dissemination of SHG -CMRC process
Other sector policy documents and lobying
Subtotal
Total
Lump Sum
Events
Module
SHGs
Number
Number
Number
2 000
2 000
12
2 000
-
66 148
1
1
-
2 000
2 000
12
2 000
10
66 148
-
-
1
2 000
2 000
12
2 000
10
66 148
-
-
1
2 000
2 000
12
2 000
-
66 148
-
-
2
2 000
2 000
12
2 000
-
66 148
-
-
1
680
200
680
-
-
12
-
-
66 148
-
-
-
3 400
1 000
3 400
25.000
35.000
25.000
357,143
500
357,143
10 000
10 000
72
10 000
20
396 888
5.000
5.000
71,429
71,429
1.000.000
1.000
100.000
14.285,714
14,286
1.428,571
5
33
11
18
17
79
9
9
14
1
2
14
48
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
-
-
4
14
-
14
11 246
4 714
-
15 960
16 110
143
-
-
-
-
143
143
143
286
171
29
-
-
200
486
5
33
19
26
25
103
9
17
29
2
2
43
101
2
18
13
30
14
-
4
14
-
19
5
33
-
-
-
33
4
38
63
2
2
7
116
4
-
16
16
14
-
-
-
14
14
-
429
429
17 243
13 571
-
30 815
31 517
-
714
714
20 692
15 143
3 214
39 049
39 966
143
243
100
243
586
729
143
143
286
171
29
14
-
214
500
143
243
100
243
586
729
143
143
286
171
29
14
-
214
500
5
33
-
-
-
33
-
-
-
2
-
-
2
2
-
-
-
5
33
-
-
-
33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29
29
-
-
-
-
-
-
71
71
5
33
-
-
-
33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29 796
19 500
1 004
50 301
50 438
35 755
16 071
1 256
53 082
53 148
143
243
100
243
586
729
143
143
286
171
29
-
-
200
486
-
243
100
243
586
586
-
-
-
171
-
-
-
171
171
-
-
-
-
-
-
331
331
24 830
36 000
804
61 634
62 035
143
243
100
243
586
729
143
143
286
171
29
-
-
200
486
29
195
31
44
42
313
21
63
106
7
5
64
268
9
18
29
47
86
29
9
14
14
37
14
1 545
1 559
139 562
105 000
6 278
250 840
253 215
714
1 214
500
1 214
2 929
3 643
714
714
1 429
1 029
143
29
-
1 200
2 629
5
35
12
19
18
85
9
9
15
1
2
15
52
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
-
-
5
15
-
15
11 246
4 714
-
15 960
16 122
153
-
-
-
-
153
154
154
308
185
31
-
-
215
523
5
37
22
29
28
117
10
19
32
2
2
48
113
2
20
15
34
16
-
5
16
-
21
6
39
-
-
-
39
5
45
75
3
2
8
138
5
-
19
19
17
-
-
-
17
17
-
477
477
17 243
13 571
-
30 815
31 601
-
827
827
20 692
15 143
3 214
39 049
40 116
159
274
113
271
658
817
161
161
323
194
32
16
-
242
565
165
288
119
281
688
854
170
170
339
203
34
17
-
254
593
6
41
-
-
-
41
-
-
-
3
-
-
3
3
-
-
-
6
43
-
-
-
43
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
36
37
-
-
-
-
-
-
89
89
7
45
-
-
-
45
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
39
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29 796
19 500
1 004
50 301
50 476
35 755
16 071
1 256
53 082
53 173
179
318
131
304
753
932
187
187
374
224
37
-
-
262
635
-
334
137
316
787
787
-
-
-
235
-
-
-
235
235
-
-
-
-
-
-
398
398
24 830
36 000
804
61 634
62 120
172
303
125
293
720
892
178
178
356
214
36
-
-
249
605
36
238
34
49
47
368
24
73
122
9
6
71
306
10
20
34
54
106
39
9
16
17
42
15
1 793
1 808
139 562
105 000
6 278
250 840
253 608
829
1 516
624
1 465
3 606
4 435
850
850
1 699
1 255
170
33
-
1 458
3 157
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29
196
28
40
38
302
20
60
100
7
5
71
263
8
16
28
44
87
32
8
13
14
34
13
1 793
1 805
139 562
105 000
6 278
250 840
253 445
680
1 244
512
1 465
3 221
3 900
697
697
1 393
1 029
139
27
-
1 196
2 589
6
43
6
9
8
66
4
13
22
2
1
-
42
2
4
6
10
19
7
2
3
3
8
3
-
3
-
-
-
-
163
149
273
112
-
385
535
153
153
306
226
31
6
-
262
568
36
238
34
49
47
368
24
73
122
9
6
71
306
10
20
34
54
106
39
9
16
17
42
15
1 793
1 808
139 562
105 000
6 278
250 840
253 608
829
1 516
624
1 465
3 606
4 435
850
850
1 699
1 255
170
33
-
1 458
3 157
6
6
36
48
259 983
1
1
8
11
1 276
8
8
44
59
261 259
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
COMP2
WRSHP_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
18.0
COMP2
TRNG_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
0.0
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
GRANTS_EA
18.0
COMP2
TRNG_EA
18.0
18.0
COMP2
COMP2
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
18.0
COMP2
WRSHP_EA
18.0
COMP2
WRSHP_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
TRNG_EA
CONSULT_EA
CONSULT_EA
18.0
0.0
COMP2
COMP2
TRNG_EA
GRANTS_EA
0.0
0.0
0.0
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
CREDIT_LINE_EA
CREDIT_LINE_EA
CREDIT_LINE_EA
18.0
COMP2
CONSULT_EA
18.0
18.0
0.0
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
GRANTS_EA
18.0
COMP2
TRNG_EA
18.0
COMP2
TRNG_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
0.0
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
COMP2
COMP2
COMP2
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
4
29
10
16
15
70
8
8
13
1
2
15
45
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
-
-
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
123
125
-
-
-
-
125
126
126
252
151
25
-
-
177
429
6
6
-
13
690
5
30
18
24
23
96
8
16
26
2
2
48
101
2
16
12
28
13
-
4
13
-
17
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
262
130
225
93
271
588
719
132
132
265
159
26
13
-
199
463
5
32
-
-
-
32
4
37
61
2
2
8
114
4
-
16
16
14
-
-
-
14
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
198
136
236
97
281
615
751
139
139
278
167
28
14
-
208
486
5
33
-
-
-
33
-
-
-
2
-
-
2
2
-
-
-
5
35
-
-
-
35
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29
31
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
72
141
248
102
293
643
784
146
146
292
175
29
-
-
204
496
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
71
147
261
107
304
672
819
153
153
306
184
31
-
-
215
521
-
-
7
7
1 451
-
-
7
7
1 442
-
-
15
15
1 367
-
-
8
8
1 418
5
37
-
-
-
37
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
42
29
196
28
40
38
302
20
60
100
7
5
71
263
8
16
28
44
87
-
8
13
14
34
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
768
-
680
274
113
316
703
703
-
-
-
193
-
-
-
193
193
-
-
-
-
938
1 244
512
1 465
3 221
3 900
697
697
1 393
1 029
139
27
-
1 196
2 589
6
6
36
48
7 306
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
477
477
-
-
-
-
477
-
827
827
-
-
-
-
827
-
398
398
-
-
-
-
398
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
477
-
-
-
-
827
-
-
-
-
398
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
89
89
-
-
-
-
89
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
89
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
32
32
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
32
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
1 793
1 805
-
-
-
-
1 837
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
6
2
3
3
15
2
2
3
0
0
-
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
1
3
-
3
-
-
-
-
26
28
-
-
-
-
28
28
28
55
33
6
-
-
39
94
-
-
-
-
32
-
-
-
-
1 837
1
1
-
3
151
1
7
4
5
5
21
2
3
6
0
0
-
12
0
4
3
6
3
-
1
3
-
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
47
29
49
20
-
70
98
29
29
58
35
6
3
-
44
102
-
-
1
1
249
1
7
-
-
-
7
1
8
13
1
0
-
23
1
-
3
3
3
-
-
-
3
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
42
30
52
21
-
73
103
31
31
61
37
6
3
-
46
107
-
-
2
2
253
1
7
-
-
-
7
-
-
-
1
-
-
1
0
-
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
16
31
54
22
-
77
108
32
32
64
38
6
-
-
45
109
-
-
3
3
236
1
8
-
-
-
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
16
32
57
24
-
81
113
34
34
67
40
7
-
-
47
114
-
-
2
2
245
1
8
-
-
-
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
16
-
60
25
-
85
85
-
-
-
42
-
-
-
42
42
6
43
6
9
8
66
4
13
22
2
1
-
42
2
4
6
10
19
7
2
3
3
8
3
-
3
-
-
-
-
163
149
273
112
-
385
535
153
153
306
226
31
6
-
262
568
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11 246
4 714
-
15 960
15 960
17 243
13 571
-
30 815
30 815
20 692
15 143
3 214
39 049
39 049
24 830
36 000
804
61 634
61 634
29 796
19 500
1 004
50 301
50 301
35 755
16 071
1 256
53 082
53 082
139 562
105 000
6 278
250 840
250 840
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
143
1
1
8
11
1 276
-
-
-
-
15 960
-
-
-
-
30 815
-
-
-
-
39 049
-
-
-
-
61 634
-
-
-
-
50 301
-
-
-
-
53 082
-
-
-
-
250 840
1
1
5
500.000
500.000
500.000
7.142,857
7.142,857
7.142,857
7
7
-
14
16 753
-
-
7
7
32 753
-
-
7
7
41 202
-
-
14
14
63 263
-
-
7
7
51 659
-
-
-
-
53 905
7
7
36
50
259 536
8
8
-
15
16 813
-
-
8
8
32 991
-
-
8
8
41 572
-
-
18
18
63 635
-
-
9
9
52 053
-
-
-
-
54 196
8
8
44
59
261 259
Page 5
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Table 3. Institutional Development and Project Management
Detailed Costs
 I. Investment Costs
A. Preproject activities - Retroactive Financing
Basic small business management (5 day)[all DCOs ,RCs, all NTej Supervisor+ MAVIM HO]
Identify potential sectors/value development sectors
Identify and map out skill development training services providers
Software procurements (microfinance management software, project management softwre, HR 
software, and upgrading TALLY software)
Conduct baseline survey (sample survey) SHG families
Complete recruitment process of new staff members.
Subtotal
B. HR Development
Senior official development Training (strategic planning, senior leadership training, etc)
Exchange visits
Subtotal
C. Institutional Development of MAVIM
Value chain project design and management (5 day)
Contract farming, subcontracting, contract negotiation
Project Management
M&E and KM management
Skill development training program management
Senior Management trainimng
Exchange visits (to projects and businesses) [5 day]
Support for KM and Training Center
Conduct Institutional Assessment of MAVIM
Subtotal
D. Audit and Joint supervision
External audit
Joint project supervision (MAVIM part)
Subtotal
E. M&E and KM
Baseline, Midterm and End project studies
Website upgradation
KM products
Subtotal
F. Computers/printers/AC & Car - Nav Tej
1. MAVIM
Cost of AC ( 2 AC per District & 15AC for HO @35000 per AC)
2 Vechicles @ 15 lakhs
Inverter & 2 Battery for 35 District
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salary & Allowance
1. Project Management Unit (PMU)
a. MAVIM _ HO
b. MAVIM Support staff- HO
Subtotal
2. Region/Districts - MAVIM
3. Nav Tejaswini - Hired officers/support staff  - HO
a. Manager
Manager (Business Dev)
Manager (Enterrpsie Dev and prject superviosn)
Manager (Rural Finance)
Manager (Training, Policy )
Subtotal
b. Deputy Managers
KM, Communication and Policy
Procurement
Account and Finance
Subtotal
c. Nav Tejaswini - Hired officers/support staff - Regions/Districts
Regional Monitoring Officer
ADCO - N.Tejaswini District Project Supervisor/Monitroing officer (Enterprise Dev)
Subtotal
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Overhead Cost
MAVIM - HO (Govt contribution)
MAVIM - Regions/Districts (GOM contribution)
Travel/DSA etc (NJes) (HO + Region + Districts)
Subtotal
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Unit
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
(INR)
(US$)
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
Quantities
Unit Cost
Unit Cost
Base Cost - Negotiation (US$ '000)
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Duties &
Taxes)
Taxes
Total
Phy.
Cont.
Rate
Summary Divisions
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
For.
Gross
Expenditure
IFAD Loan
IFAD Grant
MAVIM Kind
MAVIM Tax
Exch.
Tax Rate Component
Account
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
(US$ '000)
Parameters (in % )
16
1
0
165
7
1
90
4
2
918
38
8
191
1 060
74
3
1
753
32
6
869
26
26
52
74
6
95
10
11
14
70
968
19
1 267
59
49
108
112
14
118
244
37
33
22
92
6
6
11
16
1
21
2
2
3
15
212
4
278
13
11
24
25
3
26
54
8
13
5
26
2 632
583
2 449
2 680
5 129
13 358
145
434
145
145
869
145
145
88
378
634
2 194
2 829
4 075
22 562
5 982
8 617
1 251
15 851
38 413
41 045
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
139
139
139
722
32
32
63
90
7
115
13
13
17
86
1 181
23
1 545
72
60
131
136
17
144
297
46
46
27
118
3 215
2 449
2 680
5 129
13 358
145
434
145
145
869
145
145
88
378
634
2 194
2 829
4 075
22 562
5 982
8 617
1 390
15 990
38 552
41 767
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
EQUIP_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
18.0
18.0
COMP3
COMP3
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
18.0
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
18.0
18.0
COMP3
COMP3
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
18.0
18.0
18.0
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
TRNG_EA
18.0
28.0
18.0
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
EQUIP_EA
VEH_EA
EQUIP_EA
0.0
0.0
COMP3
COMP3
SALARY_EA
SALARY_EA
0.0
COMP3
SALARY_EA
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
SALARY_EA
SALARY_EA
SALARY_EA
SALARY_EA
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
SALARY_EA
SALARY_EA
SALARY_EA
COMP3
COMP3
SALARY_EA
SALARY_EA
0.0
0.0
10.0
COMP3
COMP3
COMP3
OPCOST_EA
OPCOST_EA
OPCOST_EA
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
13
25
18
-
-
5
-
-
6
57
19
105
8
6
14
30
6
15
52
37
33
22
92
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
13
26
37
-
-
5
5
-
13
120
-
181
8
7
15
-
1
21
23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
3
22
-
6
7
21
126
-
203
9
8
17
33
1
22
57
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
23
-
-
7
15
66
-
114
10
8
19
-
1
19
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
-
-
-
15
69
-
134
11
9
21
-
2
20
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
10
23
48
2
21
71
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
26
26
52
74
6
95
10
11
14
70
438
19
737
59
49
108
112
14
118
244
37
33
22
92
18
3
1
753
32
6
813
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
69
-
69
145
-
145
152
-
152
80
-
80
84
-
84
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
288
245
277
153
176
93
1 232
882
182
172
80
84
-
-
-
-
18
53
18
18
-
-
-
-
20
60
20
20
-
-
-
-
22
67
22
22
-
-
-
-
25
75
25
25
-
-
-
-
28
84
28
28
-
-
-
-
32
95
32
32
106
119
134
150
169
190
18
18
11
46
77
268
345
498
498
-
-
168
168
666
954
20
20
12
52
87
301
388
559
559
-
-
175
175
734
979
22
22
14
58
98
338
436
629
629
-
-
196
196
824
25
25
15
65
110
380
490
706
706
-
-
218
218
924
1 102
1 077
28
28
17
74
124
427
551
793
793
-
-
242
242
1 035
1 211
32
32
19
82
139
480
619
891
891
-
-
252
252
1 143
1 236
-
-
-
-
145
434
145
145
869
145
145
88
378
634
2 194
2 829
4 075
4 075
-
-
1 251
1 251
5 326
6 559
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
882
182
172
80
84
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
74
3
1
753
32
6
869
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
530
-
530
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 400
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 400
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
1
0
165
7
1
178
3
3
6
4
-
-
1
-
-
1
28
4
38
2
1
3
7
1
3
11
8
13
5
26
8
-
-
-
-
-
8
3
3
6
8
-
-
1
1
-
3
58
-
71
2
2
3
-
0
5
5
-
-
-
-
4
-
-
-
-
-
4
-
-
-
4
1
5
-
1
2
5
61
-
78
2
2
4
7
0
5
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
5
-
-
2
3
32
-
43
2
2
4
-
0
4
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
3
34
-
48
2
2
5
-
0
4
5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
2
5
11
0
5
16
-
-
-
-
16
1
0
165
7
1
191
6
6
11
16
1
21
2
2
3
15
212
4
278
13
11
24
25
3
26
54
8
13
5
26
262
94
99
51
57
21
583
299
327
626
336
367
703
378
414
792
424
464
888
477
523
999
1 632
1 833
2 059
2 314
2 600
535
585
1 121
2 920
2 449
2 680
5 129
13 358
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 258
2 536
2 851
3 202
3 599
4 041
18 487
751
1 081
-
1 832
4 090
4 090
835
1 203
-
2 039
4 575
4 575
930
1 339
-
2 269
5 120
5 120
1 034
1 490
-
2 524
5 726
5 726
1 151
1 658
-
2 809
6 408
6 408
1 281
1 845
-
3 126
7 167
7 167
5 982
8 617
-
14 599
33 086
33 086
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
19
19
281
19
19
19
113
22
22
22
120
24
24
24
75
27
27
27
84
28
28
28
49
139
139
139
722
  Number
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
LS
  Lump Sum
  Number
  Number
  Number
  Number
  Number
  Number
  Number
  Number
LS
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
  Lump Sum
LS
LS
LS
20
40
20
10
10
20
-
-
5
-
-
10
10
10
40
-
-
5
5
-
20
-
-
20
5
20
-
5
5
30
-
-
-
-
5
20
-
-
5
20
-
-
-
-
-
40
-
-
-
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
80
70.000
1.000
20
20
80
10
80
10
10
10
100
100.000
100.000
1.428,571
1.428,571
70.000
40.000
80.000
80.000
80.000
100.000
50.000
1.000
571,429
1.142,857
1.142,857
1.142,857
1.428,571
714,286
2
-
-
-
-
-
2
1.500.000
21.428,571
20
4
1
857
36
7
925
14
14
29
20
-
-
6
-
-
7
143
21
197
9
7
16
34
7
17
59
43
43
25
110
1 335
40
20
-
-
-
-
-
40
14
14
29
40
-
-
6
6
-
14
286
-
351
9
8
17
-
1
23
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20
-
-
-
20
3
23
-
6
7
21
286
-
366
9
8
17
34
1
23
59
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
23
-
-
7
14
143
-
190
10
8
18
-
1
19
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
46
-
-
-
14
143
-
203
10
9
19
-
1
19
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11
9
20
43
1
19
63
-
-
-
-
461
462
228
242
83
80
4
1
857
36
7
985
29
29
57
80
6
91
11
11
14
71
1 000
21
1 307
58
49
107
111
14
119
244
43
43
25
22
4
2
918
38
8
991
15
15
31
22
-
-
6
-
-
8
154
23
212
9
8
17
37
8
18
63
46
46
27
110
2 811
118
1 432
45
24
-
-
-
-
-
45
16
16
32
45
-
-
6
6
-
16
323
-
397
10
9
19
-
2
26
27
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24
-
-
-
24
3
27
-
7
8
25
339
-
434
11
9
21
41
2
27
69
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
28
-
-
9
18
178
-
237
12
10
23
-
2
23
25
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
60
-
-
-
19
187
-
265
14
11
25
-
2
24
26
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
15
13
28
59
2
26
86
-
-
-
-
521
548
284
317
114
90
4
2
918
38
8
1 060
32
32
63
90
7
115
13
13
17
86
1 181
23
1 545
72
60
131
136
17
144
297
46
46
27
118
3 215
292
319
611
312
341
654
334
367
701
358
391
748
383
420
802
409
447
857
2 088
2 285
4 372
299
327
626
336
367
703
378
414
792
424
464
888
477
523
999
1 516
1 622
1 736
1 857
1 987
2 126
10 844
1 632
1 833
2 059
2 314
2 600
535
585
1 121
2 920
2 449
2 680
5 129
13 358
16
49
16
16
99
16
16
10
43
72
249
321
462
18
53
18
18
19
56
19
19
20
60
20
20
22
65
22
22
23
69
23
23
105
113
121
129
138
18
18
11
46
77
266
343
495
19
19
11
49
82
285
368
530
20
20
12
53
88
305
393
566
22
22
13
56
94
326
421
606
23
23
14
60
101
349
450
648
118
352
118
118
705
118
118
72
307
515
1 781
2 296
3 308
18
53
18
18
20
60
20
20
22
67
22
22
25
75
25
25
28
84
28
28
32
95
32
32
106
119
134
150
169
190
18
18
11
46
77
268
345
498
20
20
12
52
87
301
388
559
22
22
14
58
98
338
436
629
25
25
15
65
110
380
490
706
28
28
17
74
124
427
551
793
32
32
19
82
139
480
619
891
145
434
145
145
869
145
145
88
378
634
2 194
2 829
4 075
2 589
2 770
2 966
3 172
3 396
3 631
18 524
2 755
3 095
3 480
3 907
4 392
4 932
22 562
701
1 010
174
1 885
4 474
5 810
750
1 080
174
2 005
4 775
5 236
802
1 156
188
2 146
5 112
5 574
859
1 237
201
2 297
5 469
5 697
919
1 323
215
2 457
5 853
6 095
983
1 416
215
2 614
6 245
6 328
5 014
7 223
1 168
13 404
31 928
34 739
751
1 081
187
2 019
4 774
6 206
835
1 203
194
2 233
5 329
5 849
930
1 339
218
2 486
5 966
6 514
1 034
1 490
243
2 767
6 674
6 959
1 151
1 658
269
3 078
7 471
7 787
1 281
1 845
280
3 406
8 338
8 452
5 982
8 617
1 390
15 990
38 552
41 767
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Page 6
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Procurement Method
Procurement Arrangements
National
Consulting
Direct
(US$ '000)
  Competitive
Services:
Purchase/Negotiations/Single Unidentified Unidentified
Bidding
LCS
Tender
#1
#2
N.B.F.
Total
A. Enterprise Development Fund
B. Workshop
C. Training, Study and Campaign
D. Consultancy
E. Equipment and Material
F. Vehicles
G. Operational Costs
H. Salaries and Allowances
I. Credit Line
J. Beneficiary
Total
-
-
-
-
990
46
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 369
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
181
21 754
-
-
-
15 990
22 562
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
250 840
14 850
-
92 291
92 291
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
181
21 754
2 369
990
46
15 990
22 562
250 840
14 850
1 036
-
2 369
-
60 486
-
14 850
-
250 840
-
92 291
-
421 872
-
Page 7
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Procurement Accounts by Years
(US$ '000)
Totals Including Contingencies
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
1. Enterprise Development Fund
7 839
21 699
28 107
23 663
10 667
2. Workshop
3. Training, Study and Campaign
4. Consultancy
5. Equipment and Material
6. Vehicles
7. Operational Costs
8. Salaries and Allowances
9. Credit Line
10. Beneficiary
Total
5
2 388
291
990
46
2 019
2 755
22
3 558
676
-
-
2 233
3 095
23
5 019
1 051
-
-
2 486
3 480
42
4 623
172
-
-
2 767
3 907
44
3 997
179
-
-
3 078
4 392
316
46
92 291
181
2 168
21 754
-
-
-
3 406
4 932
2 369
990
46
15 990
22 562
15 960
30 815
39 049
61 634
50 301
53 082
250 840
1 484
3 027
4 398
3 991
1 950
-
14 850
33 777
65 125
83 613
100 799
74 608
63 951
421 872
Page 8
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers
Banks / Financial
Local
(US$ '000)
IFAD Loan
IFAD Grant
Funding Gap
MAVIM Kind
MAVIM Tax
Convergence
Institutions
Beneficiaries
Enterprise
Total
For.
(Excl.
Duties &
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Exch.
Taxes)
Taxes
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
92 291
148
-
33
17 838
3 916
1 942
812
33
426
178
13
15 851
139
22 562
250 840
14 850
-
-
-
417 168
4 705
1. Enterprise Development Fund
  19 913
21.6
2. Workshop
116
64.2
-
-
-
-
5 387
5.8
32
17.8
3. Training, Study and Campaign
  11 221
51.6
647
3.0
5 970
27.4
4. Consultancy
  1 299
54.9
-
-
643
27.1
5. Equipment and Material
6. Vehicles
59
33
72.0
6.0
753
76.0
-
-
66 991
72.6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
33
18.0
3 916
18.0
426
18.0
178
18.0
13
28.0
14 599
91.3
139
0.9
18 487
81.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
250 840
100.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
92 291
21.9
181
21 754
2 369
990
46
15 990
22 562
-
5.2
0.6
0.2
-
3.8
5.3
250 840
59.5
-
-
4 950
33.3
9 900
66.7
14 850
3.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7. Operational Costs
  1 251
7.8
8. Salaries and Allowances
  4 075
18.1
9. Credit Line
10. Beneficiary
-
-
-
-
Total PROJECT COSTS
  37 969
9.0
1 400
0.3
12 032
2.9
33 086
7.8
4 705
1.1
66 991
15.9
250 840
59.5
4 950
1.2
9 900
2.3
421 872
100.0
Page 9
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Components by Financiers
Banks / Financial
Local
(US$ '000)
IFAD Loan
IFAD Grant
Funding Gap
MAVIM Kind
MAVIM Tax
Convergence
Institutions
Beneficiaries
Enterprise
Total
For.
(Excl.
Duties &
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
Exch.
Taxes)
Taxes
-
-
-
-
116 140
2 706
259 983
1 276
41 045
722
417 168
4 705
1. Market Led Enterprise Promotion
  24 104
20.3
2. Enabling Support Services
7 306
2.8
-
-
-
-
10 194
8.6
1 837
0.7
-
-
-
-
1 276
0.5
2 706
2.3
66 991
56.4
-
-
4 950
4.2
9 900
8.3
118 846
28.2
-
-
-
-
250 840
96.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
261 259
61.9
41 767
9.9
3. Institutional Development and Project Management
6 559
15.7
1 400
3.4
-
-
33 086
79.2
722
1.7
Total PROJECT COSTS
  37 969
9.0
1 400
0.3
12 032
2.9
33 086
7.8
4 705
1.1
66 991
15.9
250 840
59.5
4 950
1.2
9 900
2.3
421 872
100.0
Page 10
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
%
% Total
Components Project Cost Summary
(INR '000)
(US$ '000)
Foreign
Base
Local
Foreign
Total
Local
Foreign
Total
Exchange
Costs
1. Market Led Enterprise Promotion
7 275 055
2. Enabling Support Services
  18 167 536
3. Institutional Development and Project Management
2 431 755
Total BASELINE COSTS
  27 874 346
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
448 501
1 208 221
Total PROJECT COSTS
  29 531 067
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 275 055
103 929
18 167 536
259 536
2 431 755
34 739
27 874 346
398 205
448 501
6 407
1 208 221
17 260
29 531 067
421 872
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
103 929
259 536
34 739
398 205
6 407
17 260
421 872
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
26
65
9
100
2
4
106
Page 11
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Institutional
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs
  Market Led
Enabling
Development
(US$ '000)
  Enterprise
Support
and Project
Physical
Contingencies
Promotion
Services
Management
Total
%
Amount
 I. Investment Costs
A. Enterprise Development Fund
B. Workshop
C. Training, Study and Campaign
D. Consultancy
E. Equipment and Material
F. Vehicles
G. Credit Line
H. Beneficiary
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operational Costs
B. Salary and Allowances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Inflation
Local
Foreign
Subtotal Inflation
Devaluation
Subtotal Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
76 639
-
11 112
1 329
-
-
-
14 850
2 824
143
4 987
743
-
-
250 840
-
-
-
79 463
143
1 843
17 942
-
925
43
-
-
2 071
925
43
250 840
14 850
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
-
-
3 973
7
897
104
46
2
-
-
103 929
259 536
2 811
366 277
1.4
5 029
-
-
-
103 929
4 454
10 463
-
10 463
-
10 463
-
-
-
13 404
18 524
31 928
13 404
18 524
31 928
259 536
34 739
398 205
435
1 518
6 407
1 288
5 510
17 260
-
-
-
1 288
5 510
17 260
-
-
-
1 288
5 510
17 260
118 846
261 259
41 767
421 872
2 706
-
1 276
-
722
-
4 705
-
Page 12
5.0
3.8
4.3
1.6
-
-
-
-
-
4.6
1.7
4.8
-
670
708
1 378
6 407
-
-
-
-
-
786
7 193
224
-
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Institutional
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including 
Contingencies
Market Led
Enabling
Development
(US$ '000)
Enterprise
Support
and Project
Promotion
Services
Management
Total
 I. Investment Costs
A. Enterprise Development Fund
B. Workshop
C. Training, Study and Campaign
D. Consultancy
E. Equipment and Material
F. Vehicles
G. Credit Line
H. Beneficiary
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operational Costs
B. Salary and Allowances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
88 962
-
13 526
1 508
-
-
-
14 850
118 846
-
-
-
3 329
181
6 048
861
-
-
250 840
-
-
-
2 179
-
990
46
-
-
261 259
3 215
-
-
-
15 990
22 562
38 552
41 767
722
-
92 291
181
21 754
2 369
990
46
250 840
14 850
383 321
15 990
22 562
38 552
421 872
4 705
-
118 846
261 259
2 706
-
1 276
-
Page 13
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Project Components by Year -- Base Costs
(US$ '000)
Base Cost
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
1. Market Led Enterprise Promotion
10 137
23 884
31 204
25 662
12 095
949
103 929
2. Enabling Support Services
16 753
32 753
41 202
63 263
51 659
53 905
259 536
3. Institutional Development and Project Management
5 810
5 236
5 574
5 697
6 095
6 328
34 739
Total BASELINE COSTS
32 700
61 873
77 979
94 622
69 849
61 182
398 205
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Inflation
Local
Foreign
Subtotal Inflation
Devaluation
732
1 369
1 692
1 412
840
362
6 407
345
1 883
3 942
4 764
3 920
2 406
17 260
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
345
1 883
3 942
4 764
3 920
2 406
17 260
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Subtotal Price Contingencies
345
1 883
3 942
4 764
3 920
2 406
17 260
Total PROJECT COSTS
33 777
65 125
83 613
100 799
74 608
63 951
421 872
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
693
786
1 118
895
786
427
4 705
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Page 14
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies 
(US$ '000)
Totals Including Contingencies
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
1. Market Led Enterprise Promotion
10 758
26 285
35 527
30 205
14 768
1 303
118 846
2. Enabling Support Services
16 813
32 991
41 572
63 635
52 053
54 196
261 259
3. Institutional Development and Project Management
6 206
5 849
6 514
6 959
7 787
8 452
41 767
Total PROJECT COSTS
33 777
65 125
83 613
100 799
74 608
63 951
421 872
Page 15
Annex3_ProjectCosts1.xlsx
Government of India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra
Project Components by Year -- Investment/ Recurrent 
Costs
(US$ '000)
Totals Including Contingencies
20/21
21/22
22/23
23/24
24/25
25/26
Total
A. Market Led Enterprise Promotion
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal
B. Enabling Support Services
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal
C. Institutional Development and Project Management
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal
Total PROJECT COSTS
Total Investment Costs
Total Recurrent Costs
10 758
26 285
35 527
30 205
14 768
1 303
118 846
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10 758
26 285
35 527
30 205
14 768
1 303
118 846
16 813
32 991
41 572
63 635
52 053
54 196
261 259
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
16 813
32 991
41 572
63 635
52 053
54 196
261 259
1 432
4 774
6 206
521
5 329
5 849
548
5 966
6 514
284
6 674
6 959
317
7 471
7 787
114
3 215
8 338
8 452
38 552
41 767
33 777
65 125
83 613
100 799
74 608
63 951
421 872
29 003
59 797
77 647
94 124
67 137
55 613
383 321
4 774
5 329
5 966
6 674
7 471
8 338
38 552
Page 16
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Introduction and Methodology 
1. the Design Mission of the Nav Tejaswini project carried out the economic and financial analysis (EFA) 
to  assess  the  financial  and  economic  viability  is  of  the  investments  proposed  to  be  made  under  the 
project  over  the  next  six  years.  The  main  objective  of  the  project  is  to  reach  1  million  women  by 
facilitating  and  supporting  them  to  take  up  micro-enterprises  and  increase  their  level  of  income  is. 
During the earlier phase of the project around 65,000 SHG’s were set up and nearly 1 million women 
were covered in the project. This phase of the project builds upon the work done earlier and taking that 
as a base, value chain approach would be adopted to unlock the value of the enterprises at the village 
level.  The  value  chain  approach  would  be  adopted  both  for  the  farm  sector  and  non-farm  sector 
enterprises so that the benefits flow to the women beneficiaries who form the main target group of this 
programme.  Collective  marketing  and  enterprise  development  will  be  done  through  the  Community 
Managed Resource Centres (CMRCs) that were established during the earlier phase. 
2.  Methodology  and  approach  of  the  EFA:  Based  on  the  observations  during  the  field  visit  and 
interactions  with  the  officials  of  MAVIM  and  CMRCs  and  the  district  level  officials  the  design  team 
members  were  able  to  formulate  a  view  on  the  interventions  to  be  undertaken  in  this  phase  of  the 
project. The design team interacted directly with the potential beneficiaries to assess, first hand, their 
situation and expectations and to ascertain their inclination towards taking up different micro-enterprise 
related activities. The data used in the  EFA  consisted  of  information on  crops,  market prices, capital 
expenditure and working capital required for different enterprises to be set up under the project were 
collected. 
3. The design Mission identified 18 different enterprises in the farm and non-farm sector both. These 
were  enterprises  related  to  crops,  livestock,  rural  non-farm  sector,  handicrafts,  basic  grading  and 
sorting, processing of spices and millets et cetera. Financial analysis was done for these enterprises to 
estimate  the  financial  viability,  demand  for  credit  besides  their  profitability.  Incremental  costs  and 
benefits as a result of implementation of the project were also estimated to assess its impact on the 
beneficiaries of the project. Enterprises that were similar in nature and targeted towards similar nature 
were  grouped  together  for  ease  in  implementing  the  value  chain  approach.  The  identified  micro-
enterprises related to dairy, goat rearing, poultry for eggs and meat, pulses, common spices, crops like 
soybeans, sorghum, foxtail millet and the like in the farm sector. In the off /non-farm sector enterprises 
like  woodworking,  handicrafts  small  non-gold  jewelry  making,  bamboo  work  and  ecotourism  were 
identified. These are presented in the Table 1 given below. 
4. It is essential in the EFA methodology that a clear link between the beneficiaries and the planned 
interventions is established to attribute the benefits accruing to the beneficiaries as a direct result of 
the project intervention.  The EFA identified these  benefits and established a direct connection to the 
proposed project intervention. This was done, as mentioned above, through extensive interactions of 
the Design Mission Team Members with not only the beneficiaries, field level functionaries, district level 
officials but also with the MAVIM officials at their headquarters in Mumbai. 
5. All the target beneficiaries are members of the SHGs which in turn are connected to the CMRCs. This 
enables  an  ensures  that  interventions  to  be  undertaken  in  the  project  will  be  targeted  in  a  focused 
manner towards the women beneficiaries. The CMRCs will also setting up common facility centres for 
different enterprises for the beneficiaries to get trained and participate in the activities generate income 
under the project intervention. 
Project cost, beneficiaries and assumptions in the EFA 
6. The project cost of implementing the Nav Tejaswini Project was ascertained from the estimated costs 
generated in the COSTAB. 
7. The Nav Tejaswini project will be implemented from 2020/21 through 2025/26. As mentioned above, 
a  total  of  1  million  women  beneficiaries  will  be  covered  under  this  project.  The  distribution  of  these 
35 
beneficiaries is presented in table number xxx given below. Besides covering the beneficiaries under the 
value  
Table 1a   Distribution of Beneficiaries- Farm sector 
SN 
Farm Sector 
Number of 
Sub Projects 
No of Women in 
each sub -project 
Total Number of 
Beneficiaries 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
SN 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
21 
Dairy 
Goat/poultry/poultry hatcheries/ 
Fisheries 
Vegetables 
Fruits 
Lentils/Pulses/Millets 
Nuts/etc 
Special rice/other field crops 
Second round expansion 
20 
131 
5 
68 
10 
33 
10 
34 
34 
345 
2000 
2000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
200 
500 
500 
40,000 
262,000 
5,000 
68,000 
10,000 
33,000 
2,000 
17,000 
17,000 
454,000 
Table 1b Distribution of Beneficiaries -Non-Farm Sector 
Off/Non-Farm Sector 
Number of 
Sub Projects 
No of Women in 
each sub -project 
Total Number of 
Beneficiaries 
Garments/textiles/looms/similar products 
Bamboo-products/allied products 
Wood products 
Handicrafts 
Jewelry (non-gold metal/stone/wood/lac etc) 
Food processing/spice processing/dal/millet 
processing 
Eco/ Agri Tourism etc. 
Restaurants/ Catering services 
Services / Electronic Platform 
Other non-farm products 
Second round expansion 
Stand alone Businesses 
TOTAL BENEFICIARIES 
34 
16 
20 
20 
20 
33 
10 
34 
17 
34 
34 
272 
200 
817 
510 
500 
500 
510 
500 
1000 
250 
100 
500 
500 
500 
1000 
17,340 
8,000 
10,000 
10,200 
10,000 
33,000 
2,500 
3,400 
8,500 
17,000 
17,000 
136,940 
200,000 
790,940 
36 
chain approach the programme will also facilitate and encourage 200,000 women beneficiaries to take 
up stand-alone enterprises that may not be covered directly under any of the value chains. These stand-
alone enterprises would be both from the farm and non-farm sector and the choice to carry out these 
will the made by the beneficiary herself. 
Table  xxx  also  presents  the  phasing  and  distribution  of  the  beneficiaries  by  value  chain  and  the 
enterprises they would take up. The phasing to cover all 1 million beneficiaries has been drawn for a 
small evenly spread out implementation plan giving enough time to propagate and ground the micro-
enterprises. 
The following assumptions were made while carrying out the economic and financial analysis (EFA). 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
The prices prevailing at the time of the mission have been considered as the current prices, 
current level of technology has been assumed to be the “without project” situation. The with 
project situation has been estimated using inputs from the beneficiaries, district and state 
level officials, and the Agri-Value Chain expert in the Design Mission team. The ‘with project 
scenarios are taken as the most probable scenarios that would or could occur over next few 
years during the implementation of the project. 
The prevailing wage rate of Rs. 250 per person/day has been taken as the base wage rate 
for most of the enterprises considered in the project. 
It is assumed that there is scope of improvement in current level of technology however, for 
the project efforts will be concentrated more on unlocking the value of the produce at the 
post-production  stage  by  collective  marketing,  creation  of  processing  and  grading  and 
sorting facilities and taking care of the logistics and transport. Collective action for enterprise 
development amongst these 1 million will be the key factor determining the success of the 
project. 
Being  a  nutrition  sensitive  project,  the  implementation  team  will  recognise  the 
predominantly agricultural profile of the project beneficiaries to focus their efforts strongly 
and effectively. 
During  the  interactions  at  the  field  level  the  design  team  members  observed  that  the 
potential  beneficiaries  were  willing  to  participate  in  the  various  sub-projects  t 
enthusiastically. 
Sub project models 
Financial models were developed to estimate the impact of different interventions to be implemented 
under the project using the value chain approach as well is for the stand-alone businesses. Except for 
the farm-based interventions it was assumed that the interventions will be altogether new hence, the 
information gathered during the field visits and interactions was used to develop these models for both 
without project and with project situations. 
1.  Dairy  VC  Model:  In  the  dairy  value  chain  model,  a  short  value  chain  was  considered  that  
consisted of the dairy farmer, milk collection centre and the bulk milk cooler. To operationalise 
this model the beneficiaries would be encouraged to set up a mini dairy of at least two cows and 
pour the milk at the milk collection centre which in turn would transport the milk to the bulk 
milk cooler. By doing this dairy farmer would be assured of the right price for the milk produced 
and regular payments. A total of 40,000 farmers/beneficiaries would be covered under this value 
chain. 
2.  Goat/poultry value chain model: In this model it was assumed that the SHG members would be 
taking up goat rearing or poultry for eggs or meat. By being associated with the CMRCs would 
ensure  better  purchase  prices  to  them  for  the  animals/birds,  extension  services  provided 
through the pashu sakhis, better prices for the output and regular payments for their outputs. 
37 
3.  Vegetable value chain: In this value chain the beneficiary farmers would be encouraged to take 
up  vegetable  cultivation and  would  be able  to avail  the benefits of being associated with the 
SHGs/CMRCs. The CMRCs would be facilitating collection of vegetables and marketing to ensure 
that the beneficiaries are unable to get the prices for their produce. Based on the discussion at 
the field level, it was estimated that, on an average, the beneficiaries would be able to get at 
least Rs. 1.50/kg of produce than if they would sell it individually without being associated with 
the CMRCs/value. 
4.  Fruits value chain model: the food value chain model: To unlock the value for the fruit growers, 
is a short value chain set up was assumed. In this value chain, fruit grading and sorting facilities 
would be set up and the farmers will be able to bring their produce to get it created and sorted 
to realise better prices and markets. 
5.  Special rice or other field crops: In some areas of the state, area specific local varieties of rice 
that are either aromatic or black in colour are grown by very small number of farmers. In this 
project,  34  subprojects  of  500  farmers  each  growing  these  specialised  crops  would  be 
implemented under this value chain.  The  CMRCs would be facilitating the farmers to procure 
seed and help in their produce also. They would also be facilitating extension services so that 
the farmers are able to grow/produce good quality rice. 
6.  Second round of expansion: Under the second round of expansion, those beneficiaries who have 
already one round of activities in the last round would be covered. These beneficiaries would be 
taking up activities related to vegetable growing, goat keeping or dairy farming. 
7.  Garments/textiles/looms model: in this model, a common facility centre would be established 
where the participating beneficiaries would be trained in tailoring and the related skills. These 
trained  women  beneficiaries  would  then  be  working  at  the  CFC  to  produce  garments  and  or 
other  cloth/textile  items.  During  the  discussion  in  the  field,  it  emerged  that  with  the  ban  on 
plastic  bags  in  place,  the  demand  for  cloth  bags  had  increased  substantially  and  there  is  a  
readily available market for such items. In this model, the analysis is done keeping in mind the 
manufacturing of cloth bags as the primary item. However, as the women are trained in tailoring 
and other skills they can also manufacture other garments/clothes if need be. 
8.  Bamboo products: Some  districts of the state  have  ample quantities of bamboo  available  for 
being exploited commercially. The products made out of bamboo -like mementos, diary covers 
showpieces etc are gaining demand. These items are also considered as good gifts by the buyers. 
This setup would consist of a common facility centre fully equipped with the required machinery 
and tools. It will be managed by the CMRC. The gain to the participating beneficiaries in these 
NFS  models is  by  way  of  wages  which  they  would  get  and  also  a  percentage  of  the  revenue 
earned by the CFC in marketing the products. 
9.  Wood  products:  Raw  wood  is  readily  available  in  the  eastern  districts  of  Maharashtra. 
Showpieces and artefacts are manufactured out of the raw wood by the trained hands. In this 
sub project proposed, a common facility centre would be established to train women and then 
use their skills to manufacture wood products. Currently, the artifacts/showpieces do not fetch 
high prices due to inferior quality of the product, The new setups would focus on training the 
women beneficiaries in getting better quality output.. 
10. Handicrafts:  Traditional  handicraft  work,  Kantha  work  is  very  popular  throughout  the  state. 
traditional motifs are stitched on silk or handloom cloth. These products are in demand because 
of  the  novelty  and  uniqueness.  The  participating  beneficiaries  in  this  activiy  model  would  be 
trained and their skills used for manufacturing handicraft items. Women will be earning in terms 
of wages as well as a small incentive (5-10%) from the revenue of the CFC. 
38 
11. Jewelry  making:  the  CFC  to  be  set  up  for  this  activity  would  train  women  beneficiaries  and 
manufacture of small (non-gold) jewelry items. Trained beneficiaries would be working at the 
CFC and earning on a per piece basis besides a percentage of revenue earned by the CFC. The 
role of the CFC is to provide the facilities, input material, machines et cetera and marketing of 
the finished goods. 
12. Food processing model: in this particular model a combination of paddy processing and spice 
(mainly  turmeric)  processing  was  considered  the  farmers  would  be  using  these  processing 
facilities to add value to their produce before selling it further. 
13. Eco-/Agri  tourism:  Keeping  up  with  the  times,  there  is  scope  for  eco-/Agri  tourism  where 
participating women beneficiaries can take this up after proper training. The CMRCs would be 
taking  the  lead  in  identifying  and  getting  the  women  beneficiaries  trained  to  handle  this 
operation. This is a new model that would be experimented and would be refined and expanded 
further. 
14. Rural catering/rural restaurants: During the field visit, the design Mission members found that 
there was a demand for rural catering/rural restaurants in the hinterland too. Women expressed 
their willingness to set up such small units to augment their income. 
15. Other non-farm products: in this category to non-farm activities like paddy processing and spice 
processing (also considered in another sub project above were grouped under this head to have 
a focused approach and implementation. 
16. Second  round  of  expansion  NFS:  In  the  second  round  of  expansion,  activities  of  handicrafts, 
jewelry making and woodworking were combined together to provide an opportunity to those 
who have already participated in some livelihoods/income generating activity earlier. The activity 
is considered under this head would help women in getting training and then having the choice 
to work at the CFC or set up their own independent small unit. 
17. Stand Alone Businesses: Under this activity head, the individual beneficiaries would be taking 
up  activities  of  their  choice,  on  their  own  (not  part of  any  value  chain/efforts  undertaken  by 
CMRCs). They would not be able to benefit from the benefits of a value chain. These would be 
200 sub-projects of 100o members each – covering an overall number of 200,000 beneficiaries 
Financial Analysis and Demand for Credit 
18.  Partial budgets were prepared for the enterprise/sub project activities for the financial analysis. (Cost 
benefit analysis (CBA) was done for all the subproject models and net present values, BC ratio were 
estimated to examine the financial viability of the enterprise. The NPD’s were calculated at the project 
level for all the subprojects. 
19.  All the activities being taken up in the project were financially viable and generated sufficient cash flows 
to support credit uptake. Potential credit demand generated from crop enterprises is presented in Table 
2  below. The credit demand  is estimated at  90% of  the production costs. These  are  short-term crop 
loans. 
Refer Annex B_PDR_EFA_Economic file on xdesk 
Refer Annex C_PDR_EFA_Financial file on xdesk 
39 
Table 2: Potential annual credit demand from crop enterprises 
SN 
Crop 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Vegetables 
Soybeans 
Jowar 
Bajra 
Moog 
Arhar 
Number of 
Beneficiaries 
Bank loan 
per unit 
(Rs) 
Total 
demand (Rs 
in million) 
141400 
23250 
6600 
4950 
21600 
6600 
32906 
11399 
12457 
13856 
13239 
10460 
Total 
4653 
265 
82 
69 
286 
69 
5424 
20.  Similarly, credit demand for the livestock activities was estimated separately at 80% of the investment 
costs. The details are presented in Table 3 given below: 
Table 3: Credit Demand generated by livestock activities 
SN 
Activity 
1  Dairy 
2  Goat Keeping 
3 
Poultry-eggs 
Poultry- Meat 
4 
Number of 
Beneficiaries 
Bank loan per 
unit (Rs) 
Total demand 
(million Rs) 
63400 
153400 
106800 
92000 
Total  
171200 
43220 
100000 
364200 
10854 
6630 
10680 
33506 
61670 
21.  Dairy farming and poultry meat activities generate the bulk of the demand as the per unit bank loan is 
higher as compared to that of goat keeping activity. 
22.  Potential credit demand generated by the non-farm/farm activities was also estimated at 80% of the 
project investment cost the details are presented in the Table 4 below: 
Table 4 
Potential Bank loan demand 
SN 
Off/Non-Farm Sector 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Garments/textiles/looms/similar products 
Bamboo-products/allied products 
Wood products 
Handicrafts 
Jewelry (non-gold metal/stone/wood/lac etc) 
Food processing/spice processing/dal/millet processing 
Millet 
  Paddy 
  Spice 
Eco/ Agri Tourism etc. 
Restaurants/ Catering services 
40 
No of 
Units 
Bank 
loan per 
unit (Rs 
000) 
Totl Bank 
Loan (million 
Rs) 
578 
80 
134 
680 
536 
33 
134 
236 
10 
340 
1324 
3120 
4480 
1280 
2336 
13637 
1104 
920 
1880 
136.8 
 Total 
765 
250 
600 
870 
1252 
450 
148 
217 
19 
47 
4618 
23.  The credit demand generated by the crop enterprises will be on an annual basis while that generated by 
the off/non-farm enterprises will be a one-time credit demand.  
24.  Additional employment generated by crop enterprises: as a result of implementation of the Nav Tejaswini 
project,  additional  employment  374,000-man  days  would  be  generated  annually.  This  is  substantial 
considering that incremental labour requirement was minimal at the activity level. The benefits which 
accrue to the beneficiaries were a result of being part of the value chain and realising better prices for 
their produce has also production and losses substantially at the farm level due to the extension activities 
carried out by the CMRCs. 
25.  It would be pertinent to examine the NPV is generated for different subprojects. As mentioned earlier 
the NPVs were  calculated  at a discount  rate of  12%  which is the normal  lending rate  prevalent. The 
details of the NPVs are given in Table 5 below: 
Table 5  NPV of the Sub projects (@12% DR for 20 year period) 
SN 
Sub Project 
Dairy 
Goat/poultry/poultry hatcheries/ 
Vegetables 
Fruits GS 
Lentils/Pulses/Millets 
Special rice/other field crops 
Second round expansion 
Garments/textiles/looms/similar products 
Bamboo-products/allied products 
Wood products 
Handicrafts 
Jewelry (non-gold metal/stone/wood/lac etc) 
Food processing/spice processing/dal/millet processing 
Eco/ Agri Tourism etc. 
Restaurants/ Catering services 
Other non-farm products 
Second round expansion 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
17 
18 
Rs in million 
NPV at 10% 
13727 
22965 
1116 
560 
125 
53 
2170 
522 
407 
833 
585 
1548 
1553 
107 
91 
379 
1473 
26.  The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) for the project as a whole world out to 32% with a BC ratio 
of 2.77 calculated at the discount rate 7.5%. The details are presented in Excel sheets. 
Economic Analysis 
27.  Economic  values  for  the  economic  analysis  was  generated  by  adjusting  the  figures  generated  in  the 
financial analysis that was carried out the financial analysis. Figures were adjusted conversion factors 
and the following assumptions: 
a)  The prices prevailing during the design Mission in August/September 2 019 was taken 
for valuing the inputs and outputs. 
b)  Analysis  was  carried  out  for  a  20  year,  that  includes  a  six-year  period  of  project 
implementation 
c)  a  standard  conversion  factor  of  0.9  was  used  for  adjusting  the  labour  wages  and  a 
conversion  factor  of  1.1  was  used  for  converting  fertiliser  prices  to  their  economic 
values. 
d)  Lead  directly  attributable  benefits  from  the  crop  enterprises  as  well  is  of  farm 
enterprises were included. 
41 
e)  For economic analysis and discount rate of 7.5% was taken. This is the long-term bond 
rate in India. 
28. 
29. 
The major gain to the participating beneficiary for the crop enterprises was mainly in terms of increased 
income that resulted from their being associated with the project as a value chain participant and by 
way of reduction in losses by taking up post harvest operations which will generally better handling of 
the produce that they were doing earlier. 
All  the  benefits  that  flowed  from  taking  up  activities  like  dairy  farming  and  poultry  have  not  been 
ascertained as they have wider implications. These benefits include enhanced nutrition availability in 
terms of milk eggs and meat. 
30. 
The results of the cost benefit analysis showed that the overall project EIRR worked out to 35% with a 
BC ratio of 2.93 discounted at 7.5%. The NPV for the 20-year period stood at INR 84,500 million. 
Sensitivity Analysis 
31.  Sensitivity analysis was carried out to analyse the robustness of the project and to know whether the 
project  is  economically  viable  to  withstand  risks  of  increasing  cost  of  production  of  enterprise  and 
decreasing benefits to the beneficiaries. Various scenarios were created to analyse the behaviour of the 
figures  generated  in  the  economic  analysis.  Various  scenarios  and  related  numbers  analysed  in  the 
sensitivity analysis are presented in the table given below: 
ECONOMIC VALUES 
Sensitivity Analyses 
Base Case 
All cost increase by 10% 
All cost increase by 20% 
All benefits decrease by 10% 
All benefits decrease by 20% 
Cost increase by 10% and benefits decrease by 10% 
1-year delay in getting benefits 
Economic DR =  7.5% 
B/C 
Ratio 
NPV (USD 
mn) 
2.93 
2.66 
2.44 
2.63 
2.34 
2.39 
0.38 
1,207  
1,144  
1,082  
1,024  
840  
961  
1,024  
NPV (Rs 
Mn) 
84,500  
80,115  
75,730  
71,665  
58,830  
67,280  
71,706  
EIRR 
35% 
31% 
28% 
31% 
27% 
28% 
27% 
32.  An increase in cost by 10% decreases the EIRR to 31%. However, the maximum decrease in the EIRR 
happens in the scenario where all benefits decrease by 20% and there is he one-year delay in getting 
the benefits. 
The  EIRR  decreases  to  28%  in  the  scenario  of  10%  increase  in  cost  and  10%  decrease  in  benefits 
simultaneously  which  a  rather  extreme  condition.  The  NPV  decreases  to  INR67,280  million  in  this 
scenario. 
42 
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
SECAP Review Note on India: 
Nav  Tejaswini  Maharashtra  Rural  Women 
Enterprise Development Project (NT) 
I. Major landscape characteristics and Issues (Social, natural resources, 
and climate) of the State of Maharashtra 
Introduction 
A. 
1.  The overall goal of the Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women Enterprise Development Project 
is to enable one million poor rural households to overcome poverty. The Project objective is to 
improve  capacity  of  rural  women  to  diversify  into  sustainable  enterprises  or  engage  in 
remunerative employment and enhance their access to markets. The project will benefit 10 lakh 
(1  million)  rural  women,  the  majority  of  whom  are  members  of  established  self-help  groups 
federated into community managed resources centres (CMRCs). The CMRCs are present in all 34 
rural districts of Maharashtra and were established under the now closed Tejaswini Maharashtra 
Rural  Women  Empowerment  Programme  (2007-2018).  The  SECAP  Review  Note  comprises  an 
analysis of the main social, environment and in-depth climate issues within the project area, with 
a  view  to  providing  suitable  adaptation  and  mitigation  measures  to  build  sustainability  and 
resilience into the project interventions both within the project lifetime and thereafter.   
B.  Development Profile 
Nav Tejaswini Districts: Nav Tejaswini project implementation is proposed to be taken up in 34 rural districts of 
Maharashtra  state.  These  include,  Ahmadnagar,  Akola,  Amravati,  Aurangabad,  Bhandara,  Beed,  Buldhana, 
Chandrapur,  Dhule,  Gadchiroli,  Gondiya,  Hingoli,  Jalgaon,  Jalna,  Kolhapur,  Latur,  Nagpur,  Nanded,  Nandurbar, 
Nashik,  Osmanabad,  Palghar,  Parbhani,  Pune,  Raigad,  Ratnagiri,  Sangli,  Satara,  Sindhudurg,  Solapur,  Thane, 
Wardha, Washim and Yavatmal.  
2.  Figure 1 shows the Nav Tejaswini districts of Maharashtra and incidence of poverty estimated on 
basis of percentage households below the poverty line (BPL households). 
1 
Figure 1: Nav Tejaswini Districts of Maharashtra 
3.  Overall poverty situation: Maharashtra state is the second in population and third in geographic 
area in India. According to the Population Census 2011 the state has a geographical area of about 
3.08 lakh sq. km. Total population for Maharashtra State is 112,374,333 with 58,243,056 males 
and  54,131,277  females.  The  rural  population  is  at  61,556,000  (55%)  compared  to  the  urban 
population at 50,818,000 (45%). The total population for Scheduled Castes is at 13,276,000 and 
Scheduled Tribes is 10,510,000. Maharashtra is expected to be the second most urbanized State 
of India after Tamil Nadu with a projected urbanization rate of 62% in 2050. The rural population 
is  expected  to  be  stabilized  by  the  end of  the  projection  period  while  the  urban  population  is 
estimated to soar up owing to the rapid pace of urbanization and industrial development that is 
taking place in the State already. 
4. 
In Maharashtra, the poverty head-count ratio is 17.4%, of which 4.5 million have access to BPL 
cards and have assured access to the public distribution system. The National Food Security Act 
2013  (NFSA)  provides  food  and  nutritional  security  through  assured  availability  of  adequate 
quantity of quality food at affordable prices. In Maharashtra NFSA is being implemented since 
2014, and about 62.3% of the state's population is entitled to food grains at subsidised rates. Per 
the  Food  Security  Outcome  Index  (FSOI)  status  of  rural  Maharashtra,  all  districts  are  to  some 
2 
extent food insecure and 8 districts are severely food insecure (IHD, 2010). Despite improvement 
poverty reduction and overall nutrition, micronutrient deficiency remains a challenge in India and 
in Maharashtra in particular1.  
5. 
In Maharashtra as is the case in the rest of India, identification of the poor is done by the State 
Governments based on information from Below Poverty Line (BPL) censuses - the latest of which 
is the Socio-Economic Caste Census 2011 (SECC 2011). Allocation of expenditures on anti-poverty 
programs  is  sometimes  also  done  using  instruments  other  than  the  poverty  ratio.  Universal 
programs such as those under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) and Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) are available to all (NITI Aayog; 2016). 
6.  Multi-Dimensional  Poverty  Index  (MPI)  is  a  measure  that  takes  into  account  the  incidence  of 
poverty and the extent of deprivation. Going beyond just monetary measures, the MPI takes into 
account several factors (broadly three dimensions of poverty including health, living conditions 
and  education  with  total  10  indicators-  years  of  schooling,  school  attendance,  child  mortality, 
nutrition,  cooking  fuel,    sanitation,  drinking  water,  electricity  and  housing  assets).  India’s  MPI 
stood at 0.121 in 2016, half of the figure of 2006. The MPI for the state of the Maharashtra for 
2015-16 is 0.069, incidence of poverty is 16.8% and intensity of poverty is 41.3%. This also marks 
a  reduction  in  poverty  by  -0.113  from  2005-06  MPI  data.  Only  Nandurbar  district  in  northern 
Maharashtra has poverty rates bordering 60%. 
7.  Gender: India ranked 127 out of 160 countries on the gender inequality index (GII=0.524 in 2017). 
Despite considerable progress at the policy and legislative levels, women remain significantly less 
empowered politically, economically and socially than men. In political representation, women 
hold only 11.6% of parliamentary seats, and only 39% of adult women have reached at least a 
secondary  level  of  education  as  compared  to  64%  males.    Female  participation  in  the  labour 
market is 27.2% compared to 78.8% for men (UNDP, 2018). In terms of voice and representation, 
the State Government of Maharashtra has stepped up reservation for women in local bodies to 
50%, compared to 30% provision at the national level.  
8.  The National Policy for women (2016) acknowledges that while some progress has been made on 
women's empowerment, there are persistent socio-economic problems that continue to hinder 
gender  equality  and  holistic  empowerment  of  women.  Challenges  include:  feminization  of 
agriculture, women entitlement to land and assets ownership, malnutrition and anaemia, among 
others. In terms of climate change, the National Policy for Women 2016, notes that women have 
been side-lined in debates about management of climate change and environmental resources - 
yet climate change has significant gendered impacts. In order to overcome these challenges, the 
GoI is making concerted efforts to bridge the gender gap, and is giving priority to women's social 
and economic empowerment. This is reflected in the strong support to livelihood improvement 
programmes and promotion of self- help groups, which have created opportunities for women to 
access  finance,  extension  services  for  crops  and  livestock  husbandry,  and  workload  reducing 
incomes  and  women's  decision-making  power. 
equipment,  thus 
improving  household 
1 Gongmei and Toteja, 2018, Micronutrient status of Indian population, Indian Journal of Medical Research 
3 
Maharashtra  is  among  the  pioneer  states  in the  country  that  nurtured  and  scaled  up  the  SHG 
movement nearly 3 decades ago.    
9. 
In Maharashtra, out of 16.8 million women in workforce, 69% are highly dependent on agriculture. 
Maharashtra ranks fifth in the country with regard to women-owned establishments (8.25% of 
total). While 83% of women owned enterprises are self-financed, access to finance continues to 
be a constraint for women entrepreneurs besides issues of technical and business development 
support.  The  political  participation  of  women  is  having  a  positive  impact  on  women’s 
empowerment. With one-third of village government head positions reserved to women, women 
residing in areas with a female village government head show significant higher levels of political 
participation and empowerment with improved outcomes for women from low socio-economic 
strata.  However,  in  rural  India,  women’s  economic  opportunities  remain  restricted  by  social, 
cultural, and financial barriers. Most notably inheritance laws continue to marginalize women in 
the household and the larger community. Rural women, particularly of in scheduled castes and 
tribes, have the lowest literacy rates, and therefore do not have the capacity to negotiate pay or 
contracts and most often engage in the unorganized sector, self-employment, or in small scale 
industry. A small study on empowerment indicators, among rural women of reproductive age in 
Maharashtra, concluded that 76.6% women were married below age of 21; 38.3% women were 
always involved in household decision making; regarding freedom of movement, 38.3% women 
have complete freedom whereas 41.7% women have some control over economic resources, but 
only  30%  women  have  personal  savings.  60%  women  have  favourable  attitude  towards  girls’ 
education, and only 33.3% women defy domestic violence. 
10. Maharashtra State has registered some improvement in some key social indicators. Percentage of 
women who are literate has increased from 70.3% in 2006 to 80.3% in 2016. In comparison, the 
literacy rate for men is higher at 92.8%. In terms of Gender Based Violence, the percentage of 
ever-married women who have ever experienced spousal violence is 21.4% (in 2016). However, 
this  is  an  improvement  from  30.7%  in  2006  (ibid).  Crime  against  women  (reported  cases)  in 
Maharashtra  in  2013  saw  an  increase  of  46.79%  as  compared  to  2012.  As  part  of  addressing 
gender-related issues under the just completed Tejaswini project, MAVIM identified and trained 
Kayda Saathis (para-legal workers) for each CMRCs and a village level gender focal point. MAVIM 
also  established  MAVIM  Mitra  Mandal  (Friends  of  MAVIM)  comprising  the  spouses  of  SHG 
members after realizing the need to engage with men to bring about qualitative changes in gender 
relations and to address issues related to violence against women and girl children. Nav Tejaswini 
will build on the success of such activities to continue addressing gender and social related issues, 
principally through convergence with relevant Government schemes. 
11. In  terms  of  the  gender  division  of  labour,  MAVIM's  Scoping  Study  On  &  Off  farm  livelihood 
activities in Maharashtra (2019) observed that 80% of the women play a significant role in manual 
farm  activities  such  as  stubble  pricking,  sowing,  weeding,  fertilizer  application  and  harvesting. 
Tasks which required usage of machinery such as plough machine, tractor, harvester were found 
to be done by men. The remaining 20% of the women farmers are engaged in both pre and post-
harvest  on  farm  activities.  These  post-harvest  on  farm  activities  primarily  include  packaging, 
storing, transportation and selling of produce in the nearest local market. The scoping study found 
that  women  from  tribal  areas  of  Nashik  region  had  lesser  participation  in  market-oriented 
4 
responsibilities, primarily due to: i) lack of access to market outside their village/ taluka markets; 
ii)  lack  of  mobility  and  societal  norms  towards  women  participation  in  market-oriented 
responsibilities; and iii) lack of exposure to latest market trends and available possibilities to scale 
up their existing activities. 
12. Nav Tejaswini aims to transform gender relations focusing not only on economic empowerment, 
but also on activities that address root causes of gender inequalities and hinder achievement of 
gender  equality  and  women's  empowerment.  The  project  recognizes  that  being  a  women-led 
enterprise  project  does  not  automatically  lead  to  gender  justice  and  equality.  The  project  will 
therefore consolidate the gains and expand the successes of the previous Tejaswini Maharashtra 
programme in: i) drudgery reduction through machinery and women friendly technologies, ii) legal 
rights training, iii) women's participation in public spaces; iv) promoting joint titling of land and 
property;  v)  gender  sensitization,  including specific men  sensitization  workshops.  The  project's 
contribution  to  gender  equality  and  women's  empowerment  will  be  tracked  and  measured 
through  Project-level  Women's  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  (Pro-WEAI).  The  project 
adheres to the IFAD's targeting policy and the new targeting guidelines and is aligned with the 
Mainstreaming gender transformative approaches at IFAD Action Plan 2019-2025. 
13. Youth:  The National Youth Policy (2014) defines youth as those in the age group of 15-29 years 
who comprise 27.5% of the population. About 65% of the population is under 35 years of age. At 
present, about 34% of India's Gross National Income (GNI) is contributed by the youth, aged 15-
29 years. The policy recognizes the need to increase youths labour force participation and their 
productivity in order to tap into their huge potential to contribute to national development. Early 
marriages remain a key issue for young women as 26.8% of women aged 20-24 years were married 
before 18 years (which is the age of consent in India). Together with the National Youth Policy, 
the  National  Policy  for  Skill  Development  and  Entrepreneurship  (2015)  provides  an  umbrella 
framework for youth development and links skills with demand centres. The youth unemployment 
rate  in  India  in 2018  was estimated at 0.42%. The  Government of Maharashtra  is  undertaking 
various  initiatives  to  provide  the  requisite  infrastructure  for  training  the  youth  and  promoting 
access to finance through initiatives such as MUDRA and skills India. There is an increasing trend 
in the migration of young men and women to the cities and oftentimes, they realise their skills do 
not fit the job market requirements. In this regard, the GoM has undertaken a substantive sector 
analysis  to  identify  sectors  lacking  sufficient  skilled  employees  and  focusing  on  building  skills 
around market needs. 
14. Indigenous peoples and marginalized groups: Although households from scheduled tribes and 
scheduled castes in India have experienced upward mobility, poverty among these groups in rural 
areas  is  higher  than  the  average.  Nav  Tejaswini  will  follow  the  previous  project's    targeting 
mechanism which was  well focused and sharp and all poor households in the operational villages 
were  included  in  self-help  groups  using  a  two-fold  strategy:    i)  Below  Poverty  Line  (BPL)  card 
holders identified by the GOM; and by ii) identifying poorest households through Participatory 
Rural  Appraisal  (PRA)  and  wealth  ranking.  The  current  Self-Help  Group  member  composition 
(which MAVIM will continue working with under Nav Tejaswini) indicates that about 32.5% are 
from Scheduled Caste (SC), 13% from Scheduled Tribe (ST), 8% from Nomadic Tribe (NT), 3% from 
minority, 30% from other marginal groups and the remaining 14.5% are from upper castes. The 
5 
social composition of Governing bodies of CMRCs indicates increased participation of SC (34%), ST 
(16%) and NT (7%) in leadership positions. As part of pre-project planning activities, MAVIM will 
collect  data  on  current  poverty  status  of  all  members  as  per  the  Socioeconomic  Caste  Census 
categorisation before the project commences. 
15. Nutrition:  India  has made  rapid  strides  in  lowering  the  incidence  of  under  nutrition.  Owing  to 
concerted  efforts  at  all  levels,  stunting  in  children  below  five  years  declined  from  48  to  38% 
between 2006 and 2016. However, India continues to have one of the world's highest child under-
nutrition  rates  which  remain  the  prime  risk  factor  in  over 40%  of  under-five  child  deaths  (Niti 
Aayog 2018). According to National Family Health Survey-4 (NFHS-4), 2015-16, over one-third of 
all under-five children are stunted (low height-for-age), every fifth child is wasted (low weight-for-
height), and more than 50% of the children are anaemic. The health survey shows the following 
nutrition related indicators: Stunting - 38.4; Underweight - 35.7; Children (6-59 months) who are 
anaemic - 58.4%; All women (15-49 years) who are anaemic 53%. At the state level, about 35% of 
children under five in the Maharashtra exhibit stunted linear growth, which is only slightly lower 
than the Indian average of about 39% prevalence of stunting. The prevalence of wasting among 
children under five in the state is 26% (UNICEF, 2016).  
16. A large portion of the population is still affected by micronutrient deficiency. Anaemia, the most 
common form of micronutrient deficiency affects almost 50 to 60 per cent preschool children and 
women, while vitamin A deficiency and iodine-deficiency disorders (IDD) have improved over the 
years 2 .  In  Maharashtra,  the  country’s  second  most  populous  state,  about 50  per  cent  of 
women are chronically energy-deficient and over 75 per cent of non-pregnant and non-lactating 
women are anaemic3. Eating a variety of fruits and vegetables is associated with reduced risk of 
micronutrient  deficiencies  and  non-communicable  diseases.  A  recent  study  by  Aguayo,  Nair, 
Badgaiyan and Krishna has further helped identify factors most significantly associated with child 
stunting in Maharashtra. Using a representative sample of over 2,500 children (0-23 months old), 
Aguayo and colleagues conducted a multivariate regression analysis to determine predictors of 
stunting and poor linear growth. The researchers found that children’s birthweight and feeding 
practices were clear predictors of undernutrition. However, the team also noted that women’s 
nutrition and status and broader factors – such as household sanitation and poverty – were among 
the most significant factors that predicted stunting and poor linear growth. 
17. A recent study4 in Food and Nutrition Bulletin analysed data from nine focus group discussions and 
12 one-on-one interviews with 18- to 40-year-old women from eight villages surrounding eastern 
Maharashtra’s Wardha district — a region highly dependent on agriculture for food and income. 
It  was  observed  that  despite  women’s  knowledge  of  the  nutritional  benefits  of  fruits  and 
vegetables, there were seven key themes limiting their ability to obtain these foods for themselves 
and their children — personal factors, household dynamics, social and cultural norms, workload, 
time pressures, environmental factors and cost. In particular, household dynamics, and social and 
2 Gongmei and Toteja, 2018, Micronutrient status of Indian population, Indian Journal of Medical Research 
3  A.  V.  Vijaya  BhaskarD.  J.  NithyaS.  RajuR.  V.  Bhavani,  2017,  Establishing  integrated  agriculture-nutrition 
programmes to diversify household food and diets in rural India 
4 Kehoe,S et al., 2019, Barriers and Facilitators to Fruit and Vegetable Consumption Among Rural Indian Women 
of Reproductive Age, Food and Nutrition Bulletin 
6 
cultural norms were major factors. One married woman interviewed in the study said, “Women 
do not get to eat proper meals the way they are supposed to. Men get a proper meal”. Some 
women said they were so tired at the end of the day that they did not feel like eating a big meal 
and simply wanted to eat a small amount of bread or rice. And many of them alluded to marital 
norms — preventing distribution of time-consuming household chores to their husbands. 
18. At the same time, women also talked about being at the mercy of their husbands’ food choices at 
the market. Caste too played a role. For women who belonged to some select castes, it wasn’t 
considered acceptable to go to the market. And when fruits and vegetables were available, many 
women preferred that their children eat them rather than themselves. Most women also stated 
that the relatively high cost of fresh produce, which includes transportation and inflation, was a 
major determinant of how much they consumed. But even when wild green leafy vegetables were 
freely  available,  some  women  remarked  that  these  were  considered  “dirty”  or  “poor  people’s 
food” by members of their communities. Therefore, increasing rural women’s fruit and vegetable 
consumption should be a top priority for tackling micronutrient deficiencies. 
19. The GOI's decision to launch a National Nutrition Mission reflects the Government's urgency to 
deal with the situation. Maharashtra is often cited as a success story for creating a State Nutrition 
Mission and managing to reduce stunting by 15% points during 2006-12 . However, the rise in 
incidence of wasting reflects interruptions in access to food and increased risk of death. Wasting 
and severe wasting in Maharashtra have also increased from 16.5% and 5.2% in 2005-06 to 25.6% 
and 9.4% in 2015-16 respectively. Adult women and men in the rural areas also suffer from low 
BMI (30%  women  and 23% men). Furthermore, almost 50% of adult women in rural areas are 
reported to being anaemic, as against 20% of men. While there has been improvement on many 
indicators the situation of anaemia has remained unchanged in the past decade which calls for 
enhanced efforts. 
20. The project's investments will be nutrition-sensitive. The project will promote commodities/crops 
and its related products that have high nutritional value, especially micronutrients. Furthermore, 
recognizing that improved incomes do not automatically lead to better nutrition outcomes, the 
project  will  pursue  behavioural  change,  awareness/education  campaigns  primarily  through 
convergence  programmes  in  partnership  with  the  Department  of  Women  and  Child  and  the 
National  Rural  Health  Mission,  on  the  importance of  consumption  of  fruits  and  vegetables  for 
women and children and good hygiene habits.  SHG meeting will be  the  platform for nutrition 
awareness.  It  will  partner with  government  programmes  and  leverage  partnerships  with  other 
agencies  to  support  women  members  in  SHGs  and  their  households  to  make  better-informed 
decisions about family's nutritional habits. The project will also replicate the successful models of 
Saat Din Saat Ghar and Tiranga Thali undertaken in Tejaswini M.P where appropriate. 
21. Child Labour: The risk of child labour in the State of Maharashtra is considered low and is currently 
managed through the national Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 which prohibits 
employment of children below 14 years of age in all forms of employment. In case of violation of 
the Act, stringent penalties are incorporated into the Act to include imprisonment and fines. In 
implementing  the  law,  the  State  of  Maharashtra  has  also  established  an  online  grievance 
7 
mechanism that addresses concerns and grievances in connection with child labour. The project 
will follow these existing laws and mechanisms5. 
22. Target Group. The project will directly provide services to 801,979 women through the existing 
66,524 SHGs under 248 CMRCs and 200,000 women and men, through enterprises along the agri 
value-chains, in the manufacturing and service sectors and through creation of decent jobs.  
23. The project's direct target group are the members of existing viable SHGs and their families. The 
membership  falls  under  three  categories:  a)  Micro-entrepreneurs  with  steady  family  income 
above  poverty  line  of  Rs  58,000;  b)  Moderately  poor  with  family  income  from  all  sources  is 
between Rs 25,000 to Rs 58,000; and c) Ultra/very poor that earn less than Rs 25,000 and having 
no regular income. By profession, the target beneficiaries are marginal farmers, livestock/fisheries 
micro-entrepreneurs, non-farm  products producers, workers in service  sectors and agricultural 
labourers. About 20% of SHG members may fall under 35 years of age (young adults). The project 
would  include  young  adults,  women  and  men,  of  beneficiary  families  for  skill  development 
programmes to gain decent and remunerative employment. In the UN's spirit of leaving no-one 
behind, the project will include beneficiaries from different categories including Scheduled Caste 
(SC),  Scheduled  Tribe  (ST),  Nomadic  Tribe  (NT), minority  and  other  marginal  groups  as  well  as 
those from upper castes. PRAs will be conducted to ascertain the numbers and poverty levels of 
each category. The profile of the target group is presented in table 1 below.  
Table 1. Profile of the Project Target Group 
Type of target groups 
Poverty indicators 
Services and path out of poverty 
Micro-entrepreneurs 
(25-30%) 
 Annual income > Rs 58,000 (BPL)6 
 Land ownership > 2.5 acres 
 Already engaged in 3 IGAs 
 Avg. loan size, Rs.30,000/- 
 Strong enterprising ability 
 Participate in an organized value chain  
 Individual microenterprise loan more than Rs 100,000 from 
bank/non-bank financial institution 
 Some farm/non-farm businesses may not join any organized 
value chain subproject but grow as individual businesses. 
May receive business services as per need for example 
productivity related training in case of farm sectors and 
design improvement in case of non-farm product.  
Moderately poor  
 Annual income between Rs 25,000 to Rs 
 Participate in an organized value chain  
58,000 
 Individual member may borrow up to  Rs 100,000 through 
(60-70%) 
 Land ownership is between 0.5 acre and 2.5 
SHG-bank linkage 
acres 
 Some farm/non-farm businesses may not join any organized 
5 https://mahakamgar.maharashtra.gov.in/online-grievances.htm 
6 For the State, poverty line as of 2011-12, is estimated at Rs. 967 per capita per month in rural areas and with 
average family size of 5, the annual income per family is estimated at Rs. 58,000. Source; Economic Survey of 
Maharashtra, 2018-19. 
8 
Ultra poor 
(5-10%) 
 Already engaged in 1 or 2 IGAs (small shop 
etc)  
value chain subproject but grow as individual businesses. 
  some  qualify for selected convergences schemes. 
 On the verge of enterprising curve 
 Vocational training for selected SHG or family members  
 Annual income less than Rs 25,000 (no 
regular income and depends mainly on 
manual labor) 
 Land ownership: landless to 0.5 acre 
 Wage employment  
 Participate in a value chain if lives in the same cluster;  
 Individual member may borrow up to  Rs 20,000 through 
SHG-bank linkage 
 Some farm/non-farm businesses may not join any organized 
value chain subproject but grow as individual businesses. 
 Lack of self & peer confidence to avail bigger 
 Access pro poor  convergences schemes  
loans 
 Vocational training for selected SHG or family members for 
 Need more facilitation 
wage employment. 
 Mentoring for IGA development 
 Village level wage employment for a subcontractor 
C.  Natural Resources Profile 
24.  Nav Tejaswini  Districts'  Geography:  Average  elevation  above  sea  level varies  from  123m  to 
744m in the districts (State avrage elevation is 435m amsl). Districts of P Satara, Kolhapur, Pune, 
Ahmadnagar,  Nashik,  Dhule,  Nandurbar,  Ratnagiri,  Sindhudurg,  Thane  and  Raigarh  have  the 
largest elevation differences (Error! Reference source not found.). 
Figure 2: Nav Tejaswini Districts at a Glance - Development profile 
Elevation Map 
Elevation Range 
25. Topography and Physiography. Maharashtra State is spread over a geographical area of 3,07,713 
sq. km. Its geographic location is latitude 15°40’ N to 22°00’ N and longitude is 72°30’E to 80°30’E. 
Based on topography and physical features, the state can be divided into three physical divisions, 
viz.  The  Konkan  Coastal  Lowland,  the  Western  Ghats  and  the  Maharashtra  plateau.  The 
topography of Maharashtra is characterized by a narrow coastal plain that separates the Arabian 
Sea from the Western Ghat Mountains. On the eastern side of the mountains the climate is drier 
and  the  topography  is  characterized  by  a  large  plateau  formed  by  a  series  of  table-lands  that 
occupy most of the central part of the state. The State is divided into nine agro-climatic zones 
differentiated mostly by the rainfall, soil and cropping patterns. The western coastal plains have 
high rainfall, followed eastward by the ghat mountain zone, the transition zone, and the drought 
prone zones. The eastern zones are again characterized by moderate to high rainfall patterns. 
26. Maharashtra  Water  Resources:  Maharashtra  is  drained  by  major  5  river  basins  namely;  (i) 
Godavari (49.5% geographical area), (ii) Krishna (22.6%), (iii) Tapi (16.7%), (iv) Narmada (0.5%) and 
(v)  West  Flowing  Rivers  (10.7%).  These  are  further  sub-divided  into  15  sub-basins  and  1505 
9 
watersheds  (as  per  Section  2  of  Maharashtra  Groundwater  (Regulation  for  Drinking  Water 
Purposes) Act 19937. 55% of the dependable yield is available in the four river basins (Krishna, 
Godavari, Tapi and Narmada) east of the Western Ghats. These four river basins support 92% of 
the cultivable land and have more than 60% of the population in rural areas. 
The estimated ultimate irrigation potential is 12.6 million ha which includes 8.5 million ha surface 
water and 4.1 million ha ground water. Till 2012, a potential of 4.86 million ha (Mha) has been 
created through 79 major, 249 medium and 3004 minor irrigation projects8.  
-  Ground Water: Most of the Maharashtra state is occupied by  hard rocks, 85% is covered by 
Deccan  basalts  and  rest  of  the  state  by  Quaternary  alluvium,  Gondwanas,  Cuddapahs, 
Kaladgis,  Vindhyans,  Dharwars  and  Archaeans.  Ground  water  availability  is  limited  due  to 
variations  in  hard  rock  hydro  geological  characteristics;  physiography  and variability  in  the 
rainfall. Net annual ground water availability is 31.21 BCM and annual ground water draft is 
15.09 BCM with stage of ground water development of 48 %. Out of the total 353 talukas, 10 
talukas are categorized as over exploited, 2 talukas are categorized as critical and 16 talukas 
are categorized as semi-critical. There are over exploitation of ground water9. Ground water 
quality issues, including salinity, fluoride, and hardness persists in many districts. 
-  Water Pollution: According to the Hindustan times , Five water bodies in Maharashtra contain 
‘heavily polluted’ water, and Mumbai’s Mithi River is one of them, according to a water quality 
analysis done by the Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB) in May 2019. The MPCB’s 
findings were  compiled after  monitoring water quality at 250 locations in Mumbai, Thane, 
Pune and Nagpur, under the National Water Monitoring Programme. These included rivers, 
sea coasts and creeks, drains, dams and wells . While 81%, or 139 of these sites had ‘non-
polluted’  water,  28  sites  (16%)  contained  ‘polluted’  water,  and  five  (3%)  were  ‘heavily 
polluted’. 
Most sites where the MPCB recorded poor water quality were in the urban areas of Mumbai, 
Thane, Pune and Nagpur. The MPCB said the reason more locations in Mumbai were identified 
as having polluted water was because it collected samples near marine outfalls, which releases 
both  treated  and  untreated  sewage  into  the  sea,  experts  pointed  out  how  this  showed  not 
enough was being done to stop industries from releasing untreated waste into the sea. 
27.  Maharashtra Soil: The soils of Maharashtra are residual, derived from the igneous basalts. The 
soil in the river basins of Godavari, Bhima, Krishna and Tapi has a deep layer of fertile black 
basalt soil, which is rich in humus. The semi-dry plateau of Deccan has a medium layer of black 
regur (black) soil which is clayey and moisture retentive, rich in iron but poor in nitrogen and 
organic matter. The higher plateau region has murmad soils, which contain more gravel. The 
peaks of  the  Sahyadri  Mountains,  the  districts  of  Ratnagiri  and  Sindhudurg  and  the western 
regions of Kolhapur and Satara have a reddish lateritic soil. The Konkan coast has sandy loam 
soil.  Farther  away  towards  the  east  in  Vidarbha  region,  with  a  better  mixture  of  lime,  the 
7  Report  on  the  dynamic  ground  water  resources  of  Maharashtra  (2011  -  2012),  Groundwater  Surveys  & 
Development Agency (G.S.D.A.), GoM. 
8 Maharashtra Water Resources Department-Vision 2020 Report. Government of Maharashtra.. 
9 Ground Water Scenario of Maharashtra , http://cgwb.gov.in/gw_profiles/st_Maharashtra.htm. 
10 
morand soils form the ideal Kharip zone. North Konkan, eastern Vidarbha region like Bhandara, 
Gondia and Gadchiroli districts have reddish and yellowish soil10. 
Table 2. Soil types by Agro-Climatic zones 
S. No. 
Agro-climatic 
Zones 
Name of the Zone 
Soil Type 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
South 
Coastal Zone  
Konkan 
Very  high  rainfall  zone  with 
lateritic soils  
Lateritic, PH-5.5-6.5 acidic, poor in phosphorous rich in nitrogen and 
Potassium  
North Kokan Coastal 
Zone  
Very  high  rainfall  zone  with 
non-lateritic soils  
Coarse  &  shallow,  PH  5.5  to  6.5,  acidic  Rich  in  nitrogen,  poor  in 
phosphorus & potash.  
Western Ghat 
Western  Ghat  Zone/Ghat 
zone  
'Warkas' i.e. light laterite & reddish brown. Distinctly acidic, poor 
fertility low phosphorous & potash content.  
Transition Zone-1  
Sub  Montane 
Transition Zone 1  
Zone/ 
Soils are reddish brown to black tending to lateritic. PH 6-7. Well 
supplied in nitrogen but low in phosphorous & potash  
Transition Zone-2  
Western  Maharashtra  Plain 
Zone /Transition-2  
Topography  is  plain.  Soils  greyish  black.  Moderately  alkaline  7.4- 
8.4, lowest layer is 'Murum' strata. Fair in NPK content. Well drained 
& good for irrigation.  
6 
Scarcity Zone  
Maharashtra 
Western 
Scarcity Zone/Scarcity Zone  
Assured 
Zone  
Rainfall 
Central 
Plateau 
Rainfall Zone  
Zone 
Maharashtra 
/Assured 
General topography is having slope between 1-2%. Infiltration rate 
is 6-7 mm/hr. The soils are vertisol. Soils have Montmorillonite clay. 
Poor in nitrogen, low to medium in phosphate & well supplied  in 
potash.  
Soil colour ranges from black to red. Type- 1) vertisols, 2) entisols & 
3) inceptisols PH 7-7.5  
Moderate 
Zone  
Rainfall 
Central 
Zone 
/Zone of Moderate Rainfall  
Vidarbha 
Black  soils  derived  from  basalt  rock.  Medium  to  heavy  in  texture 
alkaline in reaction. Low lying areas are rich and fertile.  
Eastern 
Zone  
Vidarbha 
Eastern  Vidarbha 
Zone/ 
High Rainfall Zone with Soils 
derived 
parent 
from 
material  of  different  crops. 
There are 4 sub-zone based 
on  climate,  soils  and  crop 
pattern  
Soils derive from parent rock granite, gneisses, and schist. Brown to 
Red in colour. PH6 to 7  
7 
8 
9 
Source: NIDM, Maharashtra; Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change (MSAAPC), Dept. of Environment, Govt. 
of Maharashtra, 2014 
28.  Maharashtra Land use: The total reporting area for land utilization of the state is around 30.77 
million  ha.  The  contribution  of  net  area  sown  is  (56.47  per  cent),  area  not  available  for 
cultivation (10.35 per cent), current fallow land (4.55 per cent), forest (15.93 per cent), land 
other  than  current  fallow  land  (3.88  per  cent),  culturable  wasteland  (2.97  per  cent)  and 
10 A critical study of industrial investment in Maharashtra (in the period 2000-2001 to 2009-2010), 2014, Khuba 
Shridevi Chandrakant, University of Pune. 
11 
29. 
permanent pastures & other grazing lands (4.04 per cent).11 Error! Reference source not found. 
shows land use statistics. 
Forestry. According to the 'People's Forests' report   produced by the Centre for Science and 
Environment, Delhi, 2016; Maharashtra has the highest potential Community Forest Resource 
(CFR)  area  of  4,820,028  hectares.  Although  Maharashtra  is  faring  better  than  other  states, 
however  there  is  a scope  for  improvement,  as only 14  per cent  of  the  potential  community 
forest resource area has been actually recognised. The report further states that  Maharashtra 
has been in the forefront to show how the forest communities can contribute in conserving the 
forest  areas  in  recent  times  and  that  the  communities  understand  better  about  the  native 
plantations in the forest and also assist in preventing any artificial commercialisation.  To this 
end,  the  project  has  made  a  commitment  in  the  PCN  not  to  embark  on  land  development 
activities which will require a forest clearance or permit. 
30.  Maharashtra Agriculture: Agriculture is the dominant land use category in the state. It accounts 
for about for about 65 per cent of the total geographical area of the state. Agriculture in the 
state is predominantly rainfed and only 18% of cropped area is irrigated. Agriculture is the major 
income activity of over 64% of the state׳s population. Principal crops grown in the State are rice, 
jowar, bajra, wheat, tur, mung, urad, gram and other pulses. The State is a major producer of 
oilseeds.  Groundnut,  sunflower,  soyabean  are  the  major  oil  seed  crops.  The  important  cash 
crops are cotton, sugarcane, turmeric and vegetables. Maharashtra’s agriculture is dominated 
by small and marginal farmers (78.6 per cent). 
31.  Disaster  Profile:  Maharashtra  is  prone  to  various  natural  hazards  such  as  drought,  floods, 
cyclonic storms, earthquake, landslides and heat wave. According to the National Disaster Risk 
Index, Maharashtra has been ranked at the top of the list of Indian states, vulnerable to natural 
disasters, followed by West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, and Madhya Pradesh.12 
Earthquake: The State of Maharashtra has witnessed two major earthquakes namely, the Koyna 
earthquake of magnitude 6.6 in 1967 and the Latur earthquake of magnitude 6.2 in 1993. The 
most seismic active region in the Maharashtra is the west coast and Western Ghats regions13. 6 
districts fall in seismic zone IV (high zone) and 20 districts in seismic zone III (moderate zone). 
Districts of Kolhapur, Pune, Raigarh, Ratnagiri, Sangli and Satara fall under high zone. Districts 
of  Chandrapur,  Gadchiroli,  Mumbai,  Mumbai-(Suburban),  Thane,  Yavatmal,  Ahmadnagar, 
Akola,  Amravati,  Aurangabad,  Bid,  Buldana,  Dhule,  Jalgaon,  Latur,  Nandurbar,  Nashik, 
Osmanabad, Sindhudurg and Solapur fall under moderate zone. 
Cyclone: The coastal areas of Maharashtra are risk prone to cyclones. Being on the west coast, 
Maharashtra  is  classified  under  moderately  vulnerable  category.  Districts  of  Sindhudurg, 
Ratnagiri,  Raigarh,  Mumbai  and  Thane  are  most  prone  to  cyclones.  Maharashtra  coast  has 
witnessed 6 cyclones with maximum sustained wind speed greater than 38 knots, out of which 
4 fall under Severe Cyclonic Storm (≥47 kts) during the period from 1981-201714. 
Drought: Drought is a recurring phenomenon in Maharashtra. 40% of the area is drought prone. 
11India State of Forest Report (ISFR) 2017, http://fsi.nic.in/forest-report-2017. 
12  Draft  report  prepared  by  the  Union  home  ministry  with  support 
https://www.in.undp.org/content/india/en/home/blog/equipping-states-for-disaster.html 
13Maharashtra State Disaster Management Plan, 2016, SDMA, GoM. 
https://rfd.maharashtra.gov.in/sites/default/files/DM%20Plan%20final_State.pdf 
14 Annual frequency of cyclones, IMD. 
http://www.rsmcnewdelhi.imd.gov.in/images/pdf/climatalogy/frequency-cyclone/landfallingcd.pdf 
from 
the  UNDP,  2019. 
12 
70 per cent of the State’s geographical area lies in semi-arid region rendering it vulnerable to 
water scarcity. Geographically, historically and culturally, Maharashtra is divided into 5 regions 
namely,  Vidarbha, Marathwada, Konkan, Khandesh and Paschim Maharashtra. Vidarbha and 
Marathwada are affected by frequent anomalies in rainfall during monsoon season leading to 
drought.  Based  on  the  districts  declared  by  the  State 15 ,  5  districts  (Buldana,  Amravati, 
Chandrapur, Gadchiroli and Wardha) out of 11 districts of Vidarbha have experienced drought 
in  7  to  8  years  during  the  period  from  2000  to  2015.  Similarly  6  districts  (Latur,  Jalna, 
Osmanabad, Aurangabad, Beed and Nanded) out of 8 districts of Marathwada have experienced 
drought  in 7 to 10 years during the same  period. Kandesh region districts have  experienced 
drought in 7 to 10 years during 200 to 2015,  Ahmadnagar, Nasik (10 years), Dhule (9 years), 
Jalgaon and Nandurbar. Most affected years are 2019 and 2002 (32 districts), 2015 and 2009 
(28 districts), 2014 and 2000 (26 districts). District wise probability of drought occurrences in 
moderate,  severe  or  extremely  severe  events  has  been  calculated  based  on  standardized 
precipitation index (SPI) using the data for the period 1901-2015 for the southwest monsoon 
period  (June-September)  over  India  by  Guhathakurta,  P.,  Menon,  P.,  Inkane,  P.M.  et  al 16. 
According  to  this  literature,  drought  probability  of  districts  of  Maharashtra  under  different 
category are: (a) Moderate drought: Ahmadnagar, Hingoli, Jalna, Osmanabad, Sangli and Thane 
with 10-15% probability and Kolhapur, 15-18% probability; (b) Severe drought: Ahmadnagar, 
Amravati, Aurangabad, Beed, Bhandara, Chandrapur, Gondiya, Jalna, Latur, Ratnagiri, Satara, 
Sindhudurg,  Solapur  and  Yevatmal  with  3  to  6%  probability;  (c)  Extreme  drought:  Akola, 
Aurangabad,  Beed,  Bhandara,  Buldana,  Gadchiroli,  Gondiya,  Hingoli,  Jalgaon,  Jalna,  Latur, 
Nanded,  Nandurbar,  Osmanabad,  Parbhani,  Raigarh,  Sindhudurg,  Solapur,  Thane,  Wardha, 
Washim  and  Yevatmal  with  3  to  6%  probability  and  Chandrapur,  Nagpur,  Nasik,  Pune  and 
Ratnagiri with 6 to 9%.  
Floods:  All  districts  of  Maharashtra  are  vulnerable  to  floods.  About  7%  of  the  area  of 
Maharashtra is flood prone. Most floods in Maharashtra are flash floods due to nallah-overflows 
and  poor  drainage  systems13.  Flood  prone  districts  include,  Akola,  Aurangabad,  Beed, 
Kolhapur, Nanded, Nashik, Pune, Raigad , Ratnagiri , Sangli, Satara, Solapur, Thane and Palghar. 
Figure 3 shows flood damage statistics. Major flood years are 1983, 1984, 1989, 1994, 2002, 
2003 and 2019. 
32. Waste  Management.  In  a  study  conducted  by  Arcadis  Germany  in 2017, the  integrated waste 
management system for Nagpur (one of the districts in Maharashtra) was analysed along with a 
detailed waste characterisation of municipal solid waste. The waste characterisation exercise was 
undertaken by the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur. A total 
of 34 samples were collected from all the 10 zones in the city in April/May 2017 and tested for 
physical  and  chemical  composition  analysis,  including  bio-methane  potential.  Results  from  the 
15 Manual for Drought Management - Ministry of Agriculture, 2016. In India, the State governments are the final 
authority to declare a region as a region affected by drought. The Union government has recommended four 
standard monitoring tools when declaring a region as drought affected (Trigger 1: Two mandatory indicators; 
rainfall deviation and dry spell; Trigger 2: Four impact indicators; agriculture, vegetation indices based on remote 
sensing,  soil  moisture,  and  hydrology.  The  States  may  consider  any  three  of  the  four  types  of  the  Impact 
Indicators (one from each) for assessment of drought, the intensity of the calamity and make a judgement after 
sample survey for ground truthing. 
16 Guhathakurta, P., Menon, P., Inkane, P.M. et  al. Trends and variability of meteorological drought  over the 
districts of India using standardized precipitation index. J Earth Syst Sci 126, 120 (2017). 
13 
waste characterisation indicate that the average waste composition for Nagpur includes organics 
at approximately 60%, along with plastics (16%), paper (11%) and inerts (2%). The balance of 11% 
constitutes wood, metal, glass, etc. The MSW samples were also tested for chemical parameters, 
such  as  pH,  moisture  content,  Total  Solids  (TS),  Total  Volatile  Solid  (TVS)  ash,  calorific  value, 
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), average density and C/N ratio. The waste from Nagpur has COD 
at 24%; the average waste density is 440 kg/m3, and the C:N ratio of waste is approximately 24. 
The average moisture content is 56 %, TS is 44 %, TVS is 70 %, ash content is 31 %, and calorific 
value is 1089 kcal /kg. The collected samples from all the zones in Nagpur city were also analysed 
for their bio-methane potential, which indicated a biogas yield of 93 m3/ tonnes of organic waste 
and  an  average  methane  yield  of  45  m3/  tonne.  The  methane  percentage  in  the  biogas  was 
estimated  at  around  49%.  Mindful  of  the  study's  findings  and  in  conjunction  with  other 
observations from around Maharashtra, it is important that the project joins efforts with GoI, GoM 
and other development partners to ensure that activities of the project do not impact negatively 
on the environment and follow Government of India and State norms and good practises in this 
regard. 
33. Air  Quality  is  an  important  indicator of  the  status of  the  environment.   The  Air  Quality  Status 
Report of Maharashtra 2018-19  released on World Environment Day, states that 65% of the daily 
air quality observations for the state fell under the 'Good' and 'Satisfactory' categories, which is a 
5% upward jump from the observations recorded in 2016-17. This displays a positive trend, seeing 
as it is an increase from the 53% recorded in 2015-16 and 54% recorded in 2014-15. The highlights 
of the report Air Quality Status Report of Maharashtra 2018-19 are as follows: 6% reduction in 
PM2.5 levels and 9% reduction in PM10 levels have been observed this year, as compared to last 
year  (2017-18);  All  regions  were  found  to  be  clean  with  regard  to  SO2,  as  the  concentrations 
recorded were under the permissible limit of 50 µg/m3; out of the 72 Active Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations established across Maharashtra, NOx concentrations exceeded the standard 
limit (40 µg/m3) at 29 stations, primarily in the Mumbai, Kalyan and Pune regions.  
Figure 2 - Air quality monitoring in Maharashtra  
Source: https://air-quality.com/place/india/maharashtra/da212e71?lang=en&standard=aqi_us  
14 
Figure 3: Nav Tejaswini Districts at a Glance – Natural resources profile 
Land use - Maharashtra  State 
Land use - Nav Tejaswini Districts 
Number of Drought Declared Districts - Maharashtra  
District wise number of Drought Years in Maharashtra  
Annual Flood Damage - Maharashtra State 
% Average Annual Flood Damage in Maharashtra State 
Forest Fire Incidences 
Cyclone Frequency (1891-2017) 
Data  Source:  Dirctorate  of  Economics  &  Statistics  Maharashtra,  Flood  Damage  Statistics  (Statewise  and  for  the 
Country as a whole) during 1953 to 2017 , CWC, 2018, India Meteorological Department (IMD), Forest Survey of India. 
15 
Indepth Climate Analysis 
D. 
34.  Maharashtra has a typical monsoon climate, with hot, rainy and cold weather seasons and dry 
summers. However, dew, frost and hail also occur sometimes, depending upon the seasonal 
weather. The winter in January and February is followed by summer between March and May 
and the monsoon season between June and September.  
35.  Historical climate: Assessment of the historical climate variability and trends in mean climate 
(maximum  temperature,  minimum  temperature  and  precipitation)  for  the  implementation 
districts of Maharashtra (High resolution maps are given in Annex) over the period 1951-2013 
(63 years), has been made using historical gridded observations from the India Meteorological 
Department  (IMD) 17 .  Orography  and  landuse  influence  spatial  distribution  of  rainfall  and 
temperature. Human-induced landscapes and human activities play a key role in altering the 
climate at a local and regional scale. It is important to understand the variation in rainfall as well 
as  temperature  since  these  variations  have  to  be  kept  in  mind  while  designing  appropriate 
interventions (conservation practices or machineries etc.). Therefore analysis has been carried 
out at the district level. Summary of observed temperature and rainfall for the 16 districts is 
presented (Figure 5). 
36.  Observed Temperature: Mean maximum temperature of 34 districts is 32.7°C (31.1 - 33.7°C) is 
observed (Maharashtra state average is 32.6°C). Mean minimum temperature is 20.1°C (19.1 - 
21.5°C)  is  observed  (Maharashtra  state  average  is  22.8°C).  Both  maximum  and  minimum 
temperature attain maximum in the SW monsoon season. For annual maximum temperature 
the highest value is attained for Chandrapur district (33.7°C) while the lowest value is attained 
for  district  of  Ratnagiri  (31.1°C).  Increasing  trend  with  high  confidence  for  maximum 
temperature  is  observed  in  24  districts,  with  low  confidence  in  districts  of  Akola,  Amravati, 
Aurangabad, Buldana, Dhule, Jalgaon, Jalna, Nagpur and Nandurbar. Increasing trend with low 
confidence  for  minimum  temperature  is  observed  in  21  districts  except  for  districts  of 
Ahmadnagar, Aurangabad, Buldana, Jalgaon, Jalna, Kolhapur, Pune, Ratnagiri, Sangli, Satara and 
Sindhudurg (decreasing minimum temperature trends). 
37.  Observed Rainfall: Mean annual rainfall of 34 districts observed is 1209 mm (636 – 3504 mm). 
Maharashtra  state  average  rainfall  is  1281  mm.  Ahmadnagar  had  the  lowest  (636  mm)  and 
Sindhudurg had the highest (3504 mm) rainfall. South west monsoon contributes 86.5% (1070 
mm) and 9.5% (97 mm) of annual rainfall contribution comes from pre-monsoon months. All 
districts  show  decreasing  trend  in  annual  rainfall  (low  confidence)  except  for  districts  of 
Amravati, Akola, Buldana, Nashik and Pune show increasing trend (low confidence). Decrease 
in number of rainy days is observed in all 32 districts, out of these, decreasing trend in raindays 
in the districts of Amravati, Aurangabad, Gadchiroli, Kolhapur, Nanded, Parbhani, Satara and 
Solapur is statistically significant. Out of 63 years rainfall analysis, Nav Tejaswini districts on an 
average had 40 normal rainfall years (Ratnagiri had 50 years and Nandurbar had 27 years), 11 
years had excess rainfall (Nandurbar had 18 years and Satara had 5 years) and 13 years had 
deficit rainfall (Pune had 21 years and Ratnagiri had 5 years).  
Summary  historical  climate:  In  summary  the  Nav  Tejaswini  districts  historically  show  an 
increasing trend in maximum temperature (high confidence) and minimum temperature (low 
confidence). Increase in maximum temperature is observed during summer and post monsoon, 
while  minimum  temperature  is  observed  during  SW  monsoon.  Decreasing  trend  in  annual 
38. 
17 www.imd.gov.in/advertisements/20170320_advt_34.pdf. 
16 
rainfall  is  observed  in  28  districts  (low  confidence)  and  increasing  trend  in  5  districts  (low 
confidence).  Decreasing  trend  in  rainy  days  is  observed  in  25  districts  (low  confidence)  and 
decreasing trend in 8 districts (high confidence). Annual rainfall distribution analysis shows that 
majority of the 34 districts on an average had 63% normal, 20% deficient and 16% excess rainfall 
years18. Analysis carried out at  district  level for seasonal temperature  and rainfall is given in 
Annexure. Increasing trend in maximum temperature for the districts results in additional water 
demand  (crop,  human  and  livestock).  Districts  with  increasing  trend  in  temperature  and 
decreasing trend in rainfall would likely have water stress and drought like situation. Uneven 
rainfall distribution and extreme events may result in flood.  
Figure 5: Historical Climate Summary for Nav Tejaswini Districts of Maharashtra 
Observed Maximum Temperature (annual and seasonal) 
18 +/-19% Long Period Average (LPA): Normal rainfall year, <-19% to -59% LPA: Deficient rainfall year, >+19% to 
+59%: Excess rain fall year (http://www.imdpune.gov.in/weather_forecasting/glossary.pdf). 
17 
Observed Minimum Temperature (annual and seasonal) 
Observed Rainfall (annual and seasonal) 
18 
Frequency of deficient, normal and excess rainfall years 
Observed Trend in Temperature and Rainfall 
Data Source: India Meteorological Department (IMD) gridded temperature and rainfall. 
19 
JFMAMJJASONDANNJFMAMJJASONDANNJFMAMJJASONDANNAhmadnagarAkolaAmravatiAurangabadBhandaraBidBuldanaChandrapurDhuleGadchiroliGondiyaHingoliJalgaonJalnaKolhapurLaturNagpurNandedNandurbarNashikOsmanabadParbhaniPuneRaigarhRatnagiriSangliSataraSindhudurgSolapurThaneWardhaWashimYavatmalMaharashtraStateDistrictRainfallMaximum TemperatureMinimumTemperature 
39.  Projected Climate: The CORDEX South Asia modelled climate data on precipitation, maximum 
temperature, minimum temperature and climate extremes indices have been analysed for 34 
Nav Tejaswini districts (High resolution maps are given in Annex) for baseline (BL, 1981-2010) 
and  mid-century  (MC,  2021-2050).  Ensemble  mean  of  10  RCMs  at  a  spatial  resolution  of 
50kmx50km has been used. The CORDEX South Asia simulations with the models indicate an 
all-round warming over Nav Tejaswini districts. Summary of projected temperature and rainfall 
for 34 implementation districts is presented. 
40.  Projected  Climate  for  Maharashtra:  For  the  state  of  Maharashtra  as  whole,  increase  in 
maximum temperature is projected to increase by 1.2°C towards mid-century under IPCC AR5 
RCP4.5 scenario while increase of 1.5°C towards mid-century under IPCC AR5 RCP8.5 scenario 
is projected. Similarly change in minimum temperature is projected to increase by  1.5°C and 
1.8°C towards mid-century under IPCC AR5 RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 respectively. Projected increase 
in minimum temperature is higher than maximum temperature and increase is higher in winter 
for  maximum  temperature  and  in  SW  monsoon  season  for  minimum  temperature.  Average 
annual rainfall is projected to increase marginally by 3% and % under low and high emission 
scenarios respectively towards mid-century as compared to the baseline. Highest decrease is 
likely in pre-monsoon season (MAM). 
41.  Projected Climate for Nav Tejaswini Districts: All 34 Nav Tejaswini districts are likely to have 
increase  in  maximum  and  minimum  temperatures  under  IPCC  AR5  RCP4.5  and  RCP8.5. 
Projected  increase  in  maximum  temperature  ranges  from  1.1°C  (Kolhapur  and  Ratnagiri)  to 
1.4°C  (Bhandara,  Chandrapur,  Gadchiroli,  Gondiya  and  Wardha)  under  RCP4.5  and  1.3°C 
(Kolhapur and Ratnagiri) to 1.7°C (Gadchiroli and Gondiya) under RCP8.5 towards mid-century. 
Projected increase in minimum temperature ranges from 1.2°C (Kolhapur and Thane) to 1.7°C 
(Osmanabad)  under  RCP4.5  and  1.4°C  (Sindhudurg)  to  2.1°C  (Bid,  Osmanabad  and  Solapur) 
under RCP8.5 towards mid-century. 
Projected change in annual rainfall is negligible to 9% in the implementation districts (more than 
8%  increase  is  likely  in  Dhule  and  Nandurbar)  under  RCP4.5  scenario  towards  mid-century. 
Marginal to 15% increase in rainfall is projected under RCP8.5 scenario with highest increase in 
districts of Hingoli (15.3%). Districts of Ahmadnagar, Aurangabad, Bid, Buldana, Jalna, Nanded, 
Parbhani,  Pune  and  Washim  are  likely  to  experience  10%  increase  in  rainfall  under  RCP8.5 
scenario.  
42.  Climate Extremes: Indices representing climate extremes are developed to communicate more 
complex  climate  change  impact  relations  in  a  simplified  way.  Mean  temperature  and 
precipitation  sums  can  be  seen  as  simple  climate  extremes  indices,  More  complex  climate 
extremes  indices  incorporate  information  on  the  sensitivity  of  a  specific  system,  such  as 
exposure time, threshold levels of event intensity etc19. Five temperature indices (responsible 
for crop loss, infrastructure loss, heat stress, reduction in outdoor activity time, forest fire etc.) 
and five rainfall indices (responsible for drought, flood, erosion, infrastructure loss, etc.) which 
may influence the project objectives. 
Temperature  Indices:  Cool  nights  (TN10P)  are  projected  to  decrease  (19  districts  with  low 
confidence,  15  districts  with  high  confidence  under  RCP4.5  scenario;  28  districts  with  low 
confidence, 6 districts with high confidence under RCP8.5 scenario). Similarly Cool days (TX10P) 
are also projected to decrease in all 34 districts (low confidence under RCP4.5 scenario and high 
43. 
19 http://www.smhi.se/polopoly_fs/1.805!Climate%20indices%20for%20vulnerability%20assessments.pdf 
20 
confidence under RCP8.5 scenario). Warm nights (TN90P) and warm days (TX90P) projected to 
increase (high confidence) for the districts. Diurnal temperature range (DTR) is likely to reduce 
in all districts. Warm spell duration indicator (WSDI) is projected to increase. Cold spell duration 
indicator (CSDI) is projected to decrease (low confidence) and may not occur in future.  
44.  Rainfall  Indices:  Consecutive  dry  days  (CDD)  are  projected  to  increase  for  22  districts  (low 
confidence)  and  decrease  for  12  districts  (high  confidence)  under  RCP4.5  scenario.  Under 
RCP8.5 scenario, 9 districts are likely to experience increase (low confidence) and decrease in 
25  districts  (high  confidence).  Under  RCP4.5  scenario,  consecutive  wet  days  (CWD)  are 
projected  to  decrease  for  5  districts  (high  confidence)  and  increase  for  29  districts  (4:  high 
confidence and 25:  low confidence). Extremely wet days precipitation (R99p)  is projected to 
increase for districts of Bid, Chandrapur, Gondiya, Nagpur and Nandurbar under both low and 
high emission scenarios. 1 day maximum precipitation (RX1DAY) is projected to increase (low 
confidence) for districts of Amravati, Bhandara, Bid, Gadchiroli, Gondiya, Nagpur, Nandurbar 
and Nashik under both low and high emission scenario. Similarly, 5 day maximum precipitation 
(RX5DAY)  is  projected  to  increase  (low  confidence)  for  districts  of  Amravati,  Amravati, 
Bhandara, Bhandara, Bid, Bid, Gadchiroli, Gadchiroli, Gondiya, Gondiya, Latur and Nashik for 
both low and high emission scenarios. Wet weather may affect standing crops, cause floods and 
soil erosion, emergence of pest and diseases. 
45.  Heat Stress on Humans and Livestock: Humidex (HI) and temperature-humidity index (THI) are 
single value depicting the integrated effects of air temperature and humidity associated with 
the  level  of  heat  stress  in  human  beings  and  animals  respectively.  Though  goats  are  more 
tolerant to heat stress than sheep and cows, it is also well known that high temperatures and 
relative  humidity  values  significantly  affect  meat  yield,  quality  and  composition  of  small 
ruminants20.  Elevated  temperature  and  humidity  as  presented  in  THI  negatively  affects  feed 
intake and altered hormone concentration leading to negatively affecting the productive and 
reproductive performance of farm animals21. 
Under the projected climate THI (heat stress on livestock) is likely to increase in the range from 
14% (Chandrapur) to 38% (Sangli) under RCP4.5 scenario and increase in the range from 21% 
(Chandrapur) to 52% (Pune) under RCP8.5 scenario as compared to the baseline. 
Under the projected climate, HI (human heat stress) is likely to increase in the range from 21% 
(Chandrapur)  to  55%  (Satara)  under  RCP4.5  scenario  and  increase  in  the  range  from  32% 
(Chandrapur) to 75% (Satara) under RCP8.5 Scenario as compared to the baseline. Duration of 
out-door  farm  activities  like  agriculture  labour  are  likely  to  be  affected  due  to  many  folds 
increase in projected heat stress. Months from April to June are significant on account of either 
high temperature or high humidity. 
Summary projected climate: Projected climate indicate hotter and drier future for most of the 
Nav Tejaswini districts. Heat wave conditions are likely to increase resulting in additional stress 
on humans and natural resources. Marginal increase in precipitation is likely in future,most of 
the increase is likely to be in the form of high intensity rainfall. Spatial and temporal variability 
makes  these  districts  more  vulnerable.  Increase  in  temperature  combined  with  rainfall 
46. 
20 Silanikove N. The physiological basis of adaptation in goats to harsh environments. Small Ruminant Research. 
2000;35:181-193. DOI: 10.1016/S0921-4488(99)00096-6. 
21 Habeeb AA, Gad AE, Atta MA. Temperature-Humidity Indices as Indicators to Heat Stress of Climatic Conditions 
with Relation to Production and Reproduction of Farm Animals. Int J Biotechnol Recent Adv. 2018; 1(1): 35-50. 
doi: 10.18689/ijbr-1000107. 
21 
variability may impact on water resources. Warm spell duration indicator (WSDI) is projected to 
increase for all the districts, Extreme rainfall (1 day and 5 day maximum) is projected to increase, 
which is likely to exacerbate flood threat. Consecutive dry days (CDD) are projected to increase 
(low confidence) while Consecutive wet days (CWD) are projected to decrease (low confidence) 
resulting increasing likelihood of drought and flood.  
District-wise analysis carried out for projected temperature and rainfall at district level is given 
in Annexure. 
E.  District Climate Change Vulnerability 
Climate change and variability is one of the most important matters of concern in terms of livelihood 
and income of farmers. At the national level, there are studies or unified documents available which 
assess climate change vulnerability at the district level using the new IPCC risk framework or latest 
climate  change  projects  of  IPCC.  The  Vulnerability  Atlas  published  by  NICRA  in  2013  dealt  with 
agriculture vulnerability for 572 rural districts of India22.  
Newly  constituted  Doubling  Farmers’  Income  (DFI)  Committee  has  been  tasked  to  examine  issues 
relating to doubling of farmers’ income and recommend a strategy to achieve doubling of farmers’ 
income in real terms by the year 2022. At present, thirteen draft volumes of ‘Strategy for Doubling 
Farmers’ Income by 2022’ prepared by the Committee have been uploaded on the website for seeking 
public  opinion 23 .  This  Committee  compared  the  150  districts  which  topped  under  very  high 
vulnerability  status category  in  NICRA  study,  with  the  150  districts  having  lowest  income  status of 
farmers (farm income from crops and livestock) as per NSSO-SAS survey, 201324. The report highlights 
that "the situation to be more grievous in 33 out of 150 districts, which on the one hand are highly 
vulnerable to climate change, and on the other are agriculturally undeveloped, and fall in the bottom 
150 having lowest agricultural income". One district namely Aurangabad out of 33 highly vulnerable 
districts belong to Maharashtra. Climate change vulnerability compiled from these two literatures is 
summarised. Figure  depicts the vulnerability category for the Nav Tejaswini implementation districts. 
47.  Vulnerability for Nav Tejaswini Districts: Based on NICRA study (2013) 12 districts in very high 
vulnerability, 5 districts in high vulnerability, 3 districts in moderate vulnerability, 6 districts in 
low  vulnerability  and  7  district  in  very  low  vulnerability  category  are  identified.  Aurangabad 
district falls under high vulnerability category which also figures as double stressed district (in 
terms of climate vulnerability and low farm income) in DFI report. Major drivers of vulnerability 
identified are projected increase in number of drought years, high net sown area, low rainfall 
and projected rise in minimum temperature. Districts of Solapur, Ahmednagar, Buldhana, and 
Amravati are under very high vulnerability category, contributing factor is projected decrease 
in rainfall leading to drought. Buldhana and Amaravati have high net sown area and low net 
irrigated area. Districts of Beed, Osmanabad, Latur, Nandurbar, Sangli, Dhule, Nasik and Jalna 
also  fall  under  very  high  vulnerability  category;  contributing  factor  is  projected  increase  in 
22 Rama Rao C A, Raju B M K, Subba Rao A V M, Rao K V, Rao V U M, Kausalya Ramachandran, Venkateswarlu B 
and Sikka A K (2013). Atlas on Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change. Central Research Institute 
for Dryland Agriculture, Hyderabad. 
23 http://agricoop.nic.in/doubling-farmers. 
24Income, Expenditure, Productive Assets and Indebtedness of Agricultural Households in India, NSS 70th Round; 
http://mospi.nic.in/sites/default/files/publication_reports/nss_rep_576.pdf. 
22 
minimum temperature. Districts of Osmanabad, Latur and Jalna have high net sown area and 
low net irrigated area, while Beed, Nandurbar, Sangli, Dhule and Nasik have low rainfall and low 
net irrigated area. Districts of Akola, Aurangabad, Jalgaon, Parbhani and Washim fall under high 
vulnerability category; contributing factor is increase in minimum temperature. Akola, Jalgaon, 
Parbhani and Washim have high net sown area and low net irrigated area. 
Figure 6 Vulnerability Map for Nav Tejaswini Districts of Maharashtra 
F.  Potential  project’s  social,  environmental,  and  climate  change  impacts 
48. 
and risks 
Social  Risk:  Maharashtra  has  55%  rural  population  with  49%  female  population  (30%  rural 
female literacy). Out of 31% of female working population, 82% are main workers and 18% are 
marginal  workers.  In  Maharashtra,  out  of  16.8  million  women  in  workforce,  69%  are  highly 
dependent  on  agriculture  (engaged  as  cultivators  and  agricultural  labourers).  Maharashtra 
ranks  fifth  in  the  country  with  regard  to  women-owned  establishments  (8.25%  of  total). 
According to the National Family Health Survey IV, 47% of women are anaemic and 27% women 
are  underweight.  Close  to  54  %  households  are  landless,  incidence  of  poverty  is  16.8%  and 
intensity of poverty is 41.3%. These factors add to the vulnerability and enhance climate risks. 
All these factors also contribute to low access to information, technology and capacity building 
in these districts. 
49.  Cultural  risk:  The  project  will  be  promoting  enterprises  in  the  eco-tourism  sector.  While  no 
major excavation work is foreseen, chance finds of historical and cultural significance may be 
encountered. In absence of related procedures in Tourism policy of State (see table 3 below), 
measures  will  be  prepared  by  MAVIM  to  plan  and  execute  tourism  projects  in  order  to 
coordinate,  facilitate  the  archiving,  safekeeping  and  documentation  of  physical  cultural 
resources.  Also,  necessary  steps  of  public  consultations,  engagement  of  cultural  or  religious 
23 
50. 
leaders,  local  authorities  will  be  conducted  before  decision  on  the  subproject  is  made.  The 
CMRCs will be trained on these procedures so that they are fully integrated in the sub-projects 
they  submit  as  well  as  the  contract  negotiation  with  the  private  sector.  The  procedures  for 
chance finds are described in PIM. The project is expected to promote 30 sub-projects in eco- 
and agri-tourism for a value of 3 million USD approx. 
Environmental Risk: 70% of the State’s geographical area lies in semi-arid region rendering it 
vulnerable to water scarcity which is likely to affect water availability and water quality. 40% of 
the area is drought  prone. About 7% of the area of Maharashtra is flood prone. The coastal 
areas of Maharashtra are risk prone to cyclones and the State is classified under moderately 
vulnerable  category.  6  districts  fall  in  high  earthquake  zone  and  20  districts  in  moderate 
earthquake zone. 
51.  Climate Risk: It is evident from the analysis of climate scenarios that the selected districts would 
have  hotter  future.  Increased  Temperature,  changes  in  daytime/night-time  temperatures, 
changes  in  seasons  (e.g.,  start  date  of  rainy  season),  increased/decreased/more  variable 
rainfall, and more severe and/or more frequent extreme  events may  impact agriculture  and 
livestock.  Crop  loss,  increase  in  crop-water  demand,  ,  emergence  of  new  pests,  reduced 
availability of feed and fodder, loss of grazing land due to drought, increase distribution of water 
and  vector-borne  diseases,  feed  and  water  shortages  etc.,  may  need  to  be  addressed.  In 
addition, duration of out-door farm activities of livestock grazing and agriculture labourers are 
likely to be affected due to heat stress. Reduction in livestock products (milk, meat) are also 
likely to be impacted due to projected increased THI (temperature humidity index). Feed intake, 
production  and  reproductive  efficiency  of  animals  are  affected  by  heat  stress  as  a  result  of 
increase  in  temperature.  Livestock  is  a  key  asset  fulfilling  multiple  economic,  social  and  risk 
management functions especially for rural poor communities. 
Figure    gives  overall  summary  of  social,  environmental  and  climate  risk.  One  can  easily  see 
interrelations  across multi-dimensional  vulnerability  indicators  in  the  radar  charts  plotted.  A 
point closer to the centre on an axis indicates a lower value and vice versa. Lower values for 
sensitivity and exposure; higher values for adaptive capacity are desirable to achieve reduction 
in vulnerability. 
52. 
24 
Figure 7 Social, Environmental and Climate Risk Analysis (Adaptive Capacity graph need to be replaced) 
G.  Recommended features of project design and implementation 
53. Strengths: The project design is well suited to address impending environmental and climate risks 
envisaged in the selected districts. A large section of the target groups belong to the rural poor, 
small  and  marginal  farmers,  especially  women  and  landless  groups  who  are  likely  to  be  most 
affected by climate change, are deemed vulnerable and who may not have ready access to risk-
mitigation tools. The project will build on the lessons learnt from the recently concluded project, 
Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women Empowerment Programme (2007-2018). 
54. Weakness: The just concluded Tejaswini-Maharashtra Rural Women’s Empowerment Programme 
(2007-2018), demonstrated that despite erratic climatic conditions during the project period (see 
para 45), the incomes and assets of women and their household improved. The impact assessment 
of  Tejaswini  also  pointed  to  the  following  measures  taken  by  women  to  cope  with  climate 
variability  and  reduce  environmental  risks:  68.6%  of  Tejaswini  women  adopted  savings  as 
contingency for future shocks like crops failure vs 61.7% in the control group; the use of improved 
agriculture practices ranging from soil health cards (which may be correlated with lower use of 
chemical  fertilizers),  drip  irrigation  was  higher  among  the  Tejaswini  vs  the  control  groups;  the 
25 
access to latest technology and market rates was substantially higher among Tejaswini women 
than control groups, 59% vs 11.3%. Throughout the implementation of Tejaswini , women credit 
discipline improved and the highest repayment rates were recorded in drought affected areas. 
The productivity of crops (soja and paddy) and livestock was higher among Tejaswini women vs 
control groups. The  impact  assessment also queried women on their knowledge  and access to 
social  security  schemes  of  the  Government,  and  again  the  Tejaswini  women  had  significantly 
higher awareness and nearly 18% had availed at least 3 different social security schemes, vs 7% 
among control groups. Despite these gains, the impact assessment shows that there is room for 
improvement  in  the  following  areas  :  women's  adoption  of  improved  seeds,  proper  use  of 
chemical and organic fertilizer and insecticide, access to social security schemes. In Nav Tejaswini, 
the  project  is  promoting  GAP  and  HCCAP  certification,  piloting  insurance  for  livestock,  and 
mentoring  ultra-poor  households  among  the  project  target  group  to  facilitate  their  access  to 
safety nets that supplement their rather low incomes. For service and manufacturing enterprises, 
the project will promote technologies that conserve water and energy and dispose of waste as per 
environmental norms of the state. 
55.  Recommendations: The ESMP is available in annex and describes the recommended mitigation 
measures to comply with environmental and social safeguards; and to promote climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. The environmental and social classification and climate risk level of 
the project are listed below.  
56. Environmental  and  Social  Category.  The  project  is  rated  as  'Category  B'  with  Medium  overall 
Environmental and Social risk. Nav Tejaswini is an enterprise driven project which main outcome 
is that 550,000 enterprises will be working profitably by end of the project, and 200,000 decent 
wage employment will be created. The enterprises are likely to be nano- and small- in nature and 
dispersed over the state territory. The potential environmental impacts posed by the project will 
therefore be limited, site specific and constrained to agro-processing and manufacturing facilities 
(replacement of firewood as source of energy, waste and effluent management, healthy working 
environment,  etc.).  Most  of  these  impacts  would  be  readily  remedied  and/or  considerably 
reduced with appropriate mitigation plans. The project will not have any adverse impacts on the 
livelihoods of other peoples or social groups including involuntary taking or restriction on the use 
of land resulting in physical or economic displacement. The project  will not  have  any negative 
affect on tribal peoples or sites of historic, religious or cultural significance. The project will not 
support  land  use  change  affecting  forests,  protected  areas,  important  bird  areas,  and  or  new 
clearing of contiguous area of above 100 ha in a single location. As there is no specific regulation 
related to environment and social safeguards for micro/small/medium enterprises, the mitigation 
options proposed for environmental and social safeguards allow to pilot test these provisions with 
a view to further scaling-up. Enterprises in the agriculture and allied sectors will be supported to 
comply to GAP and HCCAP norms.  
57. The recently completed Tejaswini had successfully implemented social enterprise and livelihood 
activities, reducing the income vulnerability of households living below poverty line. Nav Tejaswini 
will build on and consolidate the gains as well as expand the successes of the previous project thus 
mitigating social risks like increased workload for women; domestic conflicts/violence arising from 
restrictions of women's mobility and participation in economic and public activities; risk of men 
taking over successful women enterprises; etc in the project area. The project will ensure that 
multiple levels of discriminations on the basis of class, caste, religion and gender are taken into 
account when assessing the risk of Gender-Based Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and will 
26 
make sure all groups benefit equally from IFAD-financed activities. Such activities will include: i) 
drudgery  reduction  through  machinery  and  women  friendly  technologies,  ii)  legal  literacy,  iii) 
women's enhanced participation in public spaces; iv) promoting joint titling of land and property; 
v)  gender  sensitization  and  orienting  service  providers  aimed  at  changing  mind  sets  regarding 
women's  participation  in  male  dominated  sectors    -  such  orientation  will  include  specific  men 
sensitization workshops. It is important to note that the project will also work with the ultra-poor 
who represent 5 to 10% of the members of SHGs. 
58. Climate  Risk category. The  project  is  categorized  as  high  climate  risk.  Historical  and  projected 
future climatic changes suggest that the project areas will experience increase in temperatures 
and precipitation, increase in rainfall intensity combined with increased likelihood of dry spells, 
drought and delayed rains during the wet season. The in-depth climate risk analysis is presented 
above. 
59. The  project  will  be  supporting  enterprise  expansion  and  diversification  in  the  following  sub-
sectors : on-farm sectors such as but not limited to, dairy, goat keeping, poultry, fruits, vegetables 
;  and  off-farm  sectors  such  as  but  not  limited  to,  bamboo/woodwork,  jewellery  making, 
handicrafts, eco-tourism etc...In order to mitigate the impact of climate change on the enterprises 
supported  by  Nav Tejaswini,  the  project  will mainstream climate smart  agriculture  and  animal 
husbandry in business advice offered to the women entrepreneurs, and incorporate measures for 
efficient use of water and energy conservation in processing/ manufacturing/ service enterprises. 
These measures are well aligned with the priorities identified in the handbook for Maharashtra 
State Action Plan for Climate Change (2018).   
60. It  is  also  worth  mentioning  that  at  state  level,  the  Government  of  Maharashtra  is  already 
implementing a series of large scale programmes that aim to mitigate the risks of climate change, 
and  the  Nav  Tejaswini  will  ensure  convergence  with  these.    A  case  in  point  is  the  massive 
programme  launched  by  the  State  Government  in  2015,  called  Jalyukt  Shivar.  This  is  a  water 
conservation programme which has created so far, an irrigation potential of 2,274,744 ha and a 
water storage capacity of 1,727,229 TMC (thousand million cubic feet) across 16,521 villages in 34 
districts of the state since 2015. Comparative data shows that in 2013-14 when there was 124 per 
cent rainfall, the agriculture production was 137.91 lakh metric tonnes (MT). However, in 2017-
18, despite rainfall being 84.3 per cent of its total capacity, there was an agricultural production 
of 132.83 lakh MT.  Research studies show that it has led to increase in crop yields and even change 
in cropping patterns in the  state. In addition, the Government of Maharashtra has a policy on 
renewable energy since 2015. In addition to supporting hydropower, wind and solar power, the 
policy also provides incentives for power generated from sugarcane and other agricultural waste. 
H.  Primary beneficiary and Institutional stakeholders 
61. The institutions that the project will potentially coordinate with include: Department of Women 
and  Child  Development  (the  parent  department  of  MAVIM);  Department  of  Agriculture  and 
Marketing; Department  of  Animal Husbandry  and  Fisheries; Department of  Small and  Medium 
Enterprises; Department of Skill development; Department of Rural Development; Maharashtra 
State Rural Livelihoods Mission; financial institutions; and the private sector. The project will be 
aligned to the existing policies/programs/legislation. Some of the relevant policies/programs/acts 
are summarized in Table  below:
27 
Table 3 Relevant National Acts/Polices/Programs 
Act/Rule/Policy 
Description 
Doubling Farmer's Income 
National Livestock Mission 
(NLM), commenced from 
2014-15. 
Umed – Maharashtra State 
Rural Livelihoods Mission 
(MSRLM) 
The Government of India has focused its attention on doubling the farmers’ income during the 
seven-year period from 2015–16 to 2022–23. 
Six major sources for increasing farmers’ income, viz., improvement in crop productivity, livestock 
productivity, resource use efficiency or promoting savings in the cost of production, increase in 
cropping intensity, diversification towards high-value crops, and enhancement of the real prices 
received by farmers. 
National Livestock Mission (NLM) provides assistance to improve availability of quality feed and 
fodder, risk mitigation and extension, skill development and training for livestock sector 
The National livestock Mission is organised into the following four sub-Missions: 
i. Sub-Mission on Livestock Development. 
ii. Sub-Mission on Pig Development in North-eastern Region. 
iii. Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development. 
iv. Sub-Mission on Skill Development, Technology Transfer and Extension. 
The  Mission  is  implemented  through  a  three  tier  structure  comprising  a  State  Mission 
Management Unit, District Mission Management Unit and Block Mission Management Unit. The 
mission envisions poverty elimination through social mobilization, institution building,  financial 
inclusion and the creation of several models of sustainable livelihoods so that each poor family is 
able to secure incremental annual income. 
Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran 
Pariyojana (MKSP). 
A sub component  of the  Deendayal Antodaya  Yojana-NRLM (DAY-NRLM)  seeks to improve the 
present status of women in agriculture, and enhance the opportunities available to empower. 
Relevance to the Project 
Highly  relevant  as  the  project  is 
built  realize the mission of DFI 
All  the  Sub-mission  are  highly 
relevant 
Highly  relevant.  Under  the  overall 
framework  of  National  Rural 
Livelihood Mission (NRLM), MSRLM 
endeavours to impact rural poverty 
through a  range of comprehensive 
and 
livelihoods 
interventions 
in  a  time  bound 
manner.  The  Mission  aims  at 
eradication  of  rural  poverty  by 
building  sustainable  institutions  of 
poor and ultimately leading them to 
sustainable livelihoods. 
strategic 
Applicable as women constitute an 
important project beneficiary group 
and  the  project  needs  to  ensure 
participation  of  women 
and 
strengthen  their  role  in  decision 
making,  in  institutions,  access  to 
trainings, in reduction of drudgery. 
28 
National commission of 
women (1990) and National 
policy for the Empowerment 
of Women (2001). 
These are intended to create a positive environment for the overall development of women and 
safeguard the rights and legal entitlements of women. 
Relevant for ensuring their right to 
equal remuneration. 
National Policy on Tribal 
Development, 1999. 
"The  policy  seeks  to  bring  scheduled  tribes  into  the  mainstream  of  society  through  a  multi-
pronged approach for their all-round development without disturbing their distinct culture. 
Development and 
empowerment of STs is 
enshrined in the Constitution 
and the tribal sub- plans 
included covered under the 
Five Year Plans." 
Tribal Sub Plan 
National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM ). 
Maharashtra Industrial Policy 
201925 
"This  policy  will  be  applicable  to  project  activities  in  tribal  dominated  districts.  Project  has  to 
ensure participation of tribal communities in the project activities without any adverse impacts 
on local tribal groups.(cid:13)" 
All funds from various programs are pooled and used strategically to support the socio- economic 
development of tribals within a specified period. 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is a Central Scheme of GOI launched in 2007 to increase 
production and productivity of wheat, rice and pulses on a sustainable basis so as to ensure food 
security  of  the  country.  The  aim  is  to  bridge  the  yield  gap  in  respect  of  these  crops  through 
dissemination of improved technologies and farm management practices. 
The industrial policy is intended to draw investments of over Rs 10 lakh crore and generating about 
40 lakh jobs by 2023-24. 
The key highlights of the New Industrial Policy are as follows: 
 
Promotions of MSMEs under the new Chief Minister Employment Programme 
 
Incentives for great and mega projects 
  An Infrastructure Capital of Rs. 1,000 crores 
 
 
 
Formulation of Commerce and Trade Councils 
Further incentives for Agro and Food Processing Industries 
Industrial  cluster-based  strategy  to  support  sustainable,  cost-effective,  and  a 
comprehensive approach to secure aggressive and enhanced MSME units. 
25 https://www.aipma.net/Industry-Update/Maharashtra%20Industrial%20Policy%20Draft%20Modified%20on%2002.03.2019.pdf 
participatory 
Highly relevant and the project uses 
approach 
a 
to 
technology 
development, 
demonstration and scaling-up.  
Please see below 
The policy is applicable in the tribal 
districts.  The  project  interventions 
can  be  dovetailed  with  the  Tribal 
Development Sub Plan. 
relevant 
Highly 
the 
selected districts are covered under 
National Food Security Mission. 
since  all 
Highly relevant 
Some  of  the  thrust  sectors  of 
industrial  policy  include:  Agro  & 
Food Processing and Green Energy. 
The policy is focussed on industrial 
growth  and  development  of  the 
of 
underdeveloped 
Marathwada 
Vidarbha 
and 
(separate 
increase 
). 
Introduction  of  special  component 
and 
classification 
incentives  by  10% 
regions 
29 
for the development of Maoist and 
tribal  belts  of  Nandurbar,  Washim 
and Gadchiroli under the industrial 
cluster development project. 
Highly relevant for Nav Tejaswini 
The woman and child development 
department will also keep aside Rs 
50 crore for the policy, which will be 
valid  for  5  years  or  till  further 
directives  issued  by  the  industries 
department. 
Maharashtra Women 
Entrepreneurs Policy 201726 
The  objective  is  to  encourage  participation  of  women  entrepreneurs,  create  an  environment 
which assures entrepreneurship and to provide technical, operational and economic assistance, 
which will enhance the employment opportunities to women. 
 
Job  Creation  and  Investment:  the  state  government  is  anticipating  women-owned 
business in the region to go up by about 9-20 per cent. The government is also aiming to 
fetch an investment of worth Rs 2,000 crore. The move will also create about a lakh of 
jobs across the state in the next five years. The government will keep aside Rs 648 crore 
for next year's budget for the same.  
  Moolah Backup: The woman entrepreneurs would get between Rs 15 lakh to Rs 1 crore 
financial assistance in a proportion of 15%-35% of the capital investment of a project at 
the subsidized rate of interest up to 5%. 
  No Man’s Land: For real estate acquisition, MSMEs can also avail an interest subsidy of 
about 5% for the payment made on the term loan to the bank or government-led financial 
institutions.  Maharashtra  Industrial  Development  Corporation  (MIDC)  across  the  state 
will also reserve land of shepreneurs. 
  Building Ecosystem: The state government of Maharashtra is planning to set up about 10 
incubators and clusters depending on the nature of business in the region. Inviting public-
private partnership (PPP), the government said it will bear 75% of the project cost, which 
is capped at Rs 5 crore, of setting up an incubation center. This will however,  exclude the 
cost of land acquisition. 
  Marketing Purposes: If any commercial real estate developers reserve spaces for women 
entrepreneurs, they can enjoy additional floor space index (FSI) benefits. Women can use 
these to display or market their products. 
For a wider exposure, women-led business will receive Rs 50,000 or 75 per cent of the 
rent in a domestic exhibition while about Rs 3 lakh for international events.  Also, 50% of 
the expenditure for the exhibition organized for women entrepreneurs will be provided 
in maximum limit of 10 lakhs. 
 
26 https://www.midcindia.org/documents/20181/28829/Special+Policy+for+Women+Entrepreneur/083d3c6e-e677-4577-9af9-f1e8510c7441 
30 
Maharashtra Tourism Policy 
201627 
Understanding the importance of the Tourism Sector and the opportunity it presents, Government 
of Maharashtra has identified Tourism as a priority sector. Tourism Policy of Maharashtra released 
in 2006 highlights are: 
  Designate Tourism as a priority sector since it holds the potential to usher in economic 
development and generate high employment opportunities in Maharashtra – change—
the policy will establish. 
  Achieve sector growth of 10% per annum and share of 15% in GSDP through tourism and 
tourism related activities. 
Highly  relevant  as  Eco-tourism  is 
one  of  the  interventions  proposed 
in Nav Tejaswini project 
State to facilitate Eco tours, nature 
trails and experiential tourism. The 
DoT  will  formulate  strategy  to 
promote,  facilitate  and  incentivize 
development of 
  Generate fresh investments in the tourism sector to the tune of INR 30,000 crore by 2025 
 
 
Create 1 million additional jobs in the tourism sector by 2025 
Incentivize tourism units in the state by linking it to the Package Scheme of Incentives, 
2013 of Industries, Energy and Labour Department or any modifications thereafter. The 
incentives under this policy are designed as per the needs of the tourism sector in the 
state. 
Key  strategic 
intervention have been laid out. 
Strengthening  of  tourism  infrastructure  especially  in  the  form  of  PPP  model,  special 
tourism infrastructure Tourism Infrastructure development fund, CSR, etc. are defined in 
this policy. 
incentives  for  respective 
identified  and  special 
interventions  are 
 
 
The Tourism policy does not refer to chance finds of cultural and historical significance that may 
be encountered during project civil works. Project will therefore put these procedures in place.  
 
 
 
 
Caravan parks in the public 
sector,  private  sector  and 
PPP mode. 
Caravans 
in  the  public 
sector,  private  sector  and 
PPP mode. 
The  DoT  will  give  special 
licenses 
to  eco-friendly 
temporary construction on 
the 
of 
beaches 
Maharashtra.  They  need 
to be eco-friendly and CRZ 
compliant. 
Eco-tourism 
in 
place28 (speaks about core 
concepts like participation 
of local community, nature 
regulated 
education, 
tourism 
and 
uncompromised 
conservation.  It  also  talks 
a 
about 
separate 
ecotourism 
board for looking after the 
ecotourism). 
creation  of 
Policy 
27 https://www.maharashtratourism.gov.in/docs/default-source/tourism-policy-2016/mtdc-tourism-policy-2016.pdf?sfvrsn=2%20target%20= 
28 http://mahaforest.nic.in/policy_file/1310720768eco-tourism-policy.pdf 
31 
Relevant  because  of  forests  in  the 
Nav  Tejaswini  districts  and  kind  of 
activities 
(Bamboo 
proposed 
Handicraft)? 
the  coastal  zone 
Relevant  as 
for 
(CZMP) 
management  plan 
Mumbai,  Sindhudurg,  Ratnagiri, 
Raigad,  Thane  and  Palghar  have 
been approved as of 2019. 
Maharashtra state forest 
policy 200829 
Coastal Zone Regulation rules, 
201130  
The Maharashtra Forest Policy 2008 aims at raising forest cover in the state to a minimum of 33% 
(101.54 lakh hectares) of total land, as per the recommendations of the Planning Commission and 
the National Forest Policy, 1988.  
At present, the forest area in the state is around 20 per cent. Of this 56 per cent is in Vidarbha, 
five per cent in Marathwada and 39 per cent in western Maharashtra.  
As part of the policy, Maharashtra is plannning on becoming the first state in the country to levy 
a green tax to encourage forest development. 
The  salient  features  of  the  draft  CRZ  Notification,  2018  and  changes  with  respect  to  CRZ 
Notification, 2011; 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
The High  Tide Line (HTL) has  been demarcated by the National Centre for Sustainable 
Coastal Management (NCSCM) and shall be reckoned as a universal standard for the HTL 
for all regulatory purposes under the CRZ Notification, 2018. 
Hazard line mapping has also been carried out by Survey of India.  The Hazard Line has, 
however, been delinked from the CRZ regulatory regime and shall be used only as a tool 
for Disaster Management and planning of adaptive and mitigation measures. 
CRZ  limits  on  land  along  the  tidal  influenced  water  bodies  has  been  proposed  to  be 
reduced from 100 meters or the width of the creek, whichever is less, to 50 meters or the 
width of the creek, whichever is less. 
A No Development Zone (NDZ) of 20 meters has been proposed to be stipulated for all 
Islands close to the main land coast and for all Backwater Islands in the main land.  
For CRZ-III areas, two separate categories have been proposed viz. CRZ-III A and CRZ-III 
B. 
The procedure for CRZ clearances has been simplified and delegations have been made 
at various levels for recommending/according CRZ clearances to the projects/activities.  
Only such projects/activities, which are located in the CRZ-I & IV areas, shall be dealt with 
for CRZ clearance by the MoEF&CC.  For all other project activities located in CRZ-II/III 
areas, CRZ clearance shall be considered at the level of the CZMA. 
As per CRZ, 2011 Notification, for CRZ-II areas, Floor Space Index (FSI) or the Floor Area 
Ratio (FAR) had been frozen at 1991 Development Control Regulation (DCR) levels.  In the 
Draft CRZ, 2018 Notification, it has been proposed to de-freeze the same and permit FSI 
for construction projects, as prevailing on the date of the new Notification. 
29 http://mahaforest.nic.in/policy_file/1311066686Maharashtra%20Forest%20Policy%202008.pdf 
30 https://mczma.gov.in/sites/default/files/2011_1_6_CRZ_Notification.pdf 
32 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
Temporary tourism facilities such as shacks, toilet blocks, change rooms, drinking water 
facilities etc. have been proposed in Beaches. Such temporary tourism facilities are also 
proposed to be permissible in the No Development Zone (NDZ) of the CRZ-III areas. 
Wherever there is a National or State Level Highway passing through the NDZ in CRZ-III 
areas, temporary tourism facilities have been proposed to be taken up on the seaward 
site of the roads.  On the landward side of such roads in the NDZ, Resorts/Hotels and 
other tourism facilities have also been proposed to be permitted subject to the extant 
regulations of the concerned State. 
Regulated limestone mining is proposed to be permitted, subject to strict Environmental 
safeguards, in areas adequately above the height of HTL, based on recommendations of 
reputed National Institutes in the Mining field. 
The Maharashtra State Water Policy 2019  is a comprehensive water policy for the state which 
focuses  on  increasing  water  and  agricultural  productivity,  reducing  disparity  in  water  supply 
criteria applied for urban and rural areas, providing water through pipelines from reservoirs and 
bringing water guzzling crops like sugarcane and banana under micro-irrigation. The policy lays 
emphasis  on  making  rainwater  harvesting  mandatory  in  urban  areas  and  for  new  colonies, 
groundwater planning will be devised. 
The policy also imposes new regulations on groundwater management and states; “… It will be 
obligatory for water users to adopt groundwater recharge measures to compensate for the water 
extracted by them”. 
Policy also focuses on flood management, drought mitigation and domestic as well as industrial 
water usage, among other areas. The policy prioritises judicious use of water, drinking water as 
well as the water used in industries, and water used for power generation, cultural and religious 
ceremonies, and sports activities. 
Key compliance requirements under the Draft Rules: 
Registration of existing well owners: The Draft Rules, brings in place the procedure in which the 
existing well owners can register their wells. This registration is subject to a notice published by 
the  State  Groundwater  Authority  mentioning  the  programme  (calendar)  and  procedure  for 
registration. It also clarifies that existing owners to obtain separate registration for having more 
than one well. 
Maharashtra State Water 
Policy (2019)31 
Maharashtra ground water 
rule, 201832 Draft yet to be 
approved 
Relevant 
water 
Micro-irrigation, 
harvesting and ground water usage. 
rain 
Relevant,  to  promote  water  use 
efficiency. 
31 https://wrd.maharashtra.gov.in/Site/Upload/PDF/State%20Water%20Policy%2005092019.pdf 
32 https://gsda.maharashtra.gov.in/english/admin/PDF_Files/1533615572_Maharashtra_Groundwater_Rules_2018.pdf 
33 
Registration of new well owners: For a new well owner, who intends to dig a well in a notified 
area,  the  Draft  Rules  lay  a  mandate  on  such  persons  to  apply  before  the  Watershed  Water 
Resources Committee for obtaining permission to carry out the activity. 
Permission required for digging / drilling wells more than 60 meter deep: The Draft Rules makes 
it mandatory to obtain a permission for digging/drilling deep wells of more than 60 meters depth 
in order to extract drinking water for drinking water purpose. 
Mandatory construction of rainwater harvesting  structures: As per the Draft Rules, in case the 
occupant  /  developer  /  builder  of  a  respective  premise,  fails  to  construct  rainwater  harvesting 
structures,  within  a  period  of  6  months  from  the  date  of  notice  of  construction  by  the  State 
Groundwater Authority, the same will be constructed by the local body and the cost would be 
recovered which shall be upto 1.25 times the cost of construction. 
State Action Plan on Climate 
Change: Assessing Climate 
Change Vulnerability and 
Adaptation Strategies for 
Maharashtra : Maharashtra 
State Adaptation Action Plan 
on Climate Change (MSAAPC), 
201433 
Special provisions for women farmers in national schemes  
The state action plan discusses the impacts of climate change on six sectors — agriculture, water 
resources, health, forests and biodiversity, livelihoods, and energy and infrastructure. 
An important component of the action plan is the Macro Level Vulnerability Index (MLVI) based 
on 19 indicators, which has identified the most  vulnerable districts in Maharashtra. As per this 
vulnerability index, Nandurbar is the most climate change vulnerable district, followed by Dhule 
and  Buldhana  districts.  On  the  other  hand,  Satara  is  regarded  as  the  least  vulnerable  district. 
Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg districts are also considered less vulnerable to changes in the climate. 
Relevant 
National Mission on 
Agricultural Extension & 
Technology (NMAET) – Sub-
Mission on Agricultural 
Extension (SAME) 
Agriculture Technology Management Agency (ATMA) 
Agri-Clinics & Agri-Business Centers (ACABC) 
Mass Media Support to Agricultural Extension. 
Highly  relevant  as  the  project 
incorporates 
agronomic 
good 
practices for agri enterprises  
Mission for Integrated 
Development of Horticulture 
(MIDH). 
Centrally sponsored 
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
the holistic growth of the horticulture sector covering fruits, vegetables, root & tuber crops, 
mushrooms, spices, flowers, aromatic plants, coconut, cashew, cocoa and bamboo. 
Under MIDH, financial assistance is provided for following major interventions/activities: 
All  the  Sub-mission  are  highly 
relevant  specially  for  protected 
cultivation/Green House 
 
Setting up of nurseries, tissue culture units for production of quality seed and planting 
material. 
  Area expansion i.e. Establishment of new orchards and gardens for fruits, vegetables, 
and flowers. · Rejuvenation of unproductive, old, and senile orchards. 
33 http://moef.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Maharashtra-Climate-Change-Final-Report.pdf 
34 
 
Protected cultivation, i.e. poly-house, green-house, etc, to improve the productivity & 
grow off season high value vegetables and flowers. 
Creation of water resources structures and watershed management. 
  Organic farming and certification. 
 
  Bee-keeping for pollination. 
  Horticulture Mechanization. 
 
Creation of Post Harvest Management and Marketing infrastructure. 
Integrated Scheme for 
Agricultural Marketing (ISAM). 
Centrally sponsored 
New Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) sub-scheme of Integrated Scheme for 
Agricultural marketing (ISAM) is approved for implementation. 
Highly relevant. 
The sub - scheme AMI lays special focus on developing and upgrading Gramin Haats (village 
markets) through strengthening of infrastructure, which may function as farmer - consumer 
market (retails market) and collection/aggregation points (spokes) with linkage to secondary 
market (hub) and also to processing/ exporting and retain chain with participation of FPOs, other 
farmers ’ groups and private sector eligible promoters. 
National Mission for 
Sustainable Agriculture 
(NMSA). 
Centrally sponsored 
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has been formulated for enhancing 
agricultural productivity especially in rainfed areas focusing on integrated farming, water use 
efficiency, soil health management and synergizing resource conservation. 
NMSA has following four (4) major programme components or activities: 
Highly relevant considering project 
districts are mostly rainfed. Existing 
funding  under  NMSA  can  benefit 
Nav Tejaswini project 
1.  Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 
2.  On Farm Water Management (OFWM) 
3.  Soil Health Management (SHM) 
4.  Climate Change and Sustainable Agriculture: Monitoring, Modeling and Networking 
(CCSAMMN) 
Agricultural Insurance. 
Centrally sponsored 
State Action Plan on Climate 
Change (SACC) 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana 
Highly Relevant.  
Climate Change sectoral adaptation action plans have been drawn. 
Relevant  for  aligning  the  project 
mitigation 
adaptation 
and 
strategies with SACC provisions. 
Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 
The Act aims at prohibiting the employment of children below 14 years of age as per the Section 
3 of the Act. It specifically prohibits the employment of all children under the age of 14 and has 
Highly relevant in addressing issues 
related to child labour. 
35 
put in place strong penalties for employers floating the law with monetary fines and punishment 
such as imprisonment.  
36 
I.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
The project’s M&E system will be aligned to the project log-frame. M&E data will be disaggregated by 
gender, by age, and by ST/SC, BPL status. A management information system will be developed in line 
with other ongoing projects. Baseline, midline and endline surveys as well as annual outcomes surveys 
will be carried out to document project results and impact. It is recommended that the project staff 
collect  GPS  coordinates  of  all  interventions  to  plot  the  data  on  maps  and  provide  a  visual 
representation  of  activities.  This  approach  enhances  monitoring,  impact  assessment  and  overall 
accountability. It also allows follow up of the implementation of environmental safeguards: such as 
avoiding environmentally fragile or protected areas; absence of deforestation or major excavation of 
civil works near the enterprises; absence of accumulation of waste around the enterprises; etc… 
37 
Annexure 1 – Environment and Social Management Plan 
A.  Positive impact of project implementation 
1.  The overall goal of the Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women Enterprise Development Project 
is to enable one million poor rural households to overcome poverty. The Project objective is to 
improve  capacity  of  rural  women  to  diversify  into  sustainable  enterprises  or  engage  in 
remunerative employment and enhance their access to markets. The project will benefit 10 lakh 
(1  million)  rural  women,  the  majority  of  whom  are  members  of  established  self-help  groups 
federated into community managed resources centres (CMRCs). The CMRCs are present in all 34 
rural districts of Maharashtra and were established under the now closed Tejaswini Maharashtra 
Rural Women Empowerment Programme (2007-2018). Project design is well suited to address 
impending environmental and climate risks envisaged in the selected districts. A large section of 
the target groups belong to the rural poor, small and marginal farmers, especially women and 
landless groups who are likely to be most affected by climate change, are deemed vulnerable and 
who may not have ready access to risk-mitigation tools. The project will build on the lessons learnt 
from  the  recently  concluded  project,  Tejaswini  Maharashtra  Rural  Women  Empowerment 
Programme (2007-2018).  
B.  Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and 
risks 
2.  Social Risk: Maharashtra has 55% rural population with 49% female population (30% rural female 
literacy). Out of 31% of female working population, 82% are main workers and 18% are marginal 
workers. In Maharashtra, out of 16.8 million women in workforce, 69% are highly dependent on 
agriculture  (engaged  as  cultivators  and  agricultural  labourers).  Maharashtra  ranks  fifth  in  the 
country with regard to women-owned establishments (8.25% of total). According to the National 
Family Health Survey IV, 47% of women are anaemic and 27% women are underweight. Close to 
54 % households are landless, incidence of poverty is 16.8% and intensity of poverty is 41.3%. 
These factors add to the vulnerability and enhance climate risks. All these factors also contribute 
to low access to information, technology and capacity building in these districts. 
3.  Cultural risk: The project will be promoting enterprises in the eco-tourism sector. While no major 
excavation  work  is  foreseen,  chance  finds  of  historical  and  cultural  significance  may  be 
encountered.  In  absence  of  related  procedures  in  Tourism  policy of  State  (see  table  3  below), 
measures will be prepared by MAVIM to plan and execute tourism projects in order to coordinate, 
facilitate  the  archiving,  safekeeping  and  documentation  of  physical  cultural  resources.  Also, 
necessary  steps  of  public  consultations,  engagement  of  cultural  or  religious  leaders,  local 
authorities  will  be  conducted  before  decision  on  the  subproject  is  made.  The  CMRCs  will  be 
trained on these procedures so that they are fully integrated in the sub-projects they submit as 
well  as  the  contract  negotiation  with  the  private  sector.  The  procedures  for  chance  finds  are 
described in PIM. The project is expected to promote 30 sub-projects in eco- and agri-tourism for 
a value of 3 million USD approx.  
4.  Environmental  Risk:  70%  of  the  State’s  geographical  area  lies  in  semi-arid  region  rendering  it 
vulnerable to water scarcity which is likely to affect water availability and water quality. 40% of 
38 
the area is drought prone. About 7% of the area of Maharashtra is flood prone. The coastal areas 
of Maharashtra are risk prone to cyclones and the State is classified under moderately vulnerable 
category. 6 districts fall in high earthquake zone and 20 districts in moderate earthquake zone. 
5.  Climate Risk: It is evident from the analysis of climate scenarios that the selected districts would 
have  hotter  future.  Increased  Temperature,  changes  in  daytime/night-time  temperatures, 
changes in seasons (e.g., start date of rainy season), increased/decreased/more variable rainfall, 
and  more  severe  and/or more  frequent extreme  events  may  impact  agriculture  and  livestock. 
Crop loss, increase in crop-water demand, , emergence of new pests, reduced availability of feed 
and fodder, loss of grazing land due to drought, increase distribution of water and vector-borne 
diseases, feed and water shortages etc., may need to be addressed. In addition, duration of out-
door farm activities of livestock grazing and agriculture labourers are likely to be affected due to 
heat  stress.  Reduction  in  livestock  products  (milk, meat)  are  also  likely  to  be  impacted  due  to 
projected increased THI (temperature humidity index). Feed intake, production and reproductive 
efficiency of animals are affected by heat stress as a result of increase in temperature. Livestock 
is a key asset  fulfilling multiple economic, social and risk management functions especially for 
rural poor communities. 
 The project should design strategies to protect outdoor workers and livestock from heat stress 
which  may  include  building  awareness  about  heat  related  illness  to  outdoor  workers  and 
imparting trainings on heat preventive measures. 
6. 
C.  Proposed Mitigation Measures 
7.  The risk mitigation measures which may be included in the project design are: (i) Capacity building 
of  partner  institutions/Agriculture/Animal  husbandry  officials  and  collaboration  with  National 
Institutes for technology know-how for reduction of CH4 emission from enteric fermentation, (ii) 
water  conservation  and  rain  water  harvesting  (iii)  Trained  primary  veterinary  health  care  and 
emergency rescue operation person/SHG, (iii) Development of Livestock Early Warning Systems, 
(iv) water conservation and rain water harvesting. 
8.  The project is not likely to have any adverse environment impacts on the project area and as result 
the project is classified as Category B in the environmental and social category  
D.  Monitoring Programs and Parameters 
9. 
Identify and prioritize climate risk management options based on the more focused assessment 
using Participatory scenario development workshops 
E.  Public Consultation Activities 
10. Please see record of people met in the annex 6 of the concept note of the project.  
F.  Responsibilities 
11. The responsibility for the implementation of the ESMP rests with MAVIM, the lead implementing 
agency.  
G.  Reporting and Reviewing 
Capacity building 
39 
12. Capacity building: Awareness building to bring understanding of the gender-entrepreneurship-
climate  nexus.  Capacity  building  for  women  entrepreneurs  on  access  to  finances,  dedicated 
women oriented  government  schemes  and  programmes.  Organise  Capacity  building  on  digital 
financial  transactions.  Awareness  building    for  access  to  extension  services,  credit,  education, 
information,  training  and  knowledge  creation.  Develop  a  cadre  of  women  community  service 
providers (CSPs) for capacity building of women farmers.  
13. Mitigation 
of 
partner 
emissions: 
institutions/Agriculture/Animal husbandry officials and collaboration with National Institutes for 
technology know-how for reduction of CH4 emission from enteric fermentation. 
livestock 
Capacity 
building 
GHG 
of 
40 
H.  Climate Risk Matrix 
Target Groups 
Threats 
Climate triggers 
Risk 
Mitigation/Adaptation 
Health, daily income 
loss (Flood), water 
availability 
Support from the CMRCs to the landless and destitute households 
under Ultra-Poor related interventions of component 2 of the 
project.  
Landless 
Belonging to 
small and 
marginal land 
holding 
category  
With special 
focus on 
women 
farming 
community 
including 
agriculture 
labourers and 
landless 
Livestock with 
special focus 
on Goat rearing 
and backyard 
poultry 
Climate shocks   Heavy/excess 
rainfall days, 
Drought, Floods, 
Heat wave 
Climate shocks   Drought, 
Consecutive dry 
days, floods, Pest 
and diseases, High 
temperature 
Forest fires, soil loss, 
loss of crop leading to 
income loss, livestock 
fodder shortage, 
malnutrition 
Drudgery, 
health 
Heat stress, 
drought, 
flood/malaria 
Physical exhaustion, 
health hazards, loss of 
income due to flood,  
Water 
availability, 
methane 
emission 
Temperature, Co2, 
Flood, drought, 
High temperature 
(Early mature, loss 
of yield), Pests and 
diseases 
Yield loss, poor seed 
quality 
Under rainfed 
conditions 
Water 
availability, 
erratic rainfall 
distribution, 
early maturity 
Consecutive wet 
and dry days, low 
seasonal rainfall, 
shifting season (1 
Crop loss, nutrient loss, 
soil erosion 
CMRCs trained to support their members to access Government 
schemes promoting water harvesting and micro-irrigation, as well as 
access to crop insurance and other safety nets provided by State 
Govt. Promotion of good agricultural practices for climate resilient 
agriculture and quality inputs provided through CMRCs or partner 
private sector.  
For land related activities and non farm enterprises, sub-projects will 
promote precision machinery that improve labour productivity and 
reduce drudgery; promote drought resilient farming based on crop 
diversification, low external input sustainable agriculture. For 
livestock related activities, the sub-projects will include intensive and 
semi-intensive livestock husbandry and appropriate sheds/ feed and 
water troughs.  
To control methane emissions in livestock, the sub-projects will 
provide for feed mixes and livestock breeds that have better 
conversion of feed; recycling of manure into biogas and bio-slurry. To 
control methane emissions from rice cultivation, CMRCs will expand 
SRI (as already adopted by SHG members in rice producing areas). 
For water availability, the sub-projects will include water troughs for 
livestock. For crops, the sub-projects will include micro-irrigation. For 
non-farm activities, the sub-projects will include machinery that is 
water efficient, and where possible, water will be recycled.  
Project will promote water efficient/ high value crop production 
enterprises; CMRCs will disseminate micro-irrigation and protective 
irrigation through agro-service centres managed by them; CMRCs 
trained to facilitate convergence with Govt schemes and help their 
41 
week to 10 days), 
extremely wet days 
members access soil and water conservation (watershed 
development schemes) and Jalyukt Shivar (water harvesting scheme).  
I.  Environmental Mitigation Plan 
Impact 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Low 
Land and soil 
degradation (incl. 
agrochemicals) 
Extent / Prevalence  Recommended 
All Districts 
Mitigation 
Measures 
The Government of 
Maharashtra is 
implementing a 
large scale soil and 
water conservation 
programme called 
Jalyukt Shivar which 
aims to develop 
integrated soil and 
water conservation 
works in 5000 
villages/ year. Since 
its implementation 
in 2015, it created 
so far, an irrigation 
potential of 
2,274,744 ha and a 
water storage 
capacity of 
17,27,229 TMC 
(thousand million 
cubic feet) across 
16,521 villages in 
34 districts. 
Comparative data 
shows that in 2013-
14 when there was 
124 per cent 
rainfall the 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
Mitigation will be 
through 
convergence with 
the Jalyukt Shivar 
scheme were 
applicable. 
Means of 
verification 
Timing / frequency 
of verification 
Annual 
MAVIM will be 
tracking the 
programs it 
converges with and 
the number of 
beneficiaries 
thereof. 
42 
Impact 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Extent / Prevalence  Recommended 
Water pollution 
Medium 
All Districts 
Forest and wetland 
removal 
Low 
All Districts 
Mitigation 
Measures 
agriculture 
production was 
137.91 lakh metric 
tonnes (MT). 
However, in 2017-
18, despite rainfall 
being 84.3 per cent 
of its total capacity, 
there was an 
agricultural 
production of 
132.83 lakh MT. As 
a result the 
significance rating 
is assessed as low. 
Minimize use of 
non-organic 
fertilizers and 
encourage use of 
organic (bio-
degradable) 
manure in 
agriculture; and 
reduce use of agro-
chemicals in 
processing and 
manufacturing 
processes.  
This is not 
applicable to the 
project. Enterprises 
will not be 
developed / 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
Means of 
verification 
Timing / frequency 
of verification 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
Every two years 
Periodic 
assessment on how 
environmental 
safeguards are 
mainstreamed in 
business processes 
Annual 
As above + 
Geotagging of 
enterprises to 
ensure they are not 
located in 
environmentally 
43 
Impact 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Extent / Prevalence  Recommended 
Erosion and gully 
Medium 
All Districts 
Bush burning 
Low 
Districts with tribal 
population where 
shifting cultivation 
is practised 
Loss of biodiversity 
Low 
All districts 
Waste proliferation  Medium 
All districts 
Mitigation 
Measures 
expanded in such 
areas. 
Please see 
description of 
Jalyukt Shivar 
programme of Govt 
of Maharashtra 
The project is not 
investing in bush 
burning and will be 
promoting good 
agronomic 
practices for soil 
nutrient 
management. 
The project will not 
be operating in 
ecologically 
sensitive areas 
Train enterprise 
owners on 
sustainable waste 
management by 
simple and 
effective 
technologies and 
better hygiene to 
liquidate waste, 
including livestock 
effluents; Create 
enterprises around 
waste valorization 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
Means of 
verification 
Timing / frequency 
of verification 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
fragile or protected 
areas 
MAVIM will track 
convergence with 
Jalyukt Shivar and 
no of beneficiaries 
No of beneficiaries 
adopting 
environmental and 
climate smart 
production 
techniques 
Periodic 
assessment of 
compliance with 
the environmental 
safeguards 
Number of sub-
projects that 
incorporate safe 
waste and effluent 
disposal.  
Annual 
Annual 
Every two years 
Annual 
44 
Impact 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Extent / Prevalence  Recommended 
Medium 
All districts 
Pollution of water 
and crops due to 
use of 
agrochemicals 
Flooding 
Medium 
7% of State area is 
prone to floods 
GHG emissions 
Medium 
All districts 
Mitigation 
Measures 
where market 
opportunities exist. 
Minimize use of 
non-organic 
fertilizers and 
encourage use of 
organic (bio-
degradable) 
manure in 
agriculture. 
Encourage regular 
and timely 
dissemination of 
hydro-
meteorological 
information to agri-
entrepreneurs; Link 
target group to 
crop and other 
insurance schemes 
areas; Discourage 
siting of livestock 
enterprises in flood 
prone areas 
Ensure energy 
efficiency and 
recycling of waste 
in business 
processes for the 
enterprises 
supported by Nav 
Tejaswini 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
MAVIM 
Means of 
verification 
Timing / frequency 
of verification 
Annual 
Convergence with 
Government 
schemes for 
sustainable 
agriculture 
MAVIM 
Annual 
Convergence with 
Government 
schemes and no of 
beneficiaries 
MAVIM 
Annual 
Number of sub-
projects including 
GHG emission 
measures (such as 
SRI, improved feed 
conversion ratio for 
livestock, and use 
of renewable 
energy in farm and 
45 
Impact 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Extent / Prevalence  Recommended 
Mitigation 
Measures 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
Timing / frequency 
of verification 
Means of 
verification 
non farm 
enterprises) 
Lack of knowledge 
and awareness 
Medium 
All districts 
MAVIM and CMRC 
No of trainees from 
MAVIM and CMRCs 
Annual 
Capacity building of 
MAVIM and CMRCs 
on mainstreaming 
environmental and 
climate safeguards 
in the business 
processes of small 
enterprises 
46 
J.  Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Key Requirements 
Landless households, 
marginal farmers, female 
workers 
High Temperature, 
Reduced Rainfall, 
variability, drought 
Disaster Emergency 
Response 
(cyclone/flood/forest 
fire/earthquake) 
Sediment/siltation/water 
quality 
Actions 
Mentoring, coaching and 
skill development for the 
Ultra-Poor (under 
component 2 of project) 
and convergence with 
Government safety 
schemes 
Demonstration of Drought 
Proofing techniques / 
Conservation Agriculture 
(pilot projects) /change in 
cropping pattern/crop 
(livestock) insurance/ 
Identify 
existing/convergence with 
Government schemes for 
SWC, water harvesting, 
micro-irrigation, insurance 
and safety nets 
CMRCs trained on disaster 
preparedness and recovery, 
under capacity building of 
CMRCs (component 1) , and 
incorporated in training on 
value chain project design 
and management.  
Sub-projects incorporate 
measures to reduce water 
pollution and improve 
water use efficiency. 
Convergence with Govt 
Indicator 
No of Ultra-Poor 
supported by the 
project 
Responsibility 
CMRCs 
MAVIM 
No of sub-
projects 
including climate 
smart agriculture 
and allied 
activities 
Time Frame 
Year 1 to 5 for 
mentoring/ 
coaching and 
year 2 to 6 for 
skill dev. In 
total, 50,000 HH 
covered. 
Year 1 to 5 
Budget Source 
4.4 million USD 
approx 
Provisions for climate 
resilient agriculture 
and animal 
husbandry provided 
in unit cost of sub-
projects – 60,000 to 
174,000 USD/ sub-
project 
Training module 
incorporates 
awareness about 
disaster 
preparedness 
and recovery for 
enterprises 
No of sub-
projects 
incorporating 
water quality 
and use 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 3  
Total training cost is 
48,000 USD 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 5 
Unit cost of sub-
project from 80,000 
to 160,000 USD 
47 
Key Requirements 
Feed and Fodder/Loss of 
Common grazing land 
GHG Emissions 
Livestock and human 
health 
Chance finds of artefacts 
of cultural and historical 
significance 
Actions 
schemes for soil and water 
conservation.  
Sub-projects incorporate 
semi-intensive and 
intensive animal husbandry 
practices 
Sub-projects to include 
renewable energy (solar, 
biogas), breeds and feed 
that improve feed 
conversion ratio and SRI 
(component 1).  
Support to innovation in 
renewable energy and 
waste management 
(component 1) 
No of sub-projects that 
promote livestock 
intensification with 
improved sheds, precision 
farming/machinery, 
drudgery reduction, 
protective gear for workers.  
MAVIM develops and trains 
the CMRCs on procedures 
for chance finds in agri- and 
eco-tourism projects.  
Indicator 
efficiency 
measures  
No of sub-
projects that 
intensify 
livestock 
husbandry 
No of sub-
projects that 
reduce GHG 
emissions 
No of 
innovations that 
reduce GHG 
emissions 
No of sub-
projects 
incorporating 
measures for 
livestock and 
human health 
No CMRCs 
trained 
Responsibility 
Time Frame 
Budget Source 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 5 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 5 
Year 2 to 5 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 5 
MAVIM  
Year 1 to 5 
Unit cost for dairy is 
174,000 USD approx.; 
and unit cost for 
goat/poultry/fisheries 
is 116,000 USD 
approx. 
See above for sub-
project budget 
Total budget for 
innovation in RE and 
waste mgt is 240,000 
USD approx 
See above for sub-
project budget 
Total training under 
cap building of CMRC 
on value chain 
planning and 
management is 
48,000 USD  
48 
Key Requirements 
Effective 
implementation of ESMP 
Actions 
Inclusion of ESMP 
indicators in monitoring 
plan ; geotagging of all 
enterprises/ sub-projects 
Indicator 
Project 
monitoring plan 
incorporates all 
ESMP indicators 
Responsibility 
MAVIM 
Time Frame 
Year 1 to 6 
An 
Environmental 
and Social 
Management 
System has been 
established 
Training has 
been carried out 
Establish an environmental 
and social management 
system within MAVIM to 
screen, manage and 
monitor environment and 
social risks and impacts of 
the project including 
building capacity of 
MAVIM. This includes: to: 
(i) review and categorize 
business plans activities 
according to the potential 
environmental and social 
risks and impacts; (ii) 
screen/categorize business 
plans against exclusion list 
and applicable national 
laws; and (iii) monitor 
environmental and social 
performance of the 
business plans. 
Budget Source 
Total budget for 
project softwares is 
918,000 USD 
(includes project 
management 
software) 
49 
50 
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
NavTejaswini- Revised AWPB 2020-21_0603.xlsx
NavTejaswini- Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development  Project
Annual Work Plan and Budget for the year 2020-21
Component 3. Institutional Development and Project Management
Component 3. Institutional Development and Project Management
Unit
Unit Cost
Expenditure
Financers 
Total 
No. of Unit 
(INR)
Planned 
(Annual)
Component
Account
IFAD Loan
IFAD Grant MAVIM Kind MAVIM Tax
A. Preproject activities - Retroactive Financing
Basic small business management (5 day)[all DCOs ,RCs, all NTej Supervisor+ MAVIM HO] & orientation workshop for all CMRC Managers.
Number
70 000
40
Identify potential sectors/value development sectors
Identify and map out skill development training services providers
Software procurements (microfinance management software, project 
management softwre, HR software, and upgrading TALLY software)
Conduct baseline survey (sample survey) SHG families
Complete recruitment process of new staff members.
Capacity building of the weak CMRCs (Strengthening them for implementation 
of project activities)
Subtotal
B. HR Development
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
2 800 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
250 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
100 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
60 000 000
COMP3
EQUIP_EA
2 500 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
500 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 296 000
205 000
82 000
49 200 000
2 050 000
410 000
Number
15
700000
10 500 000
COMP3
CONSULT_EA 10 500 000
76 650 000
10 500 000
54 243 000
Senior official development Training (strategic planning, senior leadership training, etc)
LS
Exchange visits
Subtotal
C. Institutional Development of MAVIM
Value chain project design and management (5 day)
Contract farming, subcontracting, contract negotiation
Project Management
M&E and KM management
Skill development training program management
Senior Management trainimng
Exchange visits (to projects and businesses) [5 day]
Support for KM and Training Center
Conduct Institutional Assessment of MAVIM
Subtotal
E. Audit and Joint supervision
External audit
Joint project supervision (MAVIM part)
Subtotal
F. M&E and KM
Lump Sum
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
Number
LS
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
10
10
20
-
-
5
-
-
100 000
1 000 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
100 000
1 000 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
2 000 000
820 000
820 000
1 640 000
70 000
40 000
80 000
80 000
80 000
100 000
1 400 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
1 148 000
-
-
COMP3
TRNG_EA
COMP3
TRNG_EA
400 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
328 000
-
-
COMP3
TRNG_EA
COMP3
TRNG_EA
10
50 000
500 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
1 000 000
1 000 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
1 000 000
1 000 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
410 000
370 640
820 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
449 360
-
4 300 000
3 076 640
449 360
600000
500000
600 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
500 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
1 100 000
-
492 000
410 000
902 000
-
-
-
Page 1
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
504 000
2 800 000
45 000
18 000
250 000
100 000
10 800 000
60 000 000
450 000
2 500 000
90 000
500 000
-
10 500 000
11 907 000
76 650 000
180 000
180 000
360 000
1 000 000
1 000 000
2 000 000
252 000
1 400 000
-
-
72 000
400 000
-
-
500 000
1 000 000
1 000 000
4 300 000
600 000
500 000
90 000
180 000
180 000
774 000
108 000
90 000
198 000
1 100 000
NavTejaswini- Revised AWPB 2020-21_0603.xlsx
Baseline, Midterm and End project studies
Website upgradation
KM products
Subtotal
G. Computers/printers/AC & Car - Nav Tej
1. MAVIM
Cost of AC ( 2 AC per District & 15AC for HO @35000 per AC)
2 Vechicles @ 15 lakhs
Inverter & 2 Battery for 35 District
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salary & Allowance
1. Project Management Unit (PMU)
a. MAVIM _ HO
b. MAVIM Support staff- HO
Subtotal
2. Region/Districts - MAVIM
Subtotal
3. Nav Tejaswini - Hired officers/support staff  - HO
a. Manager
Manager (Business Dev)
Manager (Enterrpsie Dev and prject superviosn)
Manager (Rural Finance)
Manager (Training, Policy )
Subtotal
b. Deputy Managers
KM, Communication and Policy
Procurement
Account and Finance
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Lump Sum
Subtotal
c. Nav Tejaswini - Hired officers/support staff - Regions/Districts
Regional Monitoring Officer
Lump Sum
ADCO - N.Tejaswini District Project Supervisor/Monitroing officer (Enterprise Dev)
Lump Sum
Subtotal
B. Overhead Cost
MAVIM - HO (Govt contribution)
MAVIM - Regions/Districts (GOM contribution)
Travel/DSA etc (NJes) (HO + Region + Districts)
Subtotal
LS
LS
LS
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2400000
2 400 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
1 968 000
500000
-
COMP3
TRNG_EA
-
1200000
1 200 000
COMP3
TRNG_EA
984 000
3 600 000
2 952 000
2980000
2 980 000
COMP3
EQUIP_EA
2 443 600
1 500 000
3 000 000
COMP3
VEH_EA
2 160 000
1750000
1 750 000
COMP3
EQUIP_EA
1 435 000
7 730 000
95 380 000
6 038 600
25 109 240
54 692 360
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
432 000
2 400 000
-
216 000
648 000
-
1 200 000
3 600 000
536 400
840 000
315 000
2 980 000
3 000 000
1 750 000
1 691 400
7 730 000
15 578 400
95 380 000
20430000
20430000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
22330000
22330000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
42 760 000
106120000
106 120 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
106 120 000
-
-
-
-
-
1150000
1 150 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
1 150 000
3450000
3 450 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
3 450 000
1150000
1 150 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
1 150 000
1150000
1 150 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
1 150 000
6 900 000
6 900 000
1150000
1 150 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
1 150 000
1150000
1 150 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
1 150 000
700000
700 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
700 000
3 000 000
3 000 000
0
5040000
5 040 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
5 040 000
17430000
17 430 000
COMP3
SALARY_EA
17 430 000
22470000
22 470 000
22 470 000
49060000
49 060 000
COMP3
OPCOST_EA
70680000
70 680 000
COMP3
OPCOST_EA
-
-
12214800
12 214 800
COMP3
OPCOST_EA
10 993 320
131 954 800
10 993 320
Page 2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20 430 000
22 330 000
42 760 000
106 120 000
106 120 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
49 060 000
70 680 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20 430 000
22 330 000
42 760 000
106 120 000
106 120 000
1 150 000
3 450 000
1 150 000
1 150 000
6 900 000
1 150 000
1 150 000
700 000
3 000 000
5 040 000
17 430 000
22 470 000
49 060 000
70 680 000
-
1 221 480
12 214 800
119 740 000
1 221 480
131 954 800
Total Recurrent Costs
1
313 204 800
408 584 800
43 363 320
-
268 620 000
1 221 480
313 204 800
68 472 560
54 692 360
268 620 000
16 799 880
408 584 800
NavTejaswini- Revised AWPB 2020-21_0603.xlsx
Total 
67 730 000
17 150 000
10 500 000
-
181 250 000
131 954 800
408 584 800
-
0
0
0
0
0
0
Name of Category
IFAD Loan
IFAD Grant 
MAVIM Kind 
MAVIM 
Equipment and Material - I
Training Cost - II
Community Funds & Grants - III
Consultant Studies - IV
Salaries - V
Operation Cost- VI
6 038 600
49 200 000
8 570 640
5 492 360
10 500 000
32 370 000
10 993 320
0
0
0
148 880 000
12 491 400
3 087 000
0
0
0
119 740 000
1 221 480
Total
57972560
65192360
268620000
16799880
Page 3
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
NAV TEJASWINI- Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project  PROCUREMENT PLAN 2020-21
Consultants
Country/Organisation : INDIA/MAVIM
Project/Programme : NAV TEJASWINI  Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project
Loan  # :  
Procurement Period : April 2020 to September  2021
PROCUREMENT PLAN (CONSULTANTS)
BASIC DATA
Bid Documents
Bidding Period
Bid Evalution
Contract Finalization
Description
Component 
Lot Number
Issue # of 
Invitaion for 
Bids
Estimated Amount IN 
INR
Prourement Method
Prior or   Post         
Plan Vs. 
Actual
Review
Date 
proposed
Date No-
Objection
Bid Invitaion  
Date
Bid Closing 
Opening
Bid Evalution 
Report
No Objection
Contract 
Amount In 
US $
Date 
Contract 
Award
Date 
Contract 
Signature
Time line 
Training materials development (module) 30% 
of the total amount will  be spent on 
development of module and 70% will be  spent 
on production .
Training of trainers/shakis training (@ 5 per 
CMRC) [3 day training at CMRC/cluster] [@20 
per batch] 10-to 15% will be spent on 
honorarirum of Resouce person and rest of the 
budget will be spent on organising training. 
BDS Services for Standalone Bussiness
Training to CMRC key staff on ME loan 
proposal preparation - farm sector (3 day 
training )
TOT for trainers on ME (5 days training )
Independent feasibilty study
Feasibility study of Livestock Health/ Insurance
Policy paper preparation and lobbying (ME loan 
program)
Document and dissemination of SHG -CMRC 
process
Conduct Institutional Assessment of MAVIM
External audit
Baseline, Midterm and End project studies
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
II
II
II
II
III
III
III
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/01
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/02
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/03
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/04
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/05
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/06
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/07
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/08
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/09
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/10
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/11
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/12
1 500 000.00
Individual Consultant
Prior review
Plan 
N.A
5 400 000.00
Individual Consultant or 
agency will hire at district 
level.
Prior review
Plan 
N.A
2 000 000.00
Individual Consultant or 
agency will hire at district 
level.
Ex post 
Review
600 000.00
Individual Consultant
1 000 000.00
Individual Consultant
Ex post 
Review
Ex post 
Review
1 000 000.00
selection of agency on QCBS 
method
Ex post 
Review
1 000 000.00
selection of agency on QCBS 
method
Ex post 
Review
500 000.00
Individual Consultant
500 000.00
Individual Consultant
Ex post 
Review
Ex post 
Review
10 000 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) 
Prior 
Review
600 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) 
Ex post 
Review
2 400 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) 
Ex post 
Review
Plan 
Plan 
Plan 
Plan 
Plan 
Plan 
Plan 
Plan 
Plan 
Plan 
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
Apr-20
Apr-20
Website upgradation
Total Cost
III
Nav Tej/cons/ 
2020-21/13
2 000 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) 
Ex post 
Review
Plan 
N.A
May-20
28 500 000.00
Description
Component  Lot Number
Issue # of 
Invitaion 
for Bids
Estimated Amount IN 
INR
Prourement Method
Prior or   
Post         
Review
Plan Vs. 
Actual
Date 
proposed
Date No-
Objection
Bid 
Invitaion  
Date
Bid Closing 
Opening
Bid Evalution 
Report
No 
Objection
Contract 
Amount In 
US $
Date 
Contract 
Award
Date 
Contract 
Signature
Time line 
Procurement Plan of Pre- Project Activities  November 2019 to March 2020
Bid Documents
BASIC DATA
Bidding Period
Bid Evalution
Contract Finalization
Identify potential sectors/value development 
sectors
Conduct baseline survey (sample survey) SHG 
families
Software procurements 
Micro Finance
Project Management 
HR Software
Upgrading TALLY Software  
III
III
III
NavTej/cons/ 
2019-21/06
NavTej/cons/ 
2019-21/5
NavTej/cons/ 
2019-20/1
NavTej/cons/ 
2019-21/2
NavTej/cons/ 
2019-21/3
NavTej/cons/ 
2019-21/4
2 500 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) 
2 500 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) 
Prior review
Plan 
N.A
Oct.19
Oct.19
Nov.19
Prior review
Plan 
N.A
Oct.19
Oct.19
Nov.19
23 000 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) ( There are 
four different type of software 
30 000 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) ( There are 
four different type of software 
5 000 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) ( There are 
four different type of software 
2 000 000.00
Quallity and Cost-Based 
Selection ( QCBS) ( There are 
four different type of software 
Prior review
Plan 
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Jan. 20
Prior review
Plan 
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Jan. 20
Prior review
Plan 
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Jan. 20
Prior review
Plan 
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Jan. 20
Prior review
Plan 
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Dec. 19
Jan. 20
Total 
       65 000 000.00 
Mar-20
May-20
May-20
May-20
May-20
May-20
NAV TEJASWINI -Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project  PROCUREMENT PLAN 2020-21
Goods / Works
Country/Organisation : INDIA/MAVIM
Project/Programme : NAV TEJASWINI  Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project 
Loan  # : 
PROCUREMENT PLAN (GOODS)
Procurement Period :April 2020 to September   2021
Description
Lot 
Number
Issue # of 
Invitaion 
for Bids
Estimated Amount 
in INR 
Prourement Method
Prior or   Post         
Review
Plan Vs. 
Actual
Date 
propsed
Date No-
Objection
Bid Invitaion  
Date
Bid Closing 
Opening
Bid Evalution 
Report
No Objection
Contract 
Amount In 
US $
Date Contract 
Award
Date Contract 
Signature
Time line 
BASIC DATA
Bid Documents
Bidding Period
Bid Evalution
Contract Finalization
Cost of AC ( 2 AC per District & 
15AC for HO @35000 per AC)
2 Vechicles @ 15 lakhs
Inverter & 2 Battery for 35 District
NavTej/Go
ods/2019-
21/1
NavTej/Go
ods/2019-
21/1
NavTej/Go
ods/2019-
21/1
Total Cost
2 980 000.00
Local Shopping ( 
each district will 
purchase at district 
level.
Ex post Review
Plan 
N.A
June
June
3 000 000.00
Local Shoping 
Ex post Review
Plan 
N.A
Aug 
Aug
Aug
Local Shopping ( 
each district will 
purchase at district 
level.
1 750 000.00
4 750 000.00
Ex post Review
Plan 
N.A
Aug 
Aug
Aug
N.A
N.A
Jun-20
Aug-20
Aug-20
Appendix II: Procurement Arrangements 
A. 
Country Level Procurement Framework 
In India, there is no law exclusively governing public procurement of goods by the departments 
1. 
and  ministries  at  the  Central  level  or  at  the  State  level.  Rules  and  directives  in  this  regard  are 
provided in the General Financial Rules (GFR). An important number of instructions, issued by the 
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), supplement these regulations. No central authority exists that 
is exclusively responsible for defining procurement  policies, overseeing compliance and grievance 
redressal systems. A limited control and oversight functions are exercised by the CAG and the Central 
Vigilance Commission. As per the rules and procedures on procurement stipulated in the GFR, the 
Corporations/ Departments have been delegated full powers to make their own arrangements for 
procurement  of  goods  and  each  of  them  have  issued  office  orders  to  define  the  process.  In  the 
Government departments, no dedicated staff are available with procurement skills. In the absence 
of  required  procurement  expertise,  a  Department  can  procure  goods  through  the  GEM  portal. 
Tenders for contracts above a threshold size are issued and are reported by the respective State 
Governments.  
2. 
A  complaint  mechanism  for  protests/grievances  redressal  does  not  exist.  The  contract 
provisions provide for dispute resolution through mutual consultation for the contracts awarded. In 
case the mutual consultation is not successful, the affected party (usually the contract winner) can 
initiate arbitration under Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 to settle the disputes and/or 
differences.  The  option  for  complaint/protest  available  to  the  unsuccessful  bidders  is  usually  to 
approach the judiciary. However, considering the backlog of cases at the lower level civil courts and 
higher  judiciary,  the  costs/time  delays  are  not  proportional  to  the  value  of  the  contract.  Hence, 
protests/complaints are taken to the judiciary only in cases of large contracts. 
3.  While  the  procurement  of  goods  and  works  have  been  generally  done  by  the  Government 
departments  over  the  years,  the  procurement  of  consultancy  services  are  new  to  government 
departments. As the consultancy services are knowledge-based, the Government departments find 
it extremely difficult to precisely prepare the terms of reference, deliverables, monitoring formats 
and contract management. 
B. 
Procurement assessment of MAVIM 
MAVIM has experience of implementing IFAD funded projects. However, the procedures and 
4. 
processes adopted for the projects have not been made applicable to the organization as such. In 
the absence of national law which safeguards the interests of transparency, fairness, and grievance 
redressal of the participating bidders/suppliers, it is recommended that IFAD Procurement Guidelines 
shall be followed both at the central level and at the decentralized level by all implementing entities. 
Procurement under the project will be done in compliance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines and 
IFAD Procurement Handbook. 
5. Procurement Risk Matrix assessment was carried out for MAVIM. Using the tool, the inherent risk 
rating is 2.00 (Medium risk) and if the risk mitigation measures recommended are fully adopted and 
complied, the Net Risk Rating becomes 2.31 (medium risk). The risk rating would have been closer 
to 3 without considering the country risk assessment which is based on PEFA in the year 2011. There 
have been major changes since 2011 and hence the PEFA ratings of 2011 may not be fully relevant.  
C. 
Risk Mitigation measures proposed  
6.  
The  major  risk  mitigation  measures  recommended  are  adoption  of  (i)  setting  up  of  a 
procurement unit with a procurement specialist; (ii) Standard Bidding Documents including contract 
templates embedding the bid process, clarifications, evaluation and complaint handling mechanism 
and policy on preventing fraud and corruption and dispute resolution; (iii) contract management- 
maintenance  of  contract  registers  and  contract  monitoring.  It  is  to  be  ensured  that  contract 
management  is  not  merely  reporting  the  contracts  but  continuously  monitoring  the  performance 
against the deliverables, conditions of the contract, validity and frequent review and resolution of 
implementation bottlenecks; (iv) preparation and adoption of procurement manual consistent with 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook which will require IFAD’s concurrence. Any 
changes/amendments/modifications in the  approved Procurement Manual also requires IFAD’s no 
objection and (v) Procurement plan for the initial 18 months of project implementation listing out all 
procurement activities to be taken up by the project consolidated at the PMU level to be prepared 
and submitted along with the first AWP&B-For the subsequent years of implementation procurement 
covering the 12 month period will be sufficient -The procurement plan will be updated at least semi-
annually or as required to reflect the actual project implementation needs - All procurement plans 
and its revisions will have to be approved by IFAD- Any procurement undertaken which is not as per 
the approved plan will not be eligible for IFAD financing;The summary of the risk matrix is provided 
below.  The  risk  matrix  will  be  reviewed  annually  and  based  on  the  observations/  review, 
implementation arrangements mitigating measures will be revised.  
Key Issues of the Risk Assessment Matrix 
Risk Factor 
No 
procurement unit  
dedicated 
Initial Risk  Mitigation measures 
High 
Guidelines 
Procurement 
Procurement  Specialist  will  be  engaged  on 
full  time  basis,  and  the  appointment  will 
require IFAD's approval. 
Preparation  and  adoption  of  procurement 
manual 
and 
IFAD 
Procurement  Handbook  will  be  adopted. 
IFAD  Standard  Bidding  documents  and 
contract  templates  will  be  prescribed  for 
compliance  to  the  project.  A  Procurement 
Manual  will  be  developed.  IFAD  will  also 
undertake  capacity  building  measures  for 
the procurement staff. 
Contract Registers and Monitoring Form will 
be introduced. 
Formalize  system  of  dispute  redressal 
including arbitration 
Residual risk 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
bidding 
Standard 
documents and contracts 
Medium 
Inadequate 
management 
Contract 
redressal system 
contract 
disputes 
Medium 
High 
The  procurement  officer’s  responsibilities  will  include  the  preparation  and  updating  of 
7. 
procurement plans for the project, acting as the focal person for NOTUS, maintaining the contracts 
register, carrying out all procurement activities of the project, coordinating with the project team on 
initiating  the  procurement  actions  as  per  the  procurement  plan,  reviewing  procurement  activities 
carried out at districts and CMRCs/ community levels, monitor procurement compliance, and provide 
training  to  all  project  staff  involved  in  procurement.  S/he  will  report  to  GM  (Project)  directly.  A 
detailed ToR for the procurement officer will be prepared and included in the PIM. 
8. 
During Supervision Missions, the post review procurements will be reviewed on a sample 
basis  selected  from  the  procurement  plan,  from  the  stage  of  preparation  of  bid  documents  till 
contract  award  and  amendments  to  contract  to  identify  the  weaknesses,  delays  and  ineligible 
procurement.  After  putting  in  place  the  above  risk  mitigation  measures  fully  and  effectively,  the 
residual risk assessment is Medium. 
D.   Procurement arrangements  
9. 
Procurement of goods and services undertaken for the project will be in accordance with IFAD’s 
Procurement Guidelines and Handbook (dated September 2010) and as amended from time to time 
as an exception to the provisions of the General Conditions.  
10.  Goods  will  be  procured  using  NCB,  Shopping  and  Direct  Contracting  and  will  follow  the 
procedures  and  processes  defined  in  the  Procurement  Manual/Project  Implementation  Manual 
approved by Board of Directors of MAVIM and IFAD. The PIM shall also include details of selection 
method to be applied in case of consultancies and services such as Quality and Cost Based Selection, 
Fixed Budget Selection, Least Cost Selection, Consultants Qualification Selection and Single Source 
Selection. The procedures would be adapted and adopted in accordance with the provisions of IFAD 
Procurement  Guidelines  and  the  Procurement  Handbook.  Consistent  with  these  Guidelines,  the 
Programme  Implementation  Manual  to  be  developed  will  have  detailed  processes,  steps  and 
documentation requirements to comply with the principles of public procurement.  
11.  The draft PIM will detail procurement procedures, processes and management arrangements. 
The procurement methods, the prior review arrangements, the estimated cost and time frame, and 
risk mitigation measures will be defined in the Letter to the Borrower and reflected in the approved 
procurement  plan.  The  project  will  be  responsible  and  accountable  for  project  procurement.  The 
design proposes to engage the CMRCs/ community groups for implementing some of the activities 
across  components.  The  project  will  provide  grants  to  the  CMRCs  and  the  Grant  Agreement  will 
define the process of procurement. 
12.  Standard  Bidding  Documents  are  of  paramount  importance  for  transparency,  speed  of  the 
process, increase competition and creation of capacity (standardization of procedures). The SBD to 
be  used  in  all  local  open bidding  processes  would  be  described  in  the  PIM  and  it  should  include: 
(i)Time to submit bid: minimum 30 days; (ii) Bids may be submitted by post or by hand; (iii) Budget 
could  be  disclosed  (if  local  legislation  so  requires);  (iv)  Clear  instructions  on  how  to  buy  bidding 
documents indicating address and price to buy the bidding documents; (v) Clarifications to bidding 
documents should be in writing only; (vi) Amendments to bidding documents should be advertised 
with  the  same  procedure  used  for  advertisement  of  bidding  documents;  (vii)  Single  envelope 
procedure  for  goods  notwithstanding  any  other  Government  instructions/guidelines;  and  (viii) 
Evaluation Criteria: the bid evaluation criteria should be non-discriminatory -It should be disclosed 
and  rigorously  quantified  in  clear  terms  to  define  the  “lowest  evaluated  bidder”  -  This  allows  to 
indisputably identify the lowest evaluated responsive bid.  
Procurement Plan 
13.  As provided in appendix I, paragraph 1 of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines, IFAD review of and 
no objection to the consolidated procurement plan is compulsory and the 18 months procurement 
plan for the first year submitted by the project must include as a minimum:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period 
and name of the implementing agency responsible for the procurement. 
The estimate value of each procurement activity. 
The method of procurement to be adopted for each procurement activity. 
The  method  of  review  IFAD  will  undertake  for  each  procurement  activity  indicating 
either post review or prior review.  
Proposed dates for each stage of the procurement. 
14.  The Procurement Plan should be prepared as a rolling Procurement Plan which captures the 
procurement  during  the  entire  duration  of  the  project  and  revisions  and  modifications  to  the 
quantities, selection method and the proposed dates will be incorporated as Revision. Any changes 
and  amendments  to  the  procurement  plan  shall  be  subject  to  IFAD’s  No  Objection.  A  draft 
procurement plan for the first 18 months is attached as Attachment 1. 
Procurement involving community procurement 
15.  The procurement through CMRCs will be governed by the Grant Agreement to be entered into 
between MAVIM and the CMRC which should cover the operational and implementation arrangement 
and shall include implementation, administration, financial management and procurement related 
activities supported by clearly defined roles and responsibilities of the intermediaries who will assist 
these  CMRCs  in  performing  the  activities.  Though  the  project  will  not  include  the  community 
procurement in its procurement plan, it is recommended that the description and the quantum of 
procurement, procurement methods to be adopted will be separately listed out and attached to the 
Procurement Plan for monitoring. 
E. 
Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
16.  Procurement of Goods: Methods for procurement of goods is established as follows:   
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB),  
National shopping  
Direct contracting  
17.  Consultancy  and  Services.  Consulting  service  will  include  project  management  technical 
assistance,  implementation  support  technical  assistance  for  different  components,  conducting 
studies,  mobilisation/establishment  of  community  groups,  technical  training  and  strengthening  of 
community groups, and monitoring and evaluation. Services would be provided by consulting firms 
and  individual  consultants.  The  Selection  methods  available  for  Consultancy  Services  and  non-
consultancy services are: 
-  Quality and Cost Based Selection 
-  Fixed Budget Selection 
-  Least Cost Selection 
-  Selection Based on Consultants Qualification 
-  Single Source Selection 
18. 
Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants are selected on the basis of 
their qualifications for the assignment of at least three candidates among those who have expressed 
interest in the assignment or have been approached directly by project. Individuals employed by the 
project shall meet all relevant qualifications and shall be fully capable of carrying out the assignment. 
Capability  is  judged  on  the  basis  of  academic  background,  experience  and,  as  appropriate, 
knowledge  of  the  local  conditions,  such  as  local  language,  culture,  administrative  system,  and 
government organization. 
19. 
Consultancy Services and Individuals consultants may be selected on a sole-source basis 
with due justification in exceptional cases such as: (a) tasks that are a continuation of previous work 
that  the  consultant  has  carried  out  and  for  which  the  consultant  was  selected  competitively;  (b) 
assignments lasting less than six months; (c) emergency situations resulting from natural disasters; 
and  (d)  when  the  individual  consultant  or  consulting  firm  is  the  only  consultant  qualified  for  the 
assignment. All  proposals for contracts on  Sole  Source  basis will require IFAD’s prior review. For 
facilitating  IFAD’s  prior  review,  justification  for  resorting  to  SSS,  the  detailed  proposal  including 
budget from the sole source agency/institution or individual, recommendation and approval following 
the Department’s internal approval procedures to be submitted to IFAD. 
The thresholds for the mode of procurement for the mode of procurement to be adopted will 
20. 
be specified in the Letter to Borrower (LTB) 
F. Review of Procurement Decisions by IFAD  
21. 
Prior and Post Reviews: IFAD will undertake prior and post reviews of procurement made. 
(a)  Prior  review  is  when  IFAD  is  required  to  provide  a  No-Objection  (NO)  at  key  stages  of  a 
procurement process. This requirement and the associated prior review thresholds are established 
initially during project design, and adjusted as needed during implementation through modification 
of the Letter to  the Borrower.  Country Programme  Management  Teams  and  Project Management 
Units are required to use the No-Objection Tracking and Utility System (NOTUS) to manage Nos;  
(b)  Post  review  is  the  assessment  by  IFAD  of  the  procurement  processes  conducted  by  the 
Borrower/Recipient for a sample of contracts that are not subject to prior preview. As noted above, 
the intensity and scope  of such reviews draws on PRM assessments,  issues identified in previous 
procurement reviews, and taking into account the project’s stage of implementation. Post reviews 
will  cover  procurement  planning,  procurement  process,  contract  awarding  and  management,  and 
risk identification and mitigation.  
22.  The  project  will  be  required  to  submit  to  IFAD  the  pre-qualification  document  where  it  is 
undertaken, the bidding document, the bid evaluation report and the draft contract documents for 
the  prior  review  of  procurement  of  goods  and  non-consulting  services  and  the  prequalification 
document,  draft  RFP,  the  technical  evaluation  report,  the  combined  evaluation  report  and  the 
negotiated  draft  contract  and  the  minutes  of  negotiations  in  case  of  procurement  of  consulting 
services.  The thresholds for procurements covered under prior review will be specified in the Letter 
to Borrower (LTB).  
Governance  and  Anti-Corruption  In  line  with  the  IFAD  General  Conditions  on  Agricultural 
Development  Financing  and  IFAD  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  its  projects,  the 
project should provide a commitment to abide by these provisions and establish credible deterrent 
mechanisms  and  internal  controls  and  cooperate  fully  with  IFAD  and  the  notified  Government 
investigative agencies/authorities. The consultants and the suppliers will also be made aware of the 
provisions and are compliant to these provisions. The detailed measures will be included in all the 
bid  documents,  contracts  and  Grant  agreements  ensuring  IFAD  rights  for  auditing,  investigating 
provisions and debarment. 
The procurement risk assessment matrix is presented below. 
DivisionCountryProjectDateINHERENT RISK RATING2.002.31#Description of Risk FeatureRatingAssessment BasisRemarks Recommendation /MitigationRatingACOUNTRY RISK ASSESSMENT1.501.501Legal and Regulatory Framework1.001.60aCountry procurement law, regulations and manual exist13 they all exist, 2 only two exist, 1 only one exist or noneThe country does not have any procurement law. The Govt has issued a resolution (GR) indicating the procurement regulationsProcurement Manual to be prepared2bExistence of Standard Bidding Documents for Goods, Works and Services13 all exist, 2 only for NCB & ICB, none for Shopping, 1 none existsMAVIM does not have any standard bidding documentsStandard bidding documents to be prepared2cProcurement Monitoring1Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for detailsThis is based on PEFA findings of 2011 and may not be relevant under the present scenarioHave the PEFA ratings updated or not to use the 2011 findings1dProcurement Methods1Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for detailsThis is based on PEFA findings of 2011 and may not be relevant under the present scenarioHave the PEFA ratings updated or not to use the 2011 findings2ePublic access to procurement information1Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for detailsThis is based on PEFA findings of 2011 and may not be relevant under the present scenarioHave the PEFA ratings updated or not to use the 2011 findings1NET  RISK RATINGIFAD Procurement Risk MatrixAPRINDIANAV TEJASWINI 
2Accountability and Transparency2.002.60aProcurement Complaints Management1Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for detailsComplaint mechanism does not exist Set up a compliant mechanism and procedure for complaints management2bCountry Corruption Perception Index score 2The score is published on Transparency.org. 0 to 29 = 1, 30 to 60 = 2, 61 to 100 = 3Score is 41 in 2018Try to get a better rating in the next survey2c2-tiered system to handle complaints23 as stated, 2 only a single level system, 1 no systemThe complaints can be addressed to the VCMDSet up a formal complaint mechanism system 3dExistence of a debarment system33 full existence, 2 existence of complaints body that is the authority, 1 does not existThe GR issued by the Govt of Maharashtra has a system  for penalty/debarringImplement the GR for project purposes3eExistence of an independent and competent local authority responsible for investigating corruption allegations23 existence of independent Anti-Corruption agency, 2 existence of an office within a government ministry/agency that carries out some/all of these functions, 1 does not existNo separate unit for investigation of corruption allegations. The process involves investigation by VCMD and then by the Dept of Women & Child DevtSetting up of an independent complaint maagement team to attend to the complaints3 
BPROJECT INSTITUTIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT2.232.671Capability in Public Procurement2.202.60aExistence of a Procurement Unit with at least 2 staff members (Design stage, reference is to govt agency)Existence of a Procurement Officer (Implementation)23 as stated, 2 one staff member, 1 does not exist (at Design stage)3 as stated, 2 someone else doing Procurement, 1 procurement function not consistently handled by anyoneNo separate unit for procurementSet up a procurement unit with atleast one procurement officer2bStaff member(s) have at least 7 years experience in donor-funded public procurement23 as stated, 2 for less than 7 years and/or  experience in public procurement but not donor-funded, 1 for less than 3 years experience  Members of the procurement committee have less than 7 years experience in donor funded public procurementWith the new project their experience will exceed 7 years3cWhat is the general quality of documents produced by the procurement office?33 for very good bidding documents, evaluation reports and contracts, 2 for mediocre documents, 1 for documents with bad qualityDocuments obtained are generally good3dDo procurement staff have immediate access to the legal and regulatory framework documents?23 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneGR is available which regulates the procurementEnsure access to legal and regulatory framework documents2eAre the procurement and financial management functions separated?23 for total separation, 2 for some separation, 1 for procurement being done by FM staffInterlinked - GM finance heads the procurement committee and CAFO is a member of the committee. The procurerment rules are incorporated in the Finance ManualHave an independent procurement officer3 
2Public Procurement Processes2.262.75iProcurement Methods1.752.50aProcurement methods for Goods consistent with IFAD Guidelines23 as stated, 2 for national or international, 1 for noneIFAD guidelines will be followed for projectAdopt IFAD procurement guidelines3bProcurement methods for Works consistent with IFAD Guidelines23 as stated, 2 for national or international, 1 for noneNo works procurement NA2cProcurement methods for Services  consistent with IFAD Guidelines23 for large-value method for firms, small value method for firms and method for individual consultants; 2 for two of the above; 1 for only one or lessIFAD guidelines will be followed for projectAdopt IFAD procurement guidelines3dEasy access to bidding documents by foreign firms13 bidding documents are free and could be issued/sent electronically; 2 foreign bidders have to wire funds to Project to buy bidding docs; 1 bidding docs not practically available to foreign biddersNo bidding by foreign bidders as the max amount of contract for the project was not exceeding INR 1 crore except engagement of NGOsNA2 
iiProcurement Planning2.673.00aAre procurement plans prepared ahead of time and consistent with annual work plans/budgets?23 prepared ahead and consistent, 2 one of either, 1 noneYes. Alongwith AWPB for the projectEnsure preparation of timely preparation of procurement plans consistent with AWPB3bDo procurement people participate in the annual work planning processes?33 if required by regulation  and practised, 2 if required by regulation, 1 if none of aboveYes3cAre Procurement Plans done using an effective format with planned and actual rows across 3 different categories33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneYes3iiiProcurement Processes33aMinimum number of quotations established by law33 for three or more; 2 for two, 1 if it does not state or less than twoAtleast three quotations are called for3bMinimum number of days for advertised procurement under competitive bidding processes13 for minimum of 30 days; 2 for minimum of 20 days; 1 for less than 20 days or not statedRanging between 7 and 21 days. For procurement less than 3 lakhs 7 daysFor larger procurements where competitive bidding process is followed the minimum number of days should be at least 302cIs there enough time provided for bidders to ask questions and receive answers in the bidding process?33 if bidders have a minimum of 3 days for the RFQ method and 7 days for competitive methods to ask questions, 2 if less than 3 days for RFQ and less than 7 but more than 4 days for competitive methods, 1 if not mentioned in RFQ and less than 4 days for competitive procurementsPre bid meeting is generally held after 7 days of advertising for clarifications of doubts of the bidders3dAre clarifications provided to all bidders?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneYes3 
eAre bids received prior to the deadline securely stored?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneOnline bids only and hence securely stored3fAre procurement securities securely stored?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none3gAre public bid openings conducted for advertised procurements, and within an hour of receipt of bids?23 for both, 2 for bid openings being conducted more than an hour after receipt, 1 for bid openings not being conductedPublic bid opening conducted but not within an hour.Ssince it is online process the bidders can view the results onlineFollow IFAD guifelines for bid opening3hAre minutes of bid openings taken, and sent to bidders who submitted bids?23 for both, 2 for minutes being taken but not being sent, 1 for noneMinutes not sent to biddersSince process is online the bidder can see the result. The project should also make the minutes available online3iAre evaluations conducted by a suitably qualified ad-hoc evaluation committee?33 for both, 2 for qualified but not ad-hoc, 1 for ad-hoc or noneYes. Subject experts are invited for evaluation of technical bids3jIn evaluation, is responsiveness based on criteria requirements in the bidding documents?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneYes. If criteria requirements are not fulfilled the bids are rejected3kAre evaluations completed within the bid validity period?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneYes. Bid validity period is generally 90 days within which bids are evaulated3lAre conditions precedent to contract effectiveness clearly stipulated in the contract? (i.e., advance payment security, performance security, insurance, etc)23 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneGenerally conditions precedent are stipulatedEnsure conditions precedent in all contracts2 
mDoes the agency maintain a complete record of the process? This would include copies of all public advertisements, pre-qualification documents (if used, the pre-qualification evaluation report documenting any decisions not to pre-qualify certain potential bidders), the bidding documents and any addenda, a record of any pre-bid meetings, the bid opening minutes, the final bid evaluation report (including a detailed record of the reasons used to accept or reject each bid), appeals against procedures or award recommendations, a signed copy of the final contract and any performance and advance payment securities issued, etc.33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneYes3nAre all contracts awarded advertised publicly?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneSince the award is announced online the bidders are aware of the contract awardee3 
ivContract Administration and Management2.002.63aExistence of authority levels in the contract management process23 for existence, 2 for some practice, 1 for noneOne co-ordinator (Manager - level)  is responsible for each procurement and after confirmation from the co-ordinator payment is made by the accounts departmentThe procurement officer will follow the aurhority levels in terms of reporting to GM who in turn reports to the VCMD3bExistence of approval thresholds for contract amendments13 for existence, 2 for some practice, 1 for noneNo contract amendments done so far and no such provision in manualFix thresholds for contract amendments in the procurement policy document2cIs there an effective contract monitoring system/framework in place?23 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneContract provides for the co-ordinator for monitoring of the contractThere should be a proper system for effective contract monitoringdIs there a process to monitor delivery of goods to verify quantity and quality?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneYes. Certification obtained from the recipient of goods3eIs there a framework for approval of deliverables and payment process for consulting services contract?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneYes 3fIs there a process for resolution of final payment and contract closure?33 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneInvoice receievd on completion of the work and payment made resulting in closure of the contract3gAre contract disputes handled in accordance with a formal complaints/arbitration system?23 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneAT first stage the VCMD addresses the concerns of the complainant. If this is not acceptable the matter can be referred for adjudication/ arbitration in accordance with the laws of India Redressal of contract disputes to be formalized and include it in the contract document3 
hAre works contracts supervised by independent engineers or a named project manager?3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneNo works executed. Any such work is assigned to PWD who supervise the workNAiAre contracts completed on schedule and within the approved/ contracted contract price?3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneNo works contracts as such. All contracts executed on timeNAjDoes the organization have contract registers that register all contracts (with names, prices and dates), per procurement category?13 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneContract register not maintainedThe procurement officer to be appointed should maitain and monitor contract registers2kAre adequate contract administration records maintained? (These would include contractual notices issued by the supplier, contractor, purchaser or employer; a detailed record of all changes or variation orders issued affecting the scope, qualities, timing or price of the contract; records of invoices and payments, progress reports, certificates of inspection, acceptance and completion; records of claim and dispute and their outcomes; etc.)13 for all, 2 for some, 1 for noneRecords are maintained separately. Contract register not maintained with all the details but documents of each procurement are maintained Ensure maintenance of contract registers and other preparation of timely preparation of contract monitoring.2Risk Rating System3L: Low Risk2M: Medium Risk1H: High Risk 
PEFA Framework2011 Framework: Procurement assessed under P1-192011 Framework: Procurement assessed under P1-242011 Framework2016 FrameworkTransparency, Comprehensiveness and Competition in the legal and regulatory frameworkProcurement MonitoringUse of competitive procurement methodsProcurement MethodsPublic access to complete, reliable and timely procurement inforrmationPublic access to procurement informationExistence of an independent administrative procurement complaints systemProcurement Complaints Management Procedure1Open www.pefa.org 2Scroll down and search by country3Choose whole country, not regions within a country4Choose latest report. Download entire report5Examine Pillar PI-19 or PI-24 (depending on Framework used) to see assessment6Summary information from section of report should be in Remarks of the Matrix7Score as follows:PEFAIFAD MatrixA3B3C2D1To Note123If the information in the PEFA  website points to an analysis only of a national system in a situation where the IFAD-funded project will be implemented by a state or regional government or enterprise, or a system other than the national system, the factors should be scored under INHERENT RISK RATING, while the Assessor should the analyse the state, regional or other system and score that under the NET RISK RATING. The Assessor should make a note of this clearly in the PRM.If the information in the PEFA website is outdated (i.e. before 2011), the Assessor should score the PEFA Report as is under INHERENT RISK RATING, while the Assessor should analyse the factors and score that analysis under the NET RISK RATING. The Assessor should make a note of this clearly in the PRM.If for whatever reason the Assessor is unable (after diligent attempts) to glean the PEFA ratings from the PEFA site, the Assessor shall analyse the factors and ascribe scores under the INHERENT RISK RATING, and where mitigants are available, viable and necessary, propose these mitigants and score the NET RISK RATING accordingly. The Assessor should make a note of this clearly in the PRM. 
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Maharashtra, India 
Maharashtra  Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project 
(NAV TEJASWINI) 
Nav Tejaswini: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Implementing agency:  
Mahila Arthik Vikas Mahamandal (MAVIM), Maharashtra 
September 2019 
44 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1.  Introduction to PIM and NAV TEJASWINI  
2.  Project Objective and Components 
3.  Project Area and Target Groups  
4.  Project Implementation Approach 
5.  COMPONENT 1: Market-Driven Enterprise Development 
5.1 Subcomponent 1.1: Farm Sector Enterprise Development 
5.2 Subcomponent 1.2: Manufacturing and services sector enterprise development 
5.3 Subcomponent 1.3: Capacity development of CMRCs 
5.4 Subcomponent 1.4: Supporting innovations 
6.  COMPONENT 2:  Enabling Support Services 
6.1 Subcomponent 2.1: Facilitating financial linkages 
6.2 Subcomponent 2.2: Evolving new pathways for ultra-poor households 
6.3  Sub-component  2.3:  Enhancing  nutritional  status  and  gender  relations  at  HH  and 
community levels 
6.4 Sub-component 2.4: Policy engagement 
7.  COMPONENT 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management 
7.1 Sub-component 3.1: Institutional Strengthening 
7.2 Subcomponent 3.2: Project Management 
8.  Project Outreach and Benefits 
9.  Project Implementation 
10.  Planning, M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management    
11.  Financial Management and Procurement 
12.  Project Costs and Financing   
ATTACHMENTS    
1.  Design & Implementation of Sub-Projects 
2.  VC profiles of selected commodities 
3.  Structure of Producer Collectives & Companies 
4.  Management Information System 
5.  TORs for selected professionals  
6.  FM Formats 
7.  Procurement formats 
8.  Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix 
45 
1. 
2. 
3. 
1. INTRODUCTION TO PIM AND NAV TEJASWINI 
Introduction:  This  project  implementation  manual  (PIM)  has  been  prepared  to  guide  the 
project  management  unit  (PMU)  to  implement  all  project  activities  as  per  project  design 
documents and annual plan. The PIM should be read in conjunction with the project design 
report (PDR) with associated Annexes and technical background papers produced during the 
design  process.  Aside  from  the  PIM,  there  will  be  separate  manuals/documents  such  as 
Financial  Management  Manual,  and  Procurement  Manual  to  support  the  PIM.  These 
documents have been referred to in the PIM as appropriate.  
Project Partners: The project will be implemented by MAVIM through its existing Community 
Managed  Resource  Centres  (CMRCs),  Self-help  Groups  (SHGs)  as  well  as  future  partner 
organizations. Besides, during the course of implementation the PMU/MAVIM may engage 
new  and  different  types  of  partner  organizations  or  project  participants  such  as  research 
organizations, academic institutions, testing & certification institutions, regulatory agencies, 
any other government and non-government organizations, cooperatives, Farmer Producer 
Organizations  (FPOs),  Farmer  Producer  Companies  (FPCs),  and  private  businesses    to 
achieve objective of the project. 
Nav Tejaswini will support about one million SHG members - who are mostly marginal and 
small farmers and micro-entrepreneurs – to transform their farm and non-farm livelihoods 
into  commercially  viable  micro  and  small  enterprises,  through  linkages  with  market  and 
access  to  technical  and  financial  service  providers.  The  project  will  identify  and  prioritize 
markets that can support expansion of women enterprises (such as preferential Government 
procurement from MSMEs and women enterprises, e-commerce platforms), and integration 
of  enterprises  in  value-chain,  while  at  the  same  time  selecting  commodities  that  bring 
nutritional  benefits  for  both  producers  and  consumers  and  work  for  gender  equality  and 
women empowerment. At the same time, to ensure management of lifecycle risks, project 
would invest in improved nutrition and health at HH level, to reduce health shocks that may 
destabilize the economy of the HH and its ability to invest in productive assets. The PIM has 
been reviewed and approved by the PMU (MAVIM team) and by IFAD.  
4. 
Amendments:  The  PMU/AMVIM  will  seek  IFAD’s  approval  for  future  amendments  and 
revisions.   
5. 
Important Dates: The following dates are important for the project: 
 
 
 
Financing Agreement: The Financing Agreement (FA) was signed between IFAD and the 
Government of India (GoI) on ………… 2020. 
Letter to the Borrower: IFAD issued the Letter to Borrower on …. 2020 that mentions 
…….. 2020 as Financing Agreement enforce date.   
Project  duration:  The  Project  Completion  Date  is  ----  -----  2026  and  the  Financing 
Closing Date is ------------------------ 2026.  
2. PROJECT OBJECTIVE AND COMPONENTS 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
The Project Goal is to enable one million rural poor households to overcome poverty. 
The Project Objective is to improve capacity of rural women to diversify into sustainable 
enterprises or engage in decent and remunerative employment through enhanced market 
linkages. 
Project Components: The project has three complementary components as follows: 
Component 1 - Market-Driven Enterprise Development: Nav Tejaswini will enable 765,400  
farm and non/off farm producers and businesses (565,400 under organized value chains and 
200,000 standalone enterprises) in identified clusters to increase sales and profit through a 
combination of interventions in marketing, product development and quality improvement, 
productivity enhancement, and sustainable business relationships with other businesses. It 
will facilitate new and expanding enterprises to strengthen their linkages with the agri/non 
agri businesses and other value-chain actors. Besides, standalone businesses in both farm 
and  no-farm  sectors  will  receive  business  development  services  to  expand  business  and 
46 
10. 
11. 
increase  profit.  This  component  comprises  four  (4)  sub-components:  1.1  Farm  sector 
enterprise  development;  1.2  Non/off  farm  sector  enterprise  development;  1.3  Capacity 
development of CMRCs; and 1.4 Supporting innovation. 
Component  2  -  Enabling  Support  Services:  Nav  Tejaswini  will  also  focus  on  providing  an 
enabling  environment  at  the  enterprise  levels  as  well  as  at  household  levels,  to  optimise 
SHG member HHs participation in the enterprise development process. All members of SHG 
(approximately  800,000  as  of  June  2019  and  will  reach  to  one  million  during  the  project 
period)  will  participate  in  various  activities,  especially  in  microfinance  through  SHG-Bank 
Linkage  program  and  campaign  for  nutritional  improvement  and  gender  equality.  Special 
assistance  for  ultra-poor  has  been  devised  as  well.  The  component  has  four  (4)  main 
subcomponents: 2.1 Facilitating financial linkages; 2.2 Evolving new pathways for ultra-poor 
households;  2.3  Enhancing  nutritional  status  and  gender  relations  at  HH  and  community 
levels; and 2.4 Policy engagement. 
Component 3 - Institutional Strengthening and Project Management: Nav Tejaswini aspires 
to  strengthen  MAVIM  and  its  CMRCs.  MAVIM  is  expected  to  play  the  following  roles:  a) 
promoter of enterprise development; b) centre of excellence in areas of SHG approach to 
community development; c) capacity builder for grassroots institutions; and d) implementer 
of  various  government  schemes  for  its  beneficiaries.  This  component  has  two 
subcomponents: 3.1 Institutional Strengthening of MAVIM; and 3.2 Project Management.  
12. 
Logframe: The log-frame of the project is presented in Table 1. 
47 
Results Hierarchy 
Outreach 
Goal 
Enable rural poor 
households to 
overcome poverty 
Development 
Objective 
Improve capacity of 
rural women to 
diversify into 
sustainable 
enterprises or engage 
in remunerative 
employment and 
enhance their access 
to markets 
Outcome 1 
Creation of 
sustainable business 
linkages for farm and 
non/off farm 
enterprises  
Indicators 
Baseline 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Name 
 No. of persons receiving project 
services (M/F/Age) 
 Number of HHs 
 Number of HH members  
 Number of women-headed 
households 
 Rural households sustainably out 
of income poverty (> 58,000 Rs/ 
year) 
Table 1 – Logical framework of Nav Tejaswini 
Mid-term 
End target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of verification 
Assumptions 
841,579 
1,000,000 
841,579  
1,000,000  
3,364,000 
117,821  
4,500,000 
117,821  
MIS 
MIS 
MIS 
MIS 
Monthly 
MAVIM 
Monthly 
MAVIM 
Monthly 
Yearly 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
Project is 
implemented 
effectively 
1,000,000 
Mid-term, end-
Impact Study, 
term  
Outcome study                     
MAVIM 
 80% of targeted women are 
0 
35% 
80% 
engaged in sustainable 
enterprises or gainful 
employment 
 Percentage of women, 15-49 
years of age, who consume at 
least 5 out of 10 food groups (CI 
1.2.8) 
 75% of targeted women report an 
increase in score on pro-WEAI 
survey 
 Number of supported rural 
enterprises reporting an increase 
in profit (CI 2.2.2) 
 Rural enterprises reporting on  
adoption of environmentally 
sustainable and climate resilient 
technologies and practices (CI 
3.2.2) 
Tbd at 
baseline 
30% 
70% 
0 
0 
75% 
200,000 
565,400 
0 
200,000 
565,400 
48 
MAVIM 
1) One time,        
2) One time,        
3) Annual,            
4) At the end 
1) Baseline 
survey report,                   
2) Mid term,          
3)AOS,                    
4) End 
line/Impact 
Study 
1) AOS,    
2)Thematic 
study,  3) Yearly 
Survey 
Annual, MTR 
onwards 
MAVIM 
Results Hierarchy 
Output 1 
Farm, non/off farm 
enterprise 
development plans 
Output 2 
Development of value 
chain project 
management capacity 
of CMRCs 
Output 3 
Supporting innovation 
Outcome 2 
An enabling 
environment to 
facilitate women's 
enterprise 
development and 
employability in 
decent and 
remunerative jobs 
Output 1 
Financial linkages 
Indicators 
Means of verification 
Assumptions 
 Rural enterprises accessing 
business development services 
(CI 2.1.1)  
 2000 batches of standalone 
businesses receive 
technical/management training  
 250 cooperatives formed 
 Rural enterprises supported to 
sustainably manage natural 
resources and climate related 
risks (CI 3.1.1) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
250,000 
765,400 
700 
2000 
100 
250,000 
250 
765,400 
1) AOS,    
2)Thematic 
study,  3) Yearly 
Survey 
1)  MIS 
2)  MIS 
Annual 
Outcome 
Survey 
Annual 
MAVIM 
Annual 
MAVIM 
Annually  
MAVIM 
 1500 CMRC staff trained in 
0 
1000 
1500 
enterprise development and 
management 
MIS, Training 
report  
Annual 
MAVIM 
 At least 40 innovations tested and 
0 
20 
20 
20 scaled up by the project  
 100,000 women accessing 
financing for enterprise 
development of Rs 100,000 or 
more 
(disagg: Age) 
0 
50,000 
100,000 
MIS, Enterprise 
reports  
Annual  
MAVIM  
MIS reports  
Monthly  
Banking Partner, 
MAVIM 
 3 financial institutions offering > 
1 
3 
MOUs  
NA  
100,000 Rs financing for 
enterprise development 
 800,000 SHG members continue 
to receive loan under SHG-Bank 
linkage program 
 Increase in loan outstanding 
under SHG-Bank Program 
 Loan repayment rate (%) 
800,000 
800,000 
800,000 
MIS 
Quarterly 
Tbd at 
baseline 
99.5 
Rs 3442 
million 
99.5 
Rs 9769. 
million 
99.5 
49 
MIS 
MIS 
Quarterly 
Quarterly 
Banking Partner, 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
Results Hierarchy 
Output 2 
Mentoring the ultra-
poor and skill 
development training 
Output 3 
Improved nutritional 
status of households 
Output 4 
Policy engagement 
Outcome 3 
Capacity of MAVIM 
strengthened and 
project satisfactorily 
managed 
Output 1 
Training of MAVIM 
officials on enterprise 
development and 
system upgraded  
 Livestock health and insurance 
recover operating cost  
Indicators 
10% 
60% 
100% 
MIS 
Means of verification 
Quarterly 
MAVIM 
Assumptions 
 26,800 ultra-poor persons trained 
in income-generating activities (CI 
2.1.2) (M/F/Age) 
0 
 34,000 wage employment 
generated 
10,000 
26,800 
MIS, Ultra poor 
study reports  
Quarterly  
MAVIM 
10,000 
34,000 
 800,000 persons provided with 
0 
300,000 
800,000 
MIS reports  
Annually  
MAVIM  
targeted support to improve their 
nutrition (CI 1.1.8) (M/F/Age) 
 8 of policy-relevant knowledge 
products completed 
Center of Excellence set up and 
well-functioning  
80 MAVIM officials trained 
(M/F/Age) 
Institutional assessment of MAVIM 
completed 
All four computerized system 
installed and upgraded 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
1 
8 
1 
Policy papers  
Annually  
MAVIM  
MAVIM report 
Annually 
MAVIM 
80 
80 
MAVIM report 
Annually 
MAVIM 
1 
4 
1 
4 
MAVIM report 
once 
MAVIM 
once 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
50 
3. PROJECT AREA AND TARGET GROUPS 
13. 
14. 
15. 
17. 
18. 
Project  Area:  The  project  will  work  across  the  34  rural  districts  of  Maharashtra,  in  the 
blocks/talukas/villages where MAVIM have organized SHGs, Village Organizations (VOs) and 
Community  Managed  Resources  Centres  (CMRCs).  It  will  support  all  existing  small  and 
microenterprise  clusters,  in  addition  to  developing  new  clusters.  Besides  all  standalone 
businesses of SHG members will receive business development services.  
Synergies  with  and  separation  from  other  projects.  Coordination  with  other 
development investment projects: MAVIM is one of the implementing agencies of the World 
Bank funded SMART project, which is somewhat similar in scope of Nav Tejaswini. Similarly, 
MAVIM is also functioning in areas where other projects such as IDH and BCI are active. The 
project will avoid investment in same value chain (product or group of products) in same 
CMRC and SHG to avoid the duplication of works and implementation complications. 
Outreach. The project will directly service 801,979 women through the 66,524 SHGs under 
248 CMRCs and 200,000 poor women and men, through value-chain interventions and wage 
employment  opportunity  creation  in  the  micro-enterprises.  These  households  will  be 
facilitated to join SHGs under existing CMRCs (self or family member). Thus the total target 
is 1,000,000 households. 
16. Social composition. The current Self Help Group member composition indicates that about 
28% Scheduled Castes, 13% Scheduled Tribe, 31% Other minority castes, 4% Minority, 7% 
Nomadic Tribes , 31 % OBC and remaining 17% are from other Castes. Scheduled tribes, 
scheduled castes, nomadic tribes, are considered as deprived. 
Target Groups: The project’s direct target group are the members of existing SHGs and 
their families. Majority of them are engaged in Income Generating Activities (IGAs) and have 
a credit history.  The membership  fall under three categories: a) microentrepreneurs with 
steady  family  income  above  Rs  58,000;  b)  Moderately  poor  with  family  income  from  all 
sources  between  Rs  25,000  to  Rs  58,000;  and  c)  Ultra/very  poor  that  earn  less  than  Rs 
25,000 and have no source of regular income (See Table 2 for features of each category of 
beneficiaries).  As  estimated  by  MAVIM  the  percentage  of  households  in  these  three 
categories are 30%, 60 to 65% and 5 to 10% respectively which also reflects approximately 
with SECC data for rural areas of Maharashtra of excluded1 households (39%), and included2 
households  (61%).  MAVIM  has  to  collect  data  on  current  poverty/inclusion  status  of  all 
members as per the Socio Economic Caste Census categorisation and where necessary PRA, 
before the project commences. 
By  profession,  the  target  beneficiaries  are  marginal 
livestock/fisheries 
microentrepreneurs,  non-farm  products  producers,  workers  in  service  sectors  and 
agricultural labourers. From gender perspectives, 100% of present direct beneficiaries are 
women. About 20% of SHG members may fall under 35 years of age (young adults). The 
project  would  include  young  adults,  women  and  men,  of  beneficiary  families  for  skill 
development programmes to gain decent and remunerative employment. It will indirectly 
support all value chain actors (input suppliers, traders, processors, aggregators, advisory 
service providers).  
farmers, 
Table 2: Features of beneficiary categories 
1 The parameters for exclusion are at least one of the following parameters a) Households owning motorized  two/three/four 
wheelers/fishing  boats,  B)  Households  owning  mechanized   three/four  wheeler agricultural  equipment,  c)  Households 
having kisan  credit card with the credit  limit of Rs.50,000 and above, d) Households with any  member as  government 
employee, e) Households with non-agricultural enterprises registered  with government, f) Households with any  member 
earning more than Rs. 10,000 p.m, g) Households paying income tax, h) Households paying professional tax, i) Households 
with three  or more rooms with pucca  walls and pucca roof, i) households owning refrigerator, j) Households owning land 
line, k) Households owning more than 2.5 acres moe of irrigated land. 
2 The parameters for inclusion are at least one of the following parameters a) Only one room with kucha walls and kucha 
roof, b) No adult member between age 16 to 59, c) Female headed households with no adult  male member between age 
16 to 59, d) Disabled member and no  able bodied adult member, e) SC/ST  households, f) No literate adult  above 25 years, 
g) Landless households deriving major part of their income from manual casual labour 
51 
Type of 
entrepreneurs 
Poverty 
indicators 
Services and path out of poverty 
Microentrepreneurs 
Moderately poor  
Ultra/Very poor 
 
 
 
Annual income > 
Rs 58,000 
(Poverty Line) 
Land  ownership  > 
2.5 acres 
Participate in an organized value chain  
Individual  microenterprise  loan  more  than  Rs  100,000 
from bank/non-bank financial institution 
Some  farm/non-farm  businesses  may  not  join  any 
organized  value  chain  subproject  but  grow  as  individual 
businesses. May receive business services as per need for 
example  productivity  related  training  in  case  of  farm 
sectors  and  design  improvement  in  case  of  non-farm 
product.  
  Participate in an organized value chain  
Annual income 
between Rs 
25,000 to Rs 
58,000 
Land  ownership  is 
between  0.5  acre 
and 2.5 acres 
 
Individual member may borrow up to Rs 100,000 through 
SHG-bank linkage 
  Some  farm/non-farm  businesses  may  not  join  any 
organized  value  chain  subproject  but  grow  as  individual 
businesses. 
 
In some instances may qualify for selected convergences 
schemes. 
Annual income 
less than Rs 
25,000 (no 
regular income 
and depend 
mainly on manual 
labor) 
Land ownership: 
landless to 0.5 
acre 
  Vocational training for selected SHG or family members  
 
 
 
 
 
Participate in a value chain if lives in the same cluster;  
Individual member may borrow up to  Rs 20,000 through 
SHG-bank linkage 
Some  farm/non-farm  businesses  may  not  join  any 
organized value chain subproject but grow as individual 
businesses. 
In many instances may qualify for selected convergences 
schemes promoted by CMRCs/MAVIM. 
Vocational training for selected SHG or family members 
for wage employment. 
  Mentoring for IGA development 
 
Village level wage employment for a subcontractor 
19. Targeting strategy; The project will have twin track approach in targeting activities; a) target 
households which possess basic level of resources, and skills that can be enhanced through the 
project interventions to enable income increase from  economic opportunities, b) target  ultra-
poor households with focused attention through mentoring, basic skill training to participate in 
wage  job  opportunities  created  in  the  enterprises  promoted,  vocational  training  and  in 
apprenticeships. Table 3 below summarizes targeting strategy for the project. 
Table 3: Mapping of target groups/Other Stakeholders by Project Components  
Component 
Sub component 
Target groups 
Market led 
enterprise 
promotion 
Farm sector 
enterprise 
development (both 
cluster based and 
standalone) 
Off farm/Non-farm 
sector enterprise 
development 
Women in self-help groups to chart out their own enterprise growth 
plan  supported  by  the  CMRCs.  The  beneficiaries  will  be  the  various 
types  of  individual  enterprises  (nano,  micro)  working  in  alignment 
with  existing  and  promoted  prioritized  commodities,  as  well  as 
collective enterprises [mainly the producer groups (PGs) and produce 
companies  (PCs)].  Apart  from  the  project  promoted  enterprise 
beneficiaries,  services  will  also  be  open  to  other  enterprises  in  the 
ecosystem.  
Poorer  households  will  undertake  jobs/wage  employment  in  both 
producer collectives as well as in individual enterprises. 
Innovations 
Innovators, tribal households, artisans, and SHG members involved 
in specific innovation pilots.  
52 
Enabling 
support 
services 
Facilitating Financial 
Linkages 
All members of SHGs through SHG credit linkage.  Individual loans to 
micro entrepreneurs. Insurance to be widely promoted. 
For livestock insurance, all livestock owners.  
Skill training 
Mentoring program 
for Ultra-poor 
Households 
Enhancing 
nutritional status 
and gender relations 
at HH and 
community levels 
Youths, both male and female, from ultra-poor and poor households 
will be target groups for vocational trainings under Government skill 
training  programmes,  private  train  programs,  and  apprenticeships 
with existing Enterprises. 
For  community  level  skill  training,  artisans  and workers  involved  in 
specific trade or interested in that particular trade will upgrade their 
skill sets from master crafts persons.  
Ultra poor households 
All members of self-help groups for nutrition related initiatives. 
Both  females  and  males  in  their  households  for  gender  equality 
activities in SHGs, VOs, and CMRCs. 
20. 
Baseline survey. The project shall conduct a baseline survey before launching to determine 
profile of project beneficiaries along with poverty status. As Nav Tejaswini is flagged as a 
gender transformative project, the baseline will also include pro-WEAI survey. 
53 
4. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH 
21. 
Project  implementation  approach:  The  PMU/MAVIM  will  ensure  the  following  core 
implementation approach while designing a micro-enterprise / value chain sub-projects as 
well as offering financial services:  
o 
Identify  and  develop  clusters  as  well  as  stand-alone  enterprises:  One  of  the  core 
elements of the project is to identify relevant services which cluster-based as well 
as  stand-alone  micro-enterprises  will  require.  The  project  will  facilitate  business 
development  services  to  strengthen  both  these  segments.  The  PMU  must  guide  / 
advice  CMRCs  to  identify  existing  value  chain  based  clusters  as  well  as  potential 
stand-alone  enterprises  to  determine  constraints  as  well  as  services  needed  to 
further  develop  associated  micro-enterprises  and  /  or  expand  these  micro-
enterprises  in  another  locations.  This  critical  step  will  help  reach  out  to  a  large 
number  of  similar  micro-enterprises,  develop  commercially  viable  support  and 
advisory services, disseminate new technologies and information, and standardize 
& aggregate products / services for buyers. 
o  Combine  micro-enterprise  finance  and  non-financial  services:  While  designing  a 
subproject  involving  a  specific,  similar  (like  vegetables)  or  linked  (like  tourism) 
product / services, the PMU will ensure that participants receive loans as and when 
required. Since value chains will have micro-enterprises of various size and capacity, 
specialized financial products shall have to be designed in collaboration with financial 
institutions to service their individual requirements3. However, it is understood that 
not  all  micro-enterprises  will  need  loans  or  ask  for  loans  as  many  of  them  may 
participate for access to technology, training, and markets. 
o  Transform  subsistence  producers  into  micro-enterprises:  The  PMU  will  introduce 
management practices, technologies, and support services to improve productivity 
and expand businesses to create broad economic multiplier effects that transform 
the rural sector and reduce poverty. 
o  Apply a nutrition-sensitive approach to the selection of commodities to be promoted, 
to ensure better nutrition for producers and consumers. 
o  Specifically  target  women  through  the  selection  of  commodities/value  chains  in 
which women are heavily involved (poultry, livestock, homestead production, fruits, 
vegetables etc). 
o 
Introduce compliance with food safety (Global GAP, HACCP and FSSAI) and quality 
standards at producer and micro-enterprise levels to ensure the supply of safe food 
for producers and consumers. 
o  Ensure  standardization,  quality  improvement  and  design  innovation  at  micro-
enterprise level to enable targeting premium markets for products and services. 
o 
Leverage commercial finance  through  scheduled commercial banks /  non-banking 
financial  corporations  for  investment  in  larger  enterprises,  value  chains,  and 
agribusinesses to expand the market for micro-enterprise output. 
o  Strengthen  the  capability  of  MAVIM  and  CMRCs  as  development  institutions  by 
leveraging trends in financial services, commercial platforms and new technologies. 
o  Adhere to the project’s Environment and Social Management Plan guided by the 
Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix (attachment 8) 
o 
3 Loans will be provided through SHG-Bank Linkage program, ME loan from banks and other type of financial 
institutions, value chain financing from institutions such as Summunati etc. 
54 
5. COMPONENT 1: MARKET-DRIVEN ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT 
Subcomponent 1.1: Farm Sector Enterprise Development 
Organized  Value  Chain  Development:  This  component  will  identify  prospective  farm 
products with market demand and opportunities for creation or expansion of enterprises to 
participate  in  identified,  well-functioning  value  chains.  The  project  will  support  454,000 
women to capture larger value and better price realization such as in collection, aggregation, 
processing, grading, packaging, quality control, and certification for products.  
CMRCs will be implementers of value chain subprojects under supervision from DCOs/RCs 
and PMU/MAVIM. See later in the PIM on value chain analysis and subproject design. 
improve 
through  better 
farm  productivity 
CMRCs eventually will set up cooperatives and also organizations at higher level, such as at 
the FPO level to: (i) Provide producers access to technical assistance from service providers, 
to 
inputs  and  production  practices, 
farmer/entrepreneurs  skill  development,  introduction  of  new  commodity,  Global  Good 
Agricultural Practices (GGAP) certification; (ii) Support producers to make forward linkages 
and identifying opportunities for supplying to big buyers, contract farming, setting up chilling 
plants,  processing  and  so  on;  (iii)  Support  aggregators  and  post-harvest  processors  to 
secure their supply chains; and (iv)  Provide to participating entrepreneurs business advisory 
services to developed skills in technology and management (e.g. business plans and cash 
flow planning; packaging and marketing planning and so on). Where required, the project 
will invest in appropriate modern technology (mostly equipment). 
Within farm sector the project will zero in on field crops (aromatic and special rice, soya, 
cotton  and  others),  fruits  and  vegetables,  pulses/seeds  and  nuts,  spices  and  medicinal 
fruits/plants, poultry and livestock and pond fisheries in selected districts. The IFAD design 
mission  has  analysed  value  chains  for  a  number  of  products  that  showed  significant 
opportunities for value enhancement in the form of better quality, increased production and 
better  farm  prices  and  additional  income  for  farming  families  and  microentrepreneurs. 
Commodities that have high value  and  growing  demand, and that are  nutrition sensitive, 
will  be  selected.  Other  factors,  such  as  environmental  considerations,  adverse  effects  of 
climate change, and food safety, will also be considered. The project will support value chain 
analyses for select commodities by either upgrading existing analyses or undertaking new 
ones.4 
Major  commodities:  The  important  commodities  for  value  chain  and  micro-enterprise 
development are field crops (paddy  – coloured / aromatic, soybean, maize, pulses, etc.), 
vegetables, fruits, dairy, poultry, goat-rearing, nuts, and aquaculture. 
Product  Targeting  by  district:  Table  4  below  provides  the  indicative  target  districts,  the 
commodities and existing clusters which have already been developed.5  
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
Table 4: Potential farm products and corresponding districts 
Product / Service 
Cereals like paddy, maize, millets & 
wheat 
Oilseeds & Pulses like soybean, 
groundnut & pigeon pea 
Districts with potential for value chain 
development 
Kolhapur, Raigad, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg, Bhandara, 
Chandrapur, Gadchiroli, Gondia, Aurangabad, Sangli, 
Nandurbar, Jalana, Hingoli, Dhule, Pune, Solapur, 
Ahmednagar 
Buldhana, Washim, Yavatmal, Jalana, Hingoli, Latur, 
Osmanabad, Wardha, Kolhapur, Sangli, Satara, 
Solapur, Akola, Amravati, Beed, Chandrapur 
Spices like turmeric 
Washim, Yavatmal, Sangli, Hingoli, Wardha 
4 Further details in Attachment 1 
5 Value chain profiles, and potential number of clusters and micro-entrepreneurs in Attachment 2 
55 
Fruits like mango, mandarin, 
grapes & pomegranate 
Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg, Amravati, Nagpur, Sangli, 
Nashik, Jalgaon, Ahmednagar, Pune, Solapur,  
Other plantation crops like coconut 
& cashew 
Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg 
Dairy  
Kolhapur, Sangli, Gondia, Solapur 
Goat and sheep 
Poultry 
All districts 
All districts 
Freshwater Aquaculture 
Gadchiroli, Gondia 
Sugar cane 
Kolhapur, Sangli 
Cotton 
Amravati, Buldhana, Yavatmal, Aurangabad, Jalana, 
Chandrapur, Wardha, Dhule 
Onion, Tomato & Potato 
Satara, Osmanabad, Dhule, Nashik, Ahmednagar, 
Pune, Solapur 
Other Vegetables 
Kolhapur, Sangli, Raigad, Nagpur, Dhule, Pune 
   Note: Nav Tejaswini/MAVIM may choose any block/talukas/district in Maharashtra to respond to demand  
   and opportunities, and proposal from CMRCs 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
Selection  of  districts  for  new  products:  The  project  may  implement  subprojects  in  each 
district aside from products mentioned in Table 4 on the basis of opportunities. The criteria 
for selection of new areas will be as follows: a) At least 200 members in one CMRC already 
engaged in / 200 new members interested in value  chain, b) Availability of institutional / 
assured market for produce, and c) First production should happen at least one year before 
the end of Nav Tejaswini. 
Common opportunities for farm sector products: The following opportunities exist for value 
addition across farm sector products: a) Shift to high yielding varieties, b) Shift to premium 
varieties like aromatic rice, c) GAP / Sustainability certification, d) Organic production, e) 
Testing, sorting & grading of final produce, f) Standardisation of quality, g) Removal of non-
value adding intermediaries, and h) Basic processing like converting paddy to rice or pulses 
to dal. These will improve the productivity, increase / assure price realization, enable access 
to premium markets, and improve margins for producers and micro-entrepreneurs. 
Common  challenges  for  farm  products:  The  greatest  challenge  faced  by  producers  and 
micro-entrepreneurs in the farm sector value chain are inconsistencies in production due to 
weather / pests, and year-on-year variation in prices of produce. Competition from alternate, 
cheaper sources, and increase in cost of production are additional challenges faced by the 
sector.6 Besides, farm productivity in many cases can be further improved through use of 
improved practices and application of technologies. 
Selection of new value chains: The project/PMU may choose new value chains for subprojects 
if opportunities arise during the implementation. The new value chain may be selected only 
if there is:  a) Availability of  an  assured market,  and  b) proof of  production  in one of the 
agro-climatic  zones  of  Maharashtra.  Once  identified,  PMU  should  commission  a  feasibility 
study  to  further  understand  the  opportunities,  requirements,  constraints  and  risks  in 
promoting this new value chain. The project will submit new subproject in the Annual Work 
Plan and Budget for approval by IFAD. 
32. 
Structure  of  agriculture  value  chain  in  Maharashtra:  The  following  schematic  diagram 
presents typical structure of farm product value chains: 
6 Challenges and market opportunities in each value chain further detailed in Attachment XX 
56 
Figure 1: Typical Farm Sector Value Chain 
33. 
Stakeholders in value chains: The following Table 5 presents various stakeholders and 
corresponding roles and challenges faced by each stakeholder in the chain: 
Stakeholder 
Role in Value Chain 
Challenges 
Table 5: Stakeholders and challenges 
Farmer 
Produces agricultural output including 
cereals, milk, poultry, etc. 
Input Company 
Develops inputs like seeds, fertilizers, 
cattle feed, etc. for increasing 
agricultural output 
Dealer 
Provides farmers access to inputs 
Financial 
Institutions 
Provides farmers access to credit, 
insurance and other financial products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climatic conditions pose risk to production 
Price varies y-o-y and day to day 
Low productivity  
Increasing cost of inputs 
Climatic conditions led to cropping pattern 
shifts 
No direct connection with farmers to 
develop understanding & loyalty 
Risk of non-payment since inputs at times 
sold on credit 
Threat of loan waivers and NPAs due to 
other conditions 
Small and dispersed landholdings make 
tracking difficult 
57 
FARMERGovernmentFinancial InstitutionsTechnology ProviderInput CompanyDealerTrader / Govt. / Collection CentreFood / AgroProcessorRetailerConsumerSimple ProcessingLegendSubsidyInput / LoansRaw ProduceProcessed Produce 
Technology 
Provider 
Government 
Provides farmers access to 
agricultural technologies like drip 
irrigation, poly-houses, etc. to 
enhance production / improve climate 
resilience 
Provides subsidies to farmers to 
promote use of better inputs, 
technologies and financial products 
including insurance 
Trader / Govt. / 
Collection Centre 
Aggregates farmers’ agricultural 
output and ensures timely payment 
Food / Agro-
Processor 
Processes agricultural output to make 
edible products / increase shelf life 
Retailer 
Provides consumers access to food 
products 
Consumer 
Consumers food products 
  Dependent on government’s subsidy 
system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Small and dispersed farm landholdings 
make adoption difficult 
Farmers lack finances to make their 
contribution to schemes 
Farmers lack finances to provide their 
contribution to schemes 
Limited financial products available to 
support timely payments 
Logistics (infrastructure and 
transportation) is unorganized 
Limited traceability & quality control of 
supply chain 
Limited traceability & quality control of 
supply chain 
Limited traceability & quality control of 
supply chain 
34. 
35. 
36. 
Objective  and  main  strategy  for  value  chain  development:  The  main  objective  of 
product/sector  specific  development  is  to  assist  a  large  number  of  producers  and  other 
actors/entrepreneurs in the value chain (as stated above) to increase profit by expanding 
businesses  or by becoming more  efficient in  respective business.  The main strategy is to 
grab market opportunities (e.g. more demand for same products, demand for new products 
etc) and identify and remove challenges faced by entrepreneurs at each stage of value chain.   
Sub-project Design and Implementation: The sub-projects design & implementation should 
include  the  following  stages:  a)  Identification  by  MAVIM-  Selecting  the  value  chain  and 
CMRC, b) conduct feasibility – Selecting the expert and conducting the feasibility study, c) 
Approval  –  Approving  the  sub-project  with  budgets  &  milestones  by  MAVIM,  defining  the 
TORs for the Technical Assistance (TA) and team, selecting the TA & team and transferring 
the  funds,  d)  Implementation  –  Developing  capacities  &  infrastructure,  fostering 
partnerships and rolling our activities, and e) Closure – Conducting the impact assessment, 
handing over assets to relevant agencies and designing the post-project support system. All 
activities shall be implemented by the CMRCs with the support of technical experts and the 
TA. The project employed District Supervisor/Monitoring officer and DCOs will monitor the 
progress of these sub-projects. 7 
Value  chain  analysis:  The  term  ‘value  chain  analysis’  in  the  context  of  the  project  is  to 
identify opportunities and constraints of each product/group of products or subsector, and 
design interventions (Activities) to remove the constraints. The activities such as training of 
farmers, setting up of milk collection centres, establishing linkages chilling plants etc are 
implemented  to  remove  constraints  of  knowledge  farmers  in  specific  areas,  developing 
supply chains to chillers, and accessing market.8 
37. 
Illustrative Example - Dairy Value Chain: The following section provides a simple analysis 
and development of a dairy value chain subproject as an illustrative example:  
7 Further details in Attachment 1 
8 Further details in Attachment 1 
58 
Fig: Dairy Value Chain 
38. 
Stakeholders in dairy value chain: 
  Breeder: The agency engaged in breeding of dairy cattle (cows – both indigenous & 
hybrid varieties, and buffaloes) for sale to farmers. 
 
 
Financial Institutions: The agency providing credit to farmers to purchase new cattle 
from breeders. Most financial institutions also bring in partner insurance companies 
to insure the cattle. 
Feed Supplier: The agency providing a balanced, nutritious diet for cattle to improve 
their  milk  yield.  The  diet  would  consist  of  cattle  feed,  mineral  mixture  and  green 
fodder. At times partner processing units provide the same to farmers at subsidized 
rates. 
  Veterinary Services: The agency providing health check-up and curative services to 
the  cattle.  These  services  are  provided  often  by  the  Dept.  of  Animal  Husbandry, 
partner processors or a local cadre of para vets like pashu sakhis. 
 
Farmer: The individual rearing the cattle and extracting milk for supplying to either 
the village level collection centres or to consumers directly. 
  Village  Level  Collection  Centre:  A  village  level  unit  to  test  and  collect  milk  from 
various producer-suppliers, and transport to the next aggregation point 
  Bulk Milk Cooler: A pre-processing unit to store and cool milk to elongate its shelf 
life before it can be transported to the processing unit. 
 
Processing Unit: A manufacturing plant where milk is converted into different grades 
of pasteurized milk and other products for sale to consumers. 
39. 
Challenges in the dairy value chain: 
o  Highly perishable commodity 
o  High variation in prices over the last few months 
59 
FARMERFinancial InstitutionsVeterinary ServicesBreederVillage Level Collection CentreBulk Milk CoolerProcessing UnitConsumerFeed Supplier 
o  No always direct access to chillers 
o 
Limited residual value of cattle past its productive stage 
40. 
Dairy subproject interventions: 
o  Test higher yielding & better production practices including breed improvement, feeding 
technologies, etc. 
o 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
o  Add  value  by  streamlining  production  and  logistics  including  better  testing,  bulk  milk 
cooling, etc. 
o 
Link with appropriate institutional markets like dairies 
o  Setting up collection center and BMC 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
S. 
No. 
o  Explore inter-CMRC market linkages for value added products like cottage cheese, etc. 
Cluster  Formation  for  Sub-Project:  One  sub-project  cluster  is  expected  to  engage  2,000 
dairy  farmers  spread  over  20  villages  with  an  average  of  100  farmers  per  village.  It  is 
expected that each of these farmers shall, due to the efforts of the sub-project, produce 10 
litre of milk every day. A total of 20,000 litre of milk shall be produced in the cluster every 
day – 10,000 litre in the morning and 10,000 in the evening. This sub-project cluster shall 
require 20 village level collection centres (VLCCs) and one bulk milk cooler (BMC) of 10,000 
litre capacity to service the needs of the associated dairy farmers. 
It is expected that 20 such sub-projects shall be implemented across the state with the first 
ones coming up  in Kolhapur,  Sangli, Solapur and Gondia. However, the Project is free to 
select any other location as per the need / opportunity. 
Selection of Technical Assistance Agency: Milk is a highly perishable commodity and hence 
requires  stable  forward  linkages  and  an  efficient  supply  chain.  There  are  also  a  lot  of 
government  schemes  and  subsidy  programmes  to  support  the  development  of  the  dairy 
value chain including the National Dairy Plan. 
The Technical Assistance (TA) Agency should have substantial experience of managing the 
milk supply chain and have strong connects with processing units / off-takers. It is useful if 
the TA also has some linkages with the government’s schemes to ensure that the sub-project 
can  benefit  from  convergence.  National  Dairy  Development  Board  (NDDB)  has  been 
responsible for transforming the dairy landscape across the country, and it is recommended 
that the Project explores the possibility of engaging them as the TA. It is also suggested that 
NDDB is brought on board for all the dairy sub-projects instead of on a sub-project basis. 
Producer Cooperative / Company Formation: It is recommended that all 2,000 members of 
a sub-project come together to form a produce cooperative under the guidance of the TA. 
The TA should then be in a position to assist the various farmer cooperatives to together 
promote  a  Producer  Company  and  link  up  with  appropriate  buyers.  NDDB  now  has  vast 
experience of promoting Producer Dairy Companies which have the capacity to engage with 
large milk processors / buyers and source large volumes for them. 
Utilization of Sub-Project  Funds  (Illustrative  example  ONLY  and  NOT  to  be  used  for 
actual costing of any dairy subproject): 
Item 
Quantity 
Unit Cost 
Total 
(INR) 
(INR) 
Contributions (INR) 
Sub-
Project 
Govt. 
Subsidy 
Credit / 
Lease 
Others 
1 
Feasibility 
Study9 
2 
Technical 
Assistance10 
0.05 
1,000,000 
50,000 
50,000 
0.05  10,000,000 
500,000 
500,000 
3 
Farmer 
Trainings 
2,000 / 
20 = 100 
5,000 
500,000 
500,000 
- 
- 
- 
4 
Pashu Sakhi 
Training 
20 
25,000 
500,000 
300,000 
200,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9 Assumption that there are 20 sub-projects and only one feasibility study required across sub-projects 
10 Assumption that there are 20 sub-projects and only one TA required across sub-projects 
60 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5 
VLCC 
Operator 
Training 
(2 x 20) / 
20 = 2 
50,000 
100,000 
100,000 
- 
- 
- 
6  VLCC Setup 
20 
150,000 
3,000,000  1,000,000  1,000,000 
-  1,000,000 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 
-  1,000,000 
-  1,000,000 
500,000 
2,500,000 
2 
1,200,000 
2,400,000 
- 
- 
- 
2,500,000 
- 
2,400,000 
1 
5 
7  BMC Setup 
8 
Transport – 
VLCC to BMC 
9 
Transport – 
BMC to Buyer 
10 
Sub-Project 
Manager 
1 yr 
300,000 
300,000 
300,000 
11  Others 
1 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
TOTAL 
12,100,000  3,000,000  2,200,000 
4,900,000  2,000,000 
47. 
Illustrative Example - Vegetables Value Chain: 
Fig: Vegetables Value Chain 
48. 
Stakeholders in vegetable subproject: 
 
 
 
 
Inputs: The  agency engaged in  development  of  high-quality  seeds,  fertilizers and 
pest control solutions to ensure farmers get good yields and quality produce. 
Financial Institutions: The agency supporting farmers with credit to purchase inputs 
and other services. 
Technology  Provider:  The  agency  assisting  farmers  to  improve  their  production 
systems by the use of technologies like drip irrigation, protected cultivation, etc. 
Government:  Supports  adoption  of  improved  and  climate  resilient  technologies 
through various schemes and subsidies. 
61 
FARMERFinancial InstitutionsTechnology ProviderInputsAPMC / Collection CentreTraderRetailerConsumerGovernment 
 
 
 
 
Farmer: Produces the vegetables in owned / leased farms. 
APMC  /  Collection  Centre:  Agencies  and  infrastructure  where  farmers’  produce  is 
aggregated. APMCs are a platform for farmers and traders to engage in transactions. 
The produce is generally sold through the open-auction system in APMCs. 
Trader: Agencies / Individuals who buy & aggregate farmers produce, sort & grade 
it appropriately, and dispatch to retailers. 
Retailer:  Shops /  Modern  retail stores where  consumers can  buy their vegetables 
from. 
49. 
Challenges: 
o  Change in weather patterns is severely effecting quality and quantity 
o 
o 
o 
Input costs increasing especially due to higher instances of pest attacks 
Limited low-cost opportunities for post-harvest value addition 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
50. 
Proposed Interventions: 
o  Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
o 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
o  Farm-level sorting & grading 
o 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
o  Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
Cluster  Formation  for  Sub-Project:  One  sub-project  cluster  shall  engage  1,000  vegetable  
farmers spread over 15-20 villages with an average of 50 farmers per village. It is expected 
that each of these farmers shall, due to the efforts of the sub-project, produce high quality, 
residue free vegetables year-round. Each of the farmers shall be able to produce about 100 
kg of one or more vegetables every day for about 100 – 150 days in a year.  
The sub-project shall set up 4 – 5 collection centres in the vegetables cluster to cater to a 
group of about 150 – 200 vegetable farmers residing in adjoining villages. A total of about 
5,000 kg vegetables shall  be collected at  each  collection  centre  every  day  and 20,000 to 
25,000 kg across the sub-project cluster. 
The sub-project shall focus on: a) improving & standardizing the quality and productivity of 
the  produce  through  use  of  better  inputs  &  technologies,  b)  developing  a  year-round 
production system to cater to retail customers, c) setting up collection centres to aggregate 
farmers’ produce, d) linking farmers with markets, and e) getting quality / sustainability / 
organic certifications for the farmers. 
It  is  expected  that  2  such  sub-projects  shall  be  implemented  across  each  of  the  target 
districts. However, the Project is free to review this as per the need / opportunity. 
Selection of Technical Assistance Agency: This sub-project requires three distinct types of 
technical  assistance:  a)  technical  support  to  develop  a  year-round  production  system,  b) 
certification  for  sustainability  /  organic  /  residue-free  /  Global  GAP  compliant  production, 
and c) aggregation and marketing of produce. Unlike milk, where one TA would have been 
able to play all the three roles or at least two of these, it is likely that no one agency shall 
be able to play more than one role in this sub-project. 
For technical support to develop a year-round production system, the sub-project needs to 
engage either an agriculture institution like IARI or ICAR-IIVR or a technical expert who has 
been engaged in crop planning at a retail company like Mother Dairy Fruits & Vegetables. 
For  certification,  the  sub-project  needs  to  select  the  relevant  standard  and  identify  an 
appropriate agency for the same. 
For aggregation and marketing, it is likely that a TA might not be available. The capability 
will have to be developed within the CMRC itself to support this activity. 
Producer Cooperative / Company Formation: It is recommended that all 1,000 members of 
a sub-project come together to form a produce cooperative. It is unlikely that one of the TAs 
will have the requisite know-how, and hence the CMRCs with the help of MAVIM’s DCOs and 
the Business Development & Enterprise Development Expert within MAVIM will have to take 
on this responsibility. It is also suggested that these cooperatives aggregate at a district / 
division level and form a Producer Company to improve access to markets. This Producer 
Company shall hire competent staff to assist  in aggregation and marketing of vegetables 
produced.  
62 
60. 
Utilization  of  Sub-Project  Funds  (Illustrative  example  only  and  not  to  be  used  for 
actual estimation of cost for subproject): 
S. 
No. 
Item 
Quantity 
Unit Cost 
Total 
(INR) 
(INR) 
Contributions (INR) 
Sub-
Project 
Govt. 
Subsidy 
Credit / 
Lease 
Others 
1 
Feasibility 
Study11 
2 
3 
Technical 
Assistance - 
Production12 
Technical 
Assistance - 
Certification 
0.25 
400,000 
100,000 
50,000 
0.25 
1,000,000 
250,000 
500,000 
1 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
4 
Farmer 
Trainings 
1,000 / 
20 = 50 
5,000 
250,000 
250,000 
5 
Lead Farmer 
Training 
6 
Demonstration 
Plots 
7 
Collection 
Centre Setup13 
8 
Sub-Project 
Manager 
20 
5,000 
100,000 
100,000 
20 
10,000 
200,000 
100,000 
50,000 
20 
50,000 
1,000,000 
800,000 
1 yr 
600,000 
600,000 
600,000 
9  Others 
1 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
TOTAL 
3,300,000  3,000,000 
50,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
50,000 
- 
200,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
250,000 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
Summary  value  chain  analysis:  The  design  mission  has  broadly  analysed  value  chains  of 
some  important  agricultural  commodities.14  The  PMU  will  further  analyse  these  before 
formally  launching  value  chain  subprojects.  See  Attachment  1  for  preliminary  profiles  of 
selected value chain.            
Global  Good  Agriculture  Practices  (GGAP):  In  order  to  cater  to  specific  markets  which 
promote food safety, the project will assist to introduce Global Good Agriculture Practices 
(GGAP) for marginal/small farmers and micro-enterprises involved in primary production of 
the selected crops, poultry and livestock, and aquaculture commodities in selected locations. 
Support will also be provided to enterprises engaged in crop/meat/fish processing to obtain 
Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) certification.  
The  project  will  implement  GGAP  in  selected  vegetables/fruits  products.  HACCP  may  be 
piloted in food processing sector. 
Standalone farming/commodity business: In many cases, expansion of individual businesses 
(increase in sales and profit) can be possible by increasing land (for rice, vegetables, lentils 
etc), increasing herds (goat, dairy), improving farm productivity by improved farm practices 
etc.  The  project  through  CMRCs  and  village-based  agricultural  assistants  (Sakhis)  will 
provide/facilitate production/market related assistance to standalone farm/businesses.  
Services for standalone businesses: The project will provide various services to stand-alone 
businesses including trainings on basic business management. These businesses shall also 
be able to access trainings on basic and advanced skills. Exchange visits for these business 
shall  also  be  organized  Table  6  below  presents  training  and  exchange  visits 
microenterprises: 
11 There are 4 sub-projects in adjoining districts and only one feasibility study required across 
those 
12 A group of 4 sub-projects require only one TA 
13 Includes weigh scales and crates which could be provided by the buyer 
14   Value chain profiles in Attachment 2 
63 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
Table 6: Training and exchange visits for microenterprises (farm sector) 
Training title 
Farm sector ME training (20 
trainees per batch) [3 day 
@CMRC/clusters] 
Participants (farm 
sector) 
Successful MEs with 
potential for further 
growth 
Main topics to be covered 
Training providers 
Technological and or 
management  as per need 
Training materials development 
(modules) 
Farm sector modules, 
if not already 
available from other 
sources 
Module of production 
technologies or 
management of specific 
sector MEs. 
Training of trainers/shakis training 
(@ 5 per CMRC) [3 day training at 
CMRC/cluster] [@20 per batch] 
Shakis 
Advance farming/agro-processing 
training [At cluster level; 3 day 
training; @ 20 per batch] 
Exchange visits (5 day within 
India) [5 day exchange visit within 
India; @ 40 per batch] 
Successful MEs for 
developing local 
experts, lead farmers 
and entrepreneurs 
who can assist others   
Successful MEs, lead 
MEs or Lead farmers, 
Shakis  
Sector wise training (field 
crop, livestock, fisheries 
etc) 
Sector or product specific 
advance training 
Sector or product specific 
site visits 
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project etc  
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project or individual 
experts etc 
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project etc 
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project etc 
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project etc 
Multi-product  cooperatives  by  CMRC:  The  project  will  facilitate  CMRCs  to  form  multi 
commodity  producer  collectives  (cooperatives)  based  on  business  potential.  To  maximise 
the  benefit  from  market  opportunities,  economies  of  scale,  commodity  wise  producer 
companies  will  be  formed  with  adequate  market  savvy  capabilities.  About  30  producer 
companies will be nurtured. Apex PC will be facilitated for forging market linkages with B2B 
players and also tapping export markets.15 See later in the PIM on further details. 
Access  to  finance  for  farm  business:  Access  to  finance  will  continue  through  SHG-Bank 
Linkage program. See Component 2 for details on access to finance. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Manufacturing and services sector enterprise development 
A number of non-farm and off-farm products have been identified with potential for value 
enhancement,  enterprise  development  and  marketability.  It  is  expected  that  151,400 
(111,400  in  organized  value  chain  and  40,000  standalone  businesses)  micro-enterprises 
shall be engaged in these activities. These products/services are, among others: a) Wood 
works, bamboo products, handicrafts; b) Spice processing, small food processing; c) Bag, 
saree,  mini-garments  (multi-machine  tailoring);  c)  Jewellery  and  allied  products;  and  d) 
services (physio therapist, cook, trained attendants, restaurant/eatery management)  and 
tourism  (this  may  include  renting  of  space,  catering,  guide  etc).  New  service  enterprises 
such  as  eco-tourism  have  been  preliminarily  identified  as  having  potential.  The  range  of 
products in non-farm sector is numerous and fewer people form one cluster.  
Main challenges: The main challenges to be addressed by the project are (i) low-quality and 
low-priced products targeted to price sensitive, low income buyers; (ii) absence of packaging 
and recognition; (iii) poor design, iv) manual production, v) poor workmanship, and vi) lack 
of  access  to  mainstream  market  (Up-market).  Value  chains  currently  are  short,  that  is, 
produced and sold locally and in small volumes.  
The  main  interventions  will  be  to:  (i)  Develop  designers  and  assist  design  of  products 
through professional designers and design organizations; (ii)  Introduce mechanization for 
quality  improvement  and  standardization;  (iii)  Develop  skilled  workers;  d)  Identify 
subcontracting  arrangement  if  feasible  in  case  of  bamboo  products,  garments,  and  wood 
works, jewellery and handicrafts; e) develop business plans and maintain records; and f) 
assistance for linkage with mainstream market. 
71. 
Value  chain  development  for  non-farm  products.  A similar approach  as  explained in 
case of farm products will be followed for value chain development of non-farm products. 
The project will select a product or group of similar products with potential for further growth. 
15 Further details in attachment 3 
64 
A  similar  of  analysis  of  opportunities  and  challenges  will  be  followed  and  interventions 
selected to remove constraints. Each subproject will have activity plans and budget to be 
approved by MAVIM. 
72. 
Illustrative Example – Bamboo products microenterprises: 
73. 
Stakeholders in bamboo subproject: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bamboo Supplier: The farmer producing bamboo. 
Bamboo  Treatment:  The  agency  engaged  in  primary  processing  of  bamboo  like 
treatment and / or cutting. 
Designer:  The  agency  involved  in  designing  the  products.  The  same  should  be 
working with the buyer and could either be the Buyer’s representative or engaged 
by the CMRC / MAVIM. 
Artisan: Produces the products as per specification either as a stand-alone ME or on 
a job-work basis depending on the arrangement with a buyer. 
Common  Facility  Centre:  A  setup  with  machinery  /  tools  for  advanced  /  fine  jobs 
which might not be affordable for individual MEs. This CFC could be set up as a part 
of the sub-project and the artisans could be charged on a pay-per-use basis. Tie ups 
with existing infrastructure can be explored. 
Trader:  Agencies  /  Individuals  who  buy,  aggregate,  standardize  and  package 
products and dispatch to appropriate retailers / buyers. 
Retailer:  Shops  including  large  furniture  stores  like  Ikea  or  Pepperfry,  or  small 
souvenir shops where consumers can buy the bamboo products from. 
74. 
Challenges: 
65 
ArtisanFinancial InstitutionsDesignerBamboo TreatmentCommon Facility CentreTrader / AggregatorRetailer / Institutional BuyerConsumerBamboo SupplierBuyer 
o 
Low existing skills of artisans and limited exposure to quality-sensitive premium markets 
o  Price  sensitive  existing  clientele  doesn’t  incentivize  artisans  to  invest  in  upskilling  or 
design improvement 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Limited understanding of input material quality and potential uses 
Limited commercial production of bamboo including selection of varieties for specific end 
uses and sustainability of supply chain 
Limited use of tools and machinery in production processes 
Limited improvement in designs 
75. 
Proposed Interventions: 
o  Train and upskill artisans to cater to premium, quality sensitive markets 
o  Engage with designers / technology providers to improve product and production design 
o  Set up Common Facility Centres with tools & machinery to improve quality of the final 
product through better finishing 
o 
Identify and engage with potential markets 
o  Develop and improve the bamboo supply chain 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
Cluster Formation for Sub-Project: One sub-project cluster shall engage 500 artisans spread 
over 10-15 villages with an average of 50 artisans per village. It is expected that each of 
these  artisans  shall,  due  to  the  efforts  of  the  sub-project,  produce  high  quality  bamboo 
products (handicraft, furniture, etc.). 
The sub-project shall set up 1 common facility centre in the cluster to cater to the group of 
artisans residing in target villages. This CFC shall have tools and machines to perform finer 
/ complicated procedures on bamboo to improve its quality and finish. 
The  sub-project  shall  focus  on:  a)  improving  the  skills  of  artisans  and  introducing  new 
designs, b) standardizing the quality and productivity of production through use of better 
inputs & technologies, c) setting up common facility centres to further improve quality of 
goods,  d)  linking  artisans  with  markets,  and  e)  getting  artisans  regular  access  to  new 
designs. 
It  is  expected  that  4  such  sub-projects  shall  be  implemented  across  each  of  the  target 
districts. However, the Project is free to review this as per the need / opportunity. 
Selection  of  Technical  Assistance  Agency:  This  sub-project  requires  two  distinct  types  of 
technical assistance: a) design support for developing new and premium products, and b) 
production  support  for  improving  the  manufacturing  processes  and  overall  quality  of 
production. Unlike farm-based enterprises, the TAs involved here will be more specialized in 
nature with very specific design and engineering skills. 
For design support, the sub-project needs to engage institutions like NID and NIFT who can 
also  regularly  send  their  teachers  /  students  to  engage  with  the  artisans.  Agencies  like 
KONBAC and Asian Heritage Foundation can also be engaged. 
For production improvement, the sub-project needs to select appropriate agencies with the 
relevant engineering skill sets. IIT Bombay’s IDC could be a potential partner. 
Utilization of Sub-Project Funds (Illustrative example only and not to be used for 
actual estimation of cost for subproject): 
S. 
No. 
Item 
Quantity 
Unit Cost 
Total 
(INR) 
(INR) 
Contributions (INR) 
Sub-
Project 
Govt. 
Subsidy 
Credit / 
Lease 
Others 
1 
Feasibility 
Study16 
0.25 
200,000 
50,000 
50,000 
- 
- 
- 
16 There are 4 sub-projects in adjoining districts and only one feasibility study required across 
those 
66 
2 
3 
Technical 
Assistance - 
Design17 
Technical 
Assistance - 
Production 
0.25 
1,000,000 
250,000 
250,000 
- 
- 
- 
0.25 
1,000,000 
250,000 
250,000 
4 
Artisan 
Trainings 
500 / 10 
= 50 
5,000 
250,000 
250,000 
5 
Lead Artisan 
Training 
20 
5,000 
100,000 
100,000 
- 
- 
6  CFC Setup 
1 
300,000 
300,000 
200,000 
50,000 
7 
Sub-Project 
Manager 
1 yr 
300,000 
300,000 
300,000 
8  Others 
1 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
- 
- 
TOTAL 
1,600,000  1,500,000 
50,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
50,000 
- 
- 
50,000 
84. 
Standalone businesses. Numerous existing microenterprises/IGAs from non-farm sector 
such as shops, micro production, collection units, can be expanded by providing larger loans, 
production/design training and linkages with bigger markets. About 30% of beneficiaries are 
currently engaged in such activities. 
85. 
Training  for  non-farm  standalone  businesses.  Table  7  below  presents  training  and  other 
activities for non-farm standalone businesses: 
Table 7: Training and exchange visits for microenterprises (non-farm sector) 
Training title 
1  Non-farm sector ME training (20 
trainees per batch) [3 day 
@CMRC/clusters] 
2 
Training materials development 
(modules) 
3 
4 
5 
Training of trainers/shakis training 
(@ 5 per CMRC) [3 day training at 
CMRC/cluster] [@20 per batch] 
Advance non-farm/agro-
processing training [At cluster 
level; 3 day training; @ 20 per 
batch] 
Exchange visits (5 day within 
India) [5 day exchange visit within 
India; @ 40 per batch] 
6  Marketing and Branding and E-
commerce linkages 
BDS Services for Standalone 
Business 
7 
86. 
Participants (farm 
sector) 
Successful MEs with 
potential for further 
growth 
Main topics to be covered 
Training providers 
Technological and or 
management  as per need 
Non-farm sector 
modules, if not 
already available from 
other sources 
Module of production 
technologies or 
management of specific 
sector MEs. 
Shakis 
Sector wise training 
Successful MEs for 
developing local 
experts, lead 
entrepreneurs who 
can assist others   
Successful MEs, lead 
MEs, Shakis  
For successful 
products 
Lump sum money for 
selected BDS for 
selected MEs 
Sector or product specific 
advance training 
Sector or product specific 
site visits 
As per need 
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project etc  
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project or individual 
experts etc 
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project etc 
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project etc 
Private, government or 
NGOs, training centers, 
associations, another 
project etc 
Take assistance from 
specialized agencies 
Specialized agencies 
Expansion of nano and micro enterprises will generate decent and remunerative employment 
opportunities.  Furthermore,  the  CMRCs  will  identify  opportunities  for  connecting  SHG 
members  with  sub-contractors  in  selected  product  supply  chains,  like  IKEA  or  garments, 
wood  and  bamboo  works,  high  value  handicrafts  etc.  Other  examples  may  be  explored. 
17 A group of 4 sub-projects require only one TA 
67 
Women  can  easily  be  trained  to  do  the  production  to  specifications.  The  key  issue  is  to 
partner with businesses to develop supply chains from villages. 
87. 
A significant proportion of SHG members would like to work in non-farm sector as well as 
receive  wage.  Besides,  young  adults  are  looking  for  work  outside  farms.  The  project  will 
follow  three  methods  of  skill  training  for  creating  wage  employment:  a)  through  formal 
government/non-government/private  institutions  where  the  project  selects  trainees  to 
participate various courses; b) village-based training to group of trainees by hired trainers; 
and c) apprentice program where trainees work as apprentice in selected private businesses 
(e.g. garments  factories, furniture/jewellery/bamboo  products/repair  shops etc) learn the 
trades.  It  will  participate  in  government’s  skill  development  programs.  The  project  will 
commit to a zero tolerance policy on child labour.  
88. Institution  building  and  enterprise  Development  Facilitation.  This  section  provides  for 
institutional  development  of  co-operatives,  hiring  of  value  chain  facilitators  for  CMRCs, 
provision of operational expenditure and working capital for Producer Companies. 
89. Multi-product cooperatives by CMRC. DCO and ADCO (business development) will facilitate 
CMRCs  to  form  commodity  specific/multi-commodity  producer  collectives  (cooperatives) 
based on business potential, ease of management and governance oversight. To maximise 
the  benefit  from  market  opportunities,  economies  of  scale,  commodity  wise  producer 
companies  will  be  formed  with  adequate  market  savvy  capabilities.  About  30  producer 
companies will be nurtured. Co-operatives will subscribe to the share capital of the producer 
companies. An Apex PC, if found essential, will be facilitated for standardising quality and 
packaging  across  the  various  suppliers  and  for tapping  export  markets.   A  note  on  the 
proposed  structure  of  the  producer  collectives  including  the  rationale  and  roles  of  the 
structure can be seen in Attachment 2. 
90. Implementation steps before formation of co-operatives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PMU will hire the services of a capable and experienced Company Secretary to advise 
and  facilitate  formation  and  registration  of  the  producer  collectives  and  guide  on 
compliances by producer collectives to different regulations periodically. 
PMU will engage the services of institutions  such as Samunnati Agro solutions for 
institutions building of producer collectives and market linkages.  
PMU and District units to facilitate sub project identification under farm and nonfarm 
sectors. Have forecasts on number of members and volume of business both input 
and outputs under different sectors. 
District  units  will  facilitate  CMRCs  to  make  a  realistic  assessment  of  work  and 
activities under Nav Tejaswini for stand-alone micro enterprise promotion and also 
ultra-poor interventions. 
District  units  will  facilitate  CMRCs  to  make  a  holistic  assessment  of  the  services 
needed  by  3,000  members  of  CMRCs  and  which  institution  (CMRC,  producer 
cooperatives) should provide what type of services.  
District units to facilitate discussions within CMRCs on role division between CMRCs 
and co-operatives; governance for both structures, staffing for both structures and 
how to create co ownership of both the structures.  
District units to facilitate business plans for CMRCs and the cooperatives including 
resource mobilisation.  
Staff (value chain facilitators) hired for sub project implementation will be initially 
working with CMRCs but move into co-operatives once they are formed.  
In  case  CMRCs  decides  on  only  cooperative  form  to  be  continued,  work  out 
modalities for winding down especially transfer of business relationships and assets 
from CMRCs to Cooperatives. 
68 
91. The project will promote strong producer collectives which are a function of several factors. 
Several studies18 and round tables on collectives of producers have been conducted in the 
recent past in India. These studies, workshops, and round tables have identified some critical 
elements  for  success.  These  are  scale  of  operation,  the  product  type  and  product  mix, 
subsector involved, and professional support. However, as many of the following factors  as 
possible have to be adopted to increase the success of collectives.  
Factors/Variables 
Design Incorporations  
Structure of collectives: Need of an 
organic  link  between  the  producers 
and  their  organizations.  Collective 
need  to  be  multi-tiered  with  distinct 
functions  and  optimizing  ownership, 
business 
governance 
performance.  
and 
Size  of  collectives:  Presently  the 
size varies from 100–1,000 members. 
However, bigger membership base of 
enhanced 
2,000 
are 
performance.  
showing 
Handholding  support  to  the  PCs: 
Intensive handholding  support to the 
collectives for a period of 3–3.5 years 
is  critical  to  set  up  systems  and 
process for long-term sustainability. 
Paid-up  capital:  The paid-up capital 
at  the  collectives’  level  is  extremely 
low  and  signifies  low  ownership  of 
members,  as  well  as  lesser  capital 
availability  at  the  collective  level  for 
business purposes.  
Financial 
PCs: 
support 
Experience  shows  that  initial  grant 
support  has  been  very  successful  in 
strengthening the PCs.  
to 
Access  to  bank  loans:  There  are 
several  issues.  Lack  of  a  quality 
business  plan  is  the  first.  Second,  in 
many  cases,  three  years  of  balance 
sheet  is  required  for  the  banks  to 
loan,  which  acts  as  a 
extend 
roadblock. 
financing 
However, 
enhances significantly if the PC is able 
to demonstrate and generate business 
volumes in the initial years.  
Multi-tier organization has been designed. The 
producer groups at the village level consisting 
of  50  to  70  aggregate  at  the  CMRC  level  to 
form  the  co  operative.  The  co  operatives  co 
own 
are 
commodity  specific  at  a  higher  level  of 
geography  –  at  a  district/regional  level.  The 
level  will  be  finally  decided  based  on  the 
commodity/subsector  and  the  operational 
feasibility. 
companies  which 
Producer 
The  size  of  the  co  operative  will  be  around 
1,500–2,500 members.  
Institutions  like  Samunnati  will  be  hired  who 
provide  integrated  services  of 
institution 
building,  business  development  and  financial 
services.  The  producer  companies  will  have 
core  business  staff  who  will  work  with  and 
hand hold the staff of co operatives.  
It will be mandatory to put in at least Rs 1,000 
per shareholder – leading to a share capital of 
Rs  20–25  lakhs  (for  a  membership  base  of 
2,000–2,500). This will create enough capital 
at  the  co  operative  level  to  invest  in  PCs,  to 
initiate  business.  Equity  matching  grants  of 
SFAC will also be availed.  
Working capital at PC level has been provided 
for.  The  fund  can  be  used  by  the  PC  as 
collateral  to  leverage  credit,  working  capital 
use,  to  fund  critical  investment,  and  so  on. 
Business plans will be provided by PC prior to 
accessing this fund.  
The  project  will  engage  the  services  of 
institutions like Samunnati to support the PCs 
develop  sound  business  plans  as  part  of 
institutional  development.  Samunnati  has 
innovative  value  chain  financing  instruments 
which the PCs will access. The project will aslo 
approach other financial institutions to finance 
sound business plans.  
18 Producer Company in India: A Study of Performance and Organizations – Sukhpal Singh and Tarunvir Singh, 
2013 and Proceeding of National Round Table Discussions on Optimal Design of Farmer Producer 
Organizations, Xavier Institute of Management, 2016.  
69 
load:  Most  of 
the 
Compliance 
producer companies find it extremely 
difficult  to  adhere  to  all  the  fiduciary 
and  legal  requirements  without  any 
external support. 
Only  few  producer  companies  are  to  be 
formed  and  professionals  will  be  hired  and 
need  based  experts  will  be  hired 
for 
compliances 
92. Budgets  and  activities:  Budgets  have  been  provided  for  institutional  development  of  co-
operatives, value chain facilitators for CMRCs, operational expenditure and working capital 
for Producer Companies. Each CMRC will be supported for hiring a value chain facilitator for 
ensuring  implementation  of  VC  activities.  For  20  weak  CMRCs,  with  low  manpower, 
additional staff cost is provided for ensuring VC facilitation. These staff will be part of the 
producer  collectives  once  they  are  formed.  Additional  staff  will  be  hired  by  cooperatives 
based on business volumes.  
93. For  cooperative  institutional  strengthening,  each  co-operative  will  estimate  the  support 
needed including additional staff, furniture, computer etc., based on the guidance by District 
units.  CMRCs  with  the  support  of  district  units  will  mobilise  additional  resources  from 
agriculture department/ATMA, horticulture department, NABARD, SFAC etc. Where needed, 
the  cooperatives  will  be  provided  marketing  finance  by  financial  institutions/producer 
companies.  
94. Producer companies will be commodity specific and will operate at scale. The cooperatives 
will be the shareholders and provide governance oversight. MAVIM will also appoint sector 
specific experts as advisors to the boards of the Producer companies (the provisions of the 
Act enables such external expertise to support community representatives). Operational cost 
support will be provided fully for the first year and scaled down to 50% for the second year. 
From third year the Producer companies are expected to be financially sustainable.  
95. The producer companies will also be provided based on business plans with working capital 
funds up to Rs. 25 lakhs for the start-up of business activities and create a track record since 
accessing the first loans is full of challenges. The PC can leverage the share capital and the 
working capital grant up to 4 times for accessing commercial finance.  
96. The  machinery  and  equipment19  provided  for  value  chain  facilitation  will  be  owned  and 
managed by the cooperatives and producer companies. As against grant funding to producer 
collectives for equipment, plant and machinery, the project will pilot patient capital financing, 
a  long  term  debt  instrument  at  low  rates  of  interest,  to  ensure  better  utilization, 
accountability and larger replication.(see sub component 2.1 for further details).  
97. The apex PC will be formed based on need and business volumes. Project staff at PMU will 
initially manage this and there will be transition plan for staff transfer and additional staff 
hiring based on business volumes.  
98. The  formation  of  cooperatives  and  Producer  companies  will  be  completed  by  third  year 
ensuring  institutional  strengthening  of  all  the  producer  collectives  before  project  closure. 
About  300,000  producers  (largely  farm  sector)  are  expected  to  be  part  of  the  producer 
collectives.  
Subcomponent 1.3: Capacity development of CMRCs 
99. 
100. 
Capacity Development of CMRCs. A series of training has been planned as follows: 
A) Basic small business management Training.  This basic business management training is 
meant to provide basic understanding of concept of private business and management of 
single business. The salient features and implementation of this course are as follows:  
 
Participants: i) CMRC managers and ii) Sayoginis. 
  Duration: 3 day  
  Objective: The objective is to provide the trainees with basic concept of a private 
business, management of a business, and business environment. The trainees after 
completion of the course  should be able to analyse a small business, its business 
19 Bulk milk coolers, dal processing machines, oil expellers, equipment in common facilitation centers etc.,  
70 
and  financial  performance,  and  make  determination  whether  it  should  be  able  to 
expand and maintain profitability.      
  Main  topics  to  be  covered:    a)  Business  environment  in  Maharashtra  and  in  rural 
areas; b) Four core areas of a business – i) product and marketing, ii) technology 
and  production,  iii)  human  resources,  and  iv)  Finance;  c)  Emphasis  should  be  on 
product and market analysis, and determining product-market fit, and analysis of 
profitability  of  the  business;  d)  analyse  income  statement  and  cash  flow;  e)  key 
success factor in each sector of business; f) various legal forms of business and role 
of regulators; g) informal businesses run by SHG members; and h) Cooperatives as 
business entities.  
  Method  of  training:  a)  Lecture  to  explain  the  concepts;  b)  many  case  analysis  to 
understand each business function; d) field visit to analyse at least one business by 
each participants; e) presentations, group discussions, and interactive discussion; 
f) discussion/experience sharing by successful entrepreneurs etc. 
 
Provider:  The  training  course  can  be  organized  by  a)  business  school  in  reputed 
private/public  university,  b)  Consulting  firm/training  centers  with  specialization  in 
business,  c)  NGO/govt  training  centers  with  specialization  business  management. 
MAVIM may customize the contents of the training course in consultation with the 
training provider.              
101. 
B) Training on Value chain project design and management (3 day):                   
 
Participants: i) CMRC Managers and ii) VCD supervisors of Nav Tejaswini will  receive 
this training. 
  Duration: 3 day  
  Objective: The objective is to teach the trainees with basic concept of a value chain 
development of businesses, designing a value chain project and implementation of 
a value chain project. The trainees after completion of the course should be able to 
analyse a subsector, its opportunities and constraints, and interventions needed.      
  Main  topics  to  be  covered:    a)  concept  of  value  chain;  b)  process  of  value  chain 
analysis; c) identification of opportunities and challenges; d) Emphasis should be on 
product and market analysis, and determining product-market fit, and analysis of 
profitability of the business; d) determine interventions for each segment of value 
chain;  e)  budget  and  costing;  f)  Logframe  development;  and  g)  monitoring  and 
evaluation.   
  Method  of  training:  a)  Lecture  to  explain  the  concepts;  b)  many  case  analysis  to 
understand  value  chain  development;  d)  field  visit  to  analyse  at  least  one  VCD 
project;  e)  presentations,  group  discussions,  and  interactive  discussion;  f) 
discussion/experience sharing by successful VCD managers etc. 
 
Provider:  The  training  course  can  organized  by  a)  business  school  in  reputed 
private/public  university,  b)  Consulting  firm/training  centers  with  specialization  in 
business,  c)  NGO/govt  training  centers  with  specialization  business  management, 
and VCD. MAVIM may customize the contents of the training course in consultation 
with the training provider.              
102. 
C) Contract farming, subcontracting, contract negotiation.  This course for CMRC Managers 
who  will  negotiating  with  large  firms/buyers  on  contract  framing,  subcontracting 
arrangement for CMRCs, SHG members or VC participants. The course should be hands on 
training  by  studying  various  contract  farming  and  subcontracting  arrangements  in  the 
state/country. 
and  VCD 
supervisors 
103.  D)    Project  Monitoring.  This  is  a  generic  project  management  training  courses  meant  for 
project 
Managers 
monitoring/management  skills.  The  focus  should  be  rural  development  type  project 
management courses. This type of courses are normally offered by Universities, large NGOs, 
Think tanks, specialised research and training institutes etc. 
E) Skill development training program management. This course is also a specialized training 
course on management of vocational training /apprenticeship program. This training course 
may not be available off the shelf. MAVIM may recruit individual consultant to develop the 
module for the training such training course is not offered by any institution. 
from  CMRCs 
enhance 
their 
104. 
to 
71 
105. 
F) Institutional transformation training (CMRC to cooperatives). The training course is open 
for CMRC managers. The topics may be selected as per cooperative formation issues. 
106.  G)  Exchange  visits  (to  projects  and  businesses).  Exchange  visits  are  practical  way  of 
learning.  CMRCs  managers,  VCD  supervisors  and  Sahyoginis  may  choose  successful  VCD 
projects, businesses, cooperatives, FPOs, FPCs etc to enhance their knowledge and skills on 
relevant topics. 
Subcomponent 1.4: Supporting innovations 
107.  Subcomponent  1.4:  Supporting  innovations.  This  subcomponent  will  be  piloting 
new  enterprises,  technologies  and  products  that  have  not  been  fully  tested  or 
adopted in the project area, but appears to have potential of replication to benefit 
project  beneficiaries.  This  will  focus  on  supporting  niche  crop  and  non-farm 
products, environment, irrigation, renewable energy, waste management and any 
product/process that supports enterprise development.  
108.  Preliminary areas of piloting. The following areas are identified: innovative business 
and technology (farm/non-farm); renewable energy; irrigation technology; waste 
management. The project will identify other areas as well.   
109. 
110. 
Implementation.  The  pilots  will  be  implemented  by  CMRCs  after  approval  from 
MAVIM. The idea is to expand the pilots under value chain development if found 
successful. All pilots will be grants funded but commercial participations are also 
welcome. 
Convergence with Government schemes; MAVIM DCOs and CMRCs have excellent track 
record of mobilising Government schemes and programmes for both livelihoods as well as 
for  social  entitlements.  Under  Nav  Tejaswini,  convergence  with  Government  schemes  for 
producer  collectives,  SHGs  as  well  as  individual  members  will  be  sought.  Department  of 
Agriculture and farmer  welfare  implements a number  of schemes out of which 11 central 
sector schemes have reservation of 30% for women; these schemes include Sub-Mission on 
Agriculture  Mechanisation,  National  Project  on  Soil  Health  and  Fertility,  National  Food 
Security Mission, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna,  Parampragat Krishi Vikas Yojna, Sub-Mission 
on Seed and Planting Material, National Project on Organic Farming, Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchai Yojna-Per-Drop More Crop, Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture, Sub-
Mission on Agriculture Extension,  Rainfed Area Development and Climate Change. Jalyukta 
Shivar  Abhiyaan  is  the  flag  ship  programme  of  the  state  for  farm  pond  improvement. 
Department of livestock  Tribal department has a number of schemes such as Promotion of 
Kitchen Garden in Tribal Districts, Swayam Prakalp (poultry rearing in tribal areas), etc.,  
111.  Under  non  farm  sector,  Prime  Minister's  Employment  Guarantee  Scheme  (PMEGP),  Seed 
Money  Scheme,  Special  component  plan  for  SC/ST,  are  possible  schemes  where 
convergence  can  be  sought.  Planning  department  is  implementing  Manav  Vikas  mission 
under which schemes for employment generation and skill development are implemented 
budgets for which are agreed at district level.  
112.  MAVIM and CMRCs will facilitate convergence with these schemes.  The project will jointly 
develop action plans with the relevant departments for convergence. 
6. COMPONENT 2: ENABLING SUPPORT SERVICES 
Sub component 2.1. Facilitating Financial Linkages  
113. 
This  sub  component  will  be  implemented  by  PMU,  MAVIM.  An  experienced  Rural  Finance 
Manager will be hired from the market and will drive the initiatives (the terms of reference 
is given in Attachment 5). PMU will facilitate MOUs with financial institutions for loans and 
CMRCs will play the business facilitating role. 
72 
114. 
The  previous  Tejaswini  project  has  developed  strong  bank  linkages  especially  with  ICICI 
Bank (currently 80% of SHG loans are from ICICI Bank), and the cumulative recovery rate 
is reported to be 99.5%. The present MOU between ICICI bank and CMRCs incentivises good 
repayment performance with 2% commission to CMRCs which substantially covers the costs 
of  CMRCs.  The  CMRCs  and  SHGs  are  well  versed  with  the  system.  Two  issues  need 
resolution: increasing in loan size per SHG and dependency on one bank. MAVIM though had 
partnership with other banks such as IDBI bank, Dena Bank, RRBs etc., due to operational 
issues these were not successful. Recently MAVIM has had discussions with HDFC bank and 
is on the verge of signing MOU. Mission also had interactions with both the banks. Banks 
lend in multiples of savings and also would like to see more loans being utilised for income 
generation activities and livelihoods. 
115.  Bank Credit workshops: CMRCs will prepare a financial services plan every year (as part 
of  their  business  planning)  indicating  a)  plans  for  augmenting  savings  within  SHGs,  b) 
motivating members for individual savings in Postbank, regulated financial institutions, c) 
credit  needed  for  SHGs  based  on  member  wise  credit  plan,  d)  Credit  needed  by  Micro 
enterprises, e) crop insurance and other insurance products to be availed by the members 
and  their  households.  They  will  also  identify  policy  and  operational  issues  that  need 
resolution. These plans will be prepared well ahead of the annual credit plan exercise by the 
NABARD/State/district  level  Bankers  Committee.  Each  district  office  will  hold  a  workshop 
inviting the relevant financial institutions including insurance companies and the plans will 
be shared and agreed with. Resolutions for operational issues will be agreed. MAVIM there 
after will ensure that these plans are reflected in Potential linked credit plans of NABARD, 
block/district/state level bankers committee’s plans and are discussed in these committee’s 
meetings. 
Strengthening of SHG-Bank Linkage Program 
116. 
117. 
Savings  campaigns  and  awards  to  CMRCs;  Since  banks  provide  loans  in  multiples  of 
savings, CMRCs will carry out campaigns for augmenting savings each year. However, care 
will be exercised in setting the minimal compulsory savings that is affordable for the poorest 
member  in  the  group.  Awards  for  savings  mobilisation  will  be  given  to  well  performing 
CMRCs.   
Training on introduction of interest on savings; At present SHGs do not offer interest 
on savings; after 5 or 10 years the accumulated profits along with full or partial savings are 
distributed among the members. SHGs will be counselled by Sahyoginis and CRPs to offer 
interest on savings to motivate members to save more. Sahyoginis and CRPs will be provided 
practical  training  on  interest  rate  calculation.  The  training  materials  will  be  developed  by 
Rural Finance Manager and DGM institutional development at PMU, they will  hold one day 
workshops with designated district staff.   District staff will train the CMRC staff and CRPs. 
These trainings will be completed in first two years.  
118. 
Training on detailed credit planning to improve  credit flow; Rural Finance Manager 
and DGM institutional development will develop training material for developing credit plans 
of  individual  members  before  bank  linkage.  Practical  training  will  be  imparted  to  all 
Sahyoginis,  CMRC  managers  and  CMRC  accountants  in  preparing  detailed  member  wise 
credit plans to assure banks of loan absorption and repayment.  
119.  MOUs with additional banking partners on similar lines that of ICICI bank will be facilitated 
by MAVIM. HDFC bank has shown interest and other banks that can explored are Syndicate 
bank and RRBs. 
120. 
Facilitation of ME loan 
About 30% of SHG members want more than Rs 100,000 individually. Women are engaged 
in off farm and non-farm activities and already engaging labour (both members of SHGs and 
outsiders) and are keen to expand their business. During field visits of the mission, access 
to larger credit in the range of Rs.1.5 to Rs.12 lakhs are emerging needs expressed by the 
enterprising women for investment in machinery, sheds and also for working capital. Most 
of the loans demanded are for enterprises owned and managed by the women themselves; 
few loans are for enterprises managed by the family members especially husband. 
73 
121.  Women’s access to financial services especially credit has been through Self Help Groups. 
Women have been unable to receive large loans from existing SHG-Bank linkage since a) 
the  maximum  cap  for  bank  loan  under  SHG  lending  is  Rs.  1  lakh  per  member,  b)  with 
average bank loan size being Rs. 3.5 lakhs to SHG as a whole, larger loans to few members 
within  SHGs  creates  imbalance  with  poorer  members  forced  to  guarantee  larger  loans. 
Enterprising women now mobilise loans from internal savings of the groups, bank loans to 
groups and also other informal credit external to the group.  Key issues are a) difficulty in 
timely sourcing of these loans to make investments, b) high rates of interest vis a vis returns 
from the enterprises, c) inefficiencies in servicing multiple loans. Women who have tried to 
get individual loans on their own find that banks have been reluctant to lend to individuals 
and the documentation, collateral requirement and transaction time are high. 
122. 
The mission explored the possibility of such loans with  a number of banks including ICICI 
Bank and HDFC Bank. From bankers’ perspective, banks are confident of lending to SHGs 
but individual loans are considered risky a) since SHG loans are micro finance loans and not 
tied to any single purpose and the individual member and group as a whole are conscious 
of repayment of the loan; in  case  of  individual  loan for a specific enterprise, the bankers 
apprehend that the entrepreneur will not repay if the enterprise faces any issue, b) while 
SHG  loan  is  a  multi-purpose  group  loan,  when  women  graduate  to  being  micro 
entrepreneurs, these loans are classified as agriculture, MSME etc., and separate verticals 
deal with these loans in banks. They often do not recognize the credit history created within 
SHGs and also within another vertical of the bank, c) the poor track record of repayment of 
first  time  ME  borrowers  is  cited  as  another  reason  for  the  hesitation  of  banks  to  offer 
collateral  free  loan;  most  poor  women  graduating  to  micro  entrepreneurs  do  not  have 
collateral to offer, d) banks expect the borrowing enterprise to have operated around 18–
24 months before ME loan is availed, e) most enterprises do not keep adequate record on 
income and expenditure, stocks etc., making loan appraisal difficult. Banks need assurance 
of repayment and find the current schemes of credit guarantee20 inadequate to address the 
credit  risks.  The  other  issue  is  inadequate/  non  availability  of  loan  products  for  different 
types of non farm sector. Banks have capability to develop products; how ever they need 
adequate loan accounts and volumes which MAVIM can assess and provide. 
123. 
The project will undertake a number of steps to mitigate risks and develop partnership with 
banks:  
a)  Training  of  trainers  programme  will  be  conducted  to  develop  a  cadre  of 
Sahyoginis  to  provide  training  to  prospective  micro  entrepreneurs  on  business 
management and preparing cash-flow and income statement; 
b)  Training on bank loan proposals on farm and non farm sectors; CMRC staff 
including  Sahyoginis  will  be  trained  to  help  micro  entrepreneurs  to  develop  bank 
loan  proposals  (both  farm  sector  and  non-farm  sector.  These  trainings  will  be 
conducted with faculty support from participating banks and (ex)bankers). 
c)  Pilot  ME  loan  program  with  2-3  banks  to  reach  to  10,000  MEs  in  two  years  to 
develop a successful ME loan program; HDFC bank has shown interest. ICICI bank 
will have to work out internal modalities for graduation of SHG loanees to individual 
borrowers and has expressed need for risk sharing arrangements. MAVIM will have 
to  discuss  with  Small  Finance  Banks  like  Equitas  Small  Finance  Bank,  Aashirwad 
Small Finance Bank, Regional Rural Banks  etc., to explore partnerships. 
d)  Exposure  visit  to  institution/  programmes  with  ME  loans  along  with 
banking  partners;  MAVIM  senior  management  along  with  potential  banks/Small 
Finance bank partners will under take joint study tours to institutions like SKDRDP, 
Karnataka, to study the ME loan products being offered to SHG members.  
124.  Preparing the protocols for pilot. CMRCs and SHGs need to prepare internally for some 
SHG  members  to  transition  to  individual  lending.  The  credit  history  of  members  in  SHGs 
(both  internal  and  bank  loans)  for  past  three  years  will  need  to  be  updated  in  the  new 
software. Protocols on loan exposure for such members will be prepared; individual loanees 
will  continue  to  be  members  of  SHGs  but  will  avail  only  emergency  loans  from  internal 
20 Though collateral free loans are available upto Rs. 10 lakhs under MUDRA, banks prefer to follow separate 
norms for lending to first time individual borrowers with no assets to back the loans and lend outside MUDRA.  
74 
125. 
126. 
savings of SHGs. Bank loans to SHGs will not be availed by them. Sahyoginis will clarify and 
train the SHGs on dos and don’ts in dealing with individual loans.  
For pilots, women with following qualifications will be chosen; a) has been member of SHGs 
for  at  least  5  years,  b)  more  than  90%  regularity  in  attendance  and  savings,  c)  on  time 
repayment of loans is 100% in the past three loans, d) owns and manages the enterprise 
with or without family labour, e) new loans are for expanding an existing nano enterprise.  
To  bridge  information  asymmetry,  women  entrepreneurs  will  be  advised  to  open  bank 
accounts  if  they  do  not  have  one  and  route  all  enterprise  related  payments  and  receipts 
through  the  bank  account.  Sahyoginis  will  also  train  and  facilitate  accounts  keeping  at 
enterprise level. These will provide assurance to banks on business volumes 
127. 
Banks will modify their products/develop new products where need arises. Project software 
will have interface with partner banks through which the banks will have access to MIS data 
of the enterprises. Both CMRCs and banks will track the loan performance of the MEs. 
128.  Risk  mitigation  instruments  provide  risk  mitigation  instruments  in  the  pilot  phase  to 
reduce risks from bank’s point of view. Contours of risk sharing will be discussed with banks 
who insist on this. The risk fund can be a fixed deposit with banks for covering first loss of 
5%; it can be individual or  portfolio guarantee. The risk fund will also have contributions 
from CMRC as well as the borrower to ensure repayments. The banks will be informed that 
this facility is available only for pilot phase  to provide confidence. Once the pilot phase is 
over and the borrowers become repeat customers, the risk sharing funds will be released by 
the banks and the project will include them under contingencies category and utilise them 
for other project activities. The share of CMRCs and individuals will be returned to them 
129.  Training  to  branch  staff;  PMU  will  also  arrange  for  need  based  training  to  branch  and 
senior management of partner banks on ME management and financing at reputed bankers’ 
training institutions such as College of Agriculture Banking, BIRD Lucknow etc. 
130.  The  expectation  is  a  successful  pilot  program  will  lead  to  larger expansion  across  MAVIM 
SHGs to eventually reach about 100,000 MEs with individual loans.  
131. 
132. 
133. 
Fintech innovations. Some of the major FinTech products and services currently used in 
the market place for loans are Peer to Peer (P2P) lending platforms, crowd funding, artificial 
intelligence based credit assessment etc. P2P lending and AI based credit assessment are of 
relevance to Nav Tejaswini.  
The peer-to-peer (P2P) lending market in India is a nascent one — with a rather modest size 
of  about Rs.300  crores. The  interest  rates  range  between  12  to  36%  depending  on  risk 
profile of he borrower. P2P interest rates tend to be on the higher side. Eleven entities have 
been licensed by RBI to operate P2P platform.  RBI’s prudential norms that restrict maximum 
lending or borrowing by a single lender or borrower to Rs.10 lakhs across platforms and a 
single  lender  cannot  lend  more  than  Rs.  50,000  to  the  same  borrower  are  seen  as 
impediments. The current loan demand to sanction ratio is 4:1.  
Fintech  companies  are  actively  developing  alternate-data  based  lending  programs  for 
borrowers  who  have  no  prior  credit  score.  Cashe,  a  Mumbai  based  fintech  company, 
providing personal loans to salaried individuals who have newly entered the workforce, poses 
questions including the conduct of a psychometric test to determine the credit score of an 
individual. A Social Loan Quotient is created and AI is leveraged to verify the information 
furnished  by  applicants.  Similarly,  Shriram  City  Union  Finance  has  entered  into  an 
arrangement with Credit Mantri to develop ScoreBuilder for extending personal loans to the 
companies’ customers based on alternative data-based scores. Credit Vidya and Aye Finance 
are  some  of  the  other  fintech  players  active  in  the  sphere  of  building  credit  scores  for 
individuals without credit history. AI allows these companies to tap into information available 
on a number of mediums and create a holistic profile based on this. Furthermore, AI can be 
leveraged  to  gain  insights  on  customer  behavior  which  aids  in  accurate  determination  of 
creditworthiness.  
134. 
The  Rural  Finance  Manager,  PMU  will  study  the  evolution  of  the  platforms  and  based  on 
discussions PD will take decisions on partnerships.  
75 
Facilitation of loans to producer collectives 
135. 
All key staff of the Producer Companies will receive training on value chain financing and 
also  innovative  financial  instruments  such  as  receivable  financing,  ware  house  receipt 
financing etc., and the expectations of banks and financial institutions in financing producer 
companies.  These  trainings  will  be  organized  at  College  of  Agricultural  Banking,  Pune, 
Bankers  Institute  of  Rural  Development,  Lucknow  etc.,  who  offer  such  trainings.  Some 
sessions will be customised to project requirements.  
136. 
137. 
138. 
139. 
140. 
141. 
Producer collectives based on their business plans will be facilitated to access working capital 
by  Rural  Finance  Manger  at  PMU.  Innovative  value  chain  financing  such  as  receivable 
financing,  warehouse  receipt  financing,  will  also  be  facilitated  for  producer  collectives  in 
collaboration  with  financial  institutions  (such  as  Samunnati  Financial  Intermediation  and 
Services).  
Samunnati is a specialized Agri Value Chain enabler that provides innovative and customized 
financial  and  non-financial  solutions.  Samunnati  follows  the  AMLA  (Aggregation,  Market 
Linkage,  Advisory  Services)  approach.  FPOs  are  a  major  segment  of  their  business;  542 
farmers  collectives  have  been  supported  for  institutional  and  business  development  and 
financed by Samunnati. As of 31 August 2019, the loan outstanding is Rs. 2248 million and 
the over-dues of more than 90 days is Rs. 107 million. 
For  equipment,  plant  and  machinery  the  PMU  will  pilot  patient  capital  financing;  the 
collectives based on business plans and viability analysis will be offered long term loans of 
3 to 5 years at low interest rates of 4 to 6 percent. In very resource poor regions such as 
Marathwada and Vidarbha, partial grant cum patient capital will be structured. The idea is 
to  replicate  and  finance  more  value  chain  based  interventions  than  what  grants  will  help 
establish. PMU will manage the patient capital initially and later the apex financial institution 
will take over.  
Insurance related interventions 
Advanced financial literacy trainings on digital finance, insurance and pension will be offered 
to all women. Rural Finance Manager with support from short term consultants will modify 
the widely available training materials on insurance, pension and digital finance and train 
key district staff  and Sahyoginis as trainers on these aspects so that they will train women 
during  SHG  meetings.  CMRCs  will  facilitate  access  of  women  to  crop  insurance,  health 
insurance of Government (Ayushman Bharat) apart from pension. MIS will capture data on 
insurance and pension enrolment and renewal. Where possible CMRCs will enrol as insurance 
agents.  
 Financial innovations 
Livestock insurance (cattle, goat) is unpopular due to high premium. Currently, members 
insure only those animals bought out of bank loans. The premium of livestock is high due to 
high mortality and morbidity rate, a result of reliable vaccination and animal health services, 
and over dependence on government livestock department. Occasionally vaccination camps 
are organized in the village that do not cover all animals, and curative service is expensive 
and not always available. What is actually needed is to offer reliable livestock health services 
that would reduce mortality and morbidity and consequently, insurance premium. 
The project will pilot a livestock health service cum insurance program in collaboration with 
vet service providers and private insurance firm to develop a low-cost and reliable livestock 
health and insurance service. A feasibility study will be carried out before initiating the pilot.  
The  scope  of  the  feasibility  study  will  include;  detailed  market  study  with  assessment  of 
present constraints and opportunities, selection of insurance company, identification of pilot 
area, initial product design for health care service and insurance, risk modelling and pricing, 
product  design  tools  development  (i.e.  pricing,  claim  settlements,  etc),  public/private 
stakeholders  engagement  at 
level,  capacity  needs  assessment, 
implementation model with clear roles and  responsibilities, business plan for three years, 
legal/regulatory  product  approval  process  if  any,  design  of  M&E  framework  and  baseline. 
Options of hybrid model of mutual insurance of individual loss to be settled by community 
with co 
local  and  state 
76 
142. 
Based on the feasibility of the product, MAVIM will engage the services of an organization 
with  successful  experience  of  similar  project.  It  is  expected  that  it  will  take  two  to  three 
years to achieve break even. Budgets are provided for bridging operational costs till the pilot 
breaks  even.  The  experience  under  the  pilot  will  be  systemically  documented  for  wider 
knowledge dissemination and also policy advocacy. 
Feasibility study for setting up Apex Financial institution 
143.  MAVIM with financial budgetary support from Planning Department is setting up Tejashri, a 
financing facility for lending to ultra-poor in Tehsils and districts with low HDI. Rs.68 crores 
will flow to MAVIM over next three years. Under Nav Tejaswini, patient capital mechanism 
will be adopted for financing plant, machinery, equipment etc., These two are products not 
available in the market. MAVIM is keen that the financing facility should offer those products 
that main stream financial institutions are not offering. The financing facility will initially be 
housed within MAVIM. However, in the long run decision has to be taken whether this facility 
will continue to function within MAVIM or will be set up as a separate financial institution. To 
this  end,  Senior  management  of  MAVIM  will  visit  similar  initiatives  such  as  Sthree  nidhi, 
Telengana  and  Andhra  Pradesh,  specialised  lending  institution  set  up  by  SERP  with 
federations  and  Government  contributing  to  equity,  SKDRDP,  BC  of  banks,  with  ME  loan 
portfolio for SHG members and NABFINS, set up by NABARD with equity from Governments, 
banks etc.  
144. 
A feasibility study will be conducted by a reputed institution such as (Micro Save, EDA rural 
systems, M2I etc.,) covering aspects such as a) assessing unmet credit and other financial 
services  needs  of  women  and  market  opportunities  for  same,  b)  opportunities  and 
constraints being faced by women in accessing existing products of financial institutions, c) 
possible  products  and  services  that  can  be  offered  by  the  financing  facility,  d)  options 
including legal forms, portfolio in own books versus BC of a bank, e) ownership patterns, 
governance  structures,  f)  management  positions,  g)  roles  of  district  offices,  CMRCs/co-
operatives, VOs and SHGs in financial intermediation, ensuring discipline and repayment, h) 
business plan for three years.  
145.  On  the  basis  of  the  study  three  outputs  are  expected;  decision  on  setting  up  of  financial 
institution,  financial  products  that  address  women’s  needs  and  policy  aspects  that  need 
wider attention of policy makers.  
Policy workshops 
146. 
Access to financial services for women still have a number of impediments. Though banks 
prefer self-help group methodology for lending, the services through self help groups has 
limitations. The 2017 Global Findex survey conducted by the World Bank found that in India, 
while the gender gap in access to basic bank accounts has decreased to 6% from 20%, the 
percentage of women who are active  users (35%) is less than that of men at 47%. Poor 
financial product design for women contributes to this. 
147. 
The  micro-credit  movement  including  self  help  groups  brought  women  into  the  formal 
financial fold for the first time, with loans and passbooks issued in their names. But there is 
limited evidence on the scale-up and success of women-led enterprises financed by micro-
credit. 
148.  Women customers take more time to develop trust in a channel/particular agent, requiring 
more interaction with him or her. The case in point is the BC agent model widely prevalent 
in  the  country  for  financial  inclusion.  The  presence  of  women  agents  can  be  helpful, 
especially  because  women  customers  consider  them  more  trustworthy  and  better  at 
maintaining confidentiality. Financial service providers haven’t invested much resources in 
supporting  women  agents  and  their  enterprises.  An  agent  network  Accelerator  study 
conducted by MicroSave found just 8% women business correspondents in India. The wide 
network  of  self  help  groups  and    federations  can  provide  BC  agents  for  wider  financial 
services for women.  
149. 
Studies have shown that women-owned enterprises have stronger repayment records with 
non-performing  loans  being  30-50%  lower  than  male  entrepreneurs.  They  also  have  a 
likelihood of availing more products than men. This is a significant business opportunity that 
77 
Financial institutions. The Financial institutions can use big data analytics to make sense of 
gender-disaggregated data points.  
150.  Women-led micro enterprises expect much more than the delivery of financial products—
especially  in  terms  of  business  advisory  support  in  managerial  capacity-building, 
bookkeeping, technological upgradation, skill development, and legal procedures to scale-
up their businesses. Models for providing these services on a sustainable basis and twinning 
these services with financial services will be aspects that need study and advocacy.  
151. 
There  is  an  urgent  need  to  consider  women  as  a  distinct  segment  with  specific  financial 
services  requirements,  without  disguising  male-focused  products  as  gender  neutral.  To 
enable this change, the project will facilitate to under stand in depth the various social and 
behavioral impediments impacting women, and use this knowledge to advocate for policy 
changes and also customized product designs. 
152.  MAVIM  will  hold  half  yearly/yearly  consultations  at  regional  level  to  consult  CMRC 
representatives on identifying aspects that require policy adjustments. There are a number 
of reputed institutions in Maharashtra and also else where who conduct policy research and 
also hold policy workshops such as College Agricultural Banking, promoted by RBI, Indira 
Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai, promoted by RBI, National Institute of 
Bank Management, promoted by banks, DWARA research, Micro Save, etc., 
153.  MAVIM will commission  studies with the clear aim of holding policy workshops with  key 
policy making institutions as participants such as RBI, Ministry of Finance, top management 
of banks etc., These studies and work shops can be co funded by some of these institutions 
who also have the core agenda and annual budgets for policy work. 
154. 
Expected results; The cumulative incremental loans from banks is expected to be a) Rs. 
976 crores for SHGs, b) Rs. 735 crores for ME and c) Rs. 43 crores for FPOs. At least 50% 
of  women  who  own  land  in  their  names  will  avail  crop  insurance.  Similarly  50%  of  the 
animals  owned  by  women  will  be  insured,  if  the  pilot  on  health  service  cum  insurance  is 
successful..  
Sub component 2.2 Mentoring program for Ultra-poor Households 
155.  Ultra poor families who are already members of self help groups will be identified by CMRCs 
and VOs based on select criteria such as a) depend on insecure livelihoods, including casual 
farming labor with irregular or seasonal income of less than 50% of the poverty line income 
per year, b) no borrowing or negligible borrowing from self help groups, c) household without 
proper shelter.  
156. 
Mentoring ultra-poor households; Building on lessons from IFAD's Household Mentoring 
Approach,  Sahyoginis  will  be  trained  by  individual  consultants  to  provide  counselling, 
coaching, and encouragement  to  the  ultra poor households. During field visit interactions 
with  ultra  poor  households  show  that  these  households  are  not  homogenous  groups  and 
there  are  a  number  of  factors  affecting  each  household  including  a)  women  headed 
households  with  limited  support  systems,  b)  lack  of  support  from  family  who  discourage 
taking loans, c) no skills in the household except for labour, d) alcoholism, e) poor health, 
f)  lack  of  hope.  Through  frequent  visits  better  understanding  and  solutions  for  the 
households to improve their incomes will be arrived at which can include:  
o  Village  level  training  for  improving  skills  and  mentoring  for  small  IGAs  and 
participate in a value chain (both farm and non farm) if lives in the same cluster, 
other wise on a stand alone basis, (please section below on skill training for details) 
o  Encourage women to take small loans from self help groups for income generation 
activities  and  counseling  to  Self  help  group  leaders  and  other  members  to  be 
supportive. Husbands and other family members will also be counselled. Tejashri, 
financing facility for lending to ultra poor, will be utilised for loans to ultra poor at 
reasonable rate of interest. SHGs will also be sensitised to lower interest rate for the 
first two loans of ultra poor from internal savings in SHGs. 
78 
 
Identify  Government  schemes  for  convergence  both  for  livelihoods  as  well  as  for 
social entitlements. CMRCs have on  going  working arrangements for convergence 
with Government schemes; district offices will identify those which are suitable for 
ultra poor households and prioritise them for such convergence. 
  Vocational training for selected SHG or family members for wage employment.  
 
If the male members are found to be alcoholic, special de addiction camps will be 
organized for them in partnership with other specialized agencies. (SKDRDP model 
can be studied). 
157. 
158. 
Project  MIS  will  monitor  the  performance  of  the  ultra  poor  households  separately.  Since 
pathway out of poverty for ultra poor households are full of challenges, CMRCs will closely 
monitor each household’s  performance to ensure that they are progressing as per plans. 
Skill Development (ultra-poor/poor families): Three pronged approach will be adopted 
by the project for provision of skill trainings aimed at increasing wage/self employment and 
incomes. The skill trainings will be targeted at women/ other household members:  
o 
o 
o 
Vocational training at formal institutions through existing flagship government skills 
training  programs  with  the  objective  of  enhancing  access  to  services  and 
employment  outcomes  for  youth  from  poor/ultra  poor  households.  CMRCs  will 
support Government skill training programmes in provision of pre training services 
including identification and mobilization of target youth, sharing information packs 
on  types  of  training  and  training  schedules,  providing  pre-training  counselling 
services  to  poor  youth  to  assist  them  in  interpreting  available  information  and 
making optimal training choices.  
Village based skill development is aimed at enhancing productivity and incomes of 
poor  women  through  upgrading  skills  in  selected  employment/self-  employment 
occupations.  Master trainers/Certified trainers will be selected to offer village level 
trainings thus increasing access to such training for women and other marginalized 
groups.  
Apprenticeship with existing industries/ establishments for youth in ultra poor/poor 
household  where  by  the  youth  will  be  absorbed  in  the  establishment  after  the 
apprenticeship period/ or set up own establishment. Support will be provided out of 
pocket expenses for travel, stay etc., during the apprenticeship period. 
159. 
Subcomponent 2.3: Enhancing nutritional status and gender relations at HH and community 
levels. This subcomponent has two distinct activities: nutrition and health improvement; and 
women’s empowerment.  
160.  Nutritional and health improvement. The project will have a number of distinctive activities 
for  promoting  behavioural  change,  at  the  household  level,  with  regard  to  dietary 
diversification and water and hygiene practises. The activities will be targeted at all women 
beneficiaries  and  their  households.  The  SHG/CMRC  meetings  will  be  the  point  of 
dissemination of trainings and monitoring. 
161. 
Activities  will  include:  (i)  inputs  and  training  for  homestead  vegetable  gardens,  dietary 
diversification and good diet practises at the household level (tiranga plate) and introduction 
of dietary supplements. The nutrition initiatives of 7-Din 7-Saat Ghar and Tiranga Thali from 
IFAD's  supported  project  of  Tejaswini  Rural  Development  Programme  (TRDP)  in  Madhya 
Pradesh  has  significantly  improved  food  intake  and  dietary  diversity  among  beneficiary 
households through improved agriculture and consumption practices. Nav Tejeswani might 
have  potential  and  readiness  to  emulate  and  integrate  these  two  models  in  their  project 
activities. The staff from TRDP can visit the project areas, conduct training, provide peer to 
peer learning, and  answers queries of  project staff to  facilitate the adoption of these  two 
initiatives. Alternatively, MAVIM staff and project beneficiaries’ can visit TRDP for exposure 
and learning about 7-Din 7-Saat Ghar and Tiranga Thali. 
162. 
(ii)  WASH  training  through  GOM's  existing  programmes,  delivered  through  participating 
SHGs; (iii) tracking of SHG members body mass index (BMI) and haemoglobin levels through 
79 
Primary  Health  Care  centres  and  targeted  follow-up  and  mentoring  of  those  women 
recording  low  rates  on  either  indicator;  (iv)  support  for  enrolment  in  health  insurance 
schemes of the Govt (Ayushman Bharat). These activities will be implemented in partnership 
with  on-going  Government  of  Maharashtra  schemes,  especially  those  of  Department  of 
Women and Child and the MH Rural Health Mission programmes (NRHM). MAVIM’s District 
Coordinating offices will be responsible for facilitating all linkages with Government schemes. 
NHRM has quality training and knowledge material which must be leveraged by MAVIM for 
implementation of these services to the beneficiary women and their households.  
163. 
Apart from  these  HH level targeted  interventions, the project will also promote nutrition-
sensitive value-chains, e.g. vegetables and dairy.  
164.  Women's  empowerment.  MAVIM  through  SHG/CMRC  structure  has  successfully  promoted 
gender equality at the family level. The project will: i) continue to promote gender equality 
through  training  -  including  specific  gender  awareness  workshops  for  men  focusing  on 
equitable work distribution, family nutrition, women’s economic contribution to households; 
ii) encourage co-ownership by registration of agricultural land in joint names; iii) address 
women's drudgery in order to ensure time for participation in enterprise related activities. 
Further,  MAVIM  will  actively  seek  convergence  with  on-going  Government  schemes  on 
interventions that promote gender equality and women's empowerment as well as address 
gender related constrains that hinder women-led entrepreneurship. The successful initiatives 
under  Tejaswini  such  as  a)  Mitra  mandals  of  men  supporting  women’s  strategic  gender 
initiatives, b) registration of houses and land in joint names of husband and wife, c) paralegal 
counselling  etc.,  will  be  scaled  up.  Recognizing  that  women  are  not  homogeneous,  the 
project  will  ensure  that  gender  disaggregated  data  tracks  specific  variables  such  as  age, 
women-headed households as well as different vulnerabilities of the target groups. 
165. 
Subcomponent  2.4:  Policy  engagement.  This  subcomponent  will  focus  on  specific  policy 
issues  identified  during  project  implementation.  Some  issues  that  are  identified  during 
design  stage  include:  (i)  lack  of  access  to  individual  ME  loan,  to  women  graduating  from 
SHGs, from commercial banks and other financial institutions; (ii) develop a more systematic 
procedure of receiving resources under convergences programs; (iii) define MAVIM's role in 
skill development and Vocational training in the state; (iii) explore long-term collaboration 
with MSRLM/RDD; (iv) explore the possibilities to pilot supply of millet and other nutritional 
products  made  by  SHGs  to  Aanganwadi;  and  (vi)  feasibility  study  on  setting  up  an  apex 
financial institution based on need assessment of enterprises. The PMU will also commission 
policy specific studies where needed  along with reputed institutions.  The project  will  also 
prepare  in-house  capacity  within  MAVIM  to  prepare  policy  documents  and  effective 
advocacy. 
166. 
Policy  engagement  process.  The  common  process  that  the  project  will  follow  for  policy 
advocacy  is  as  follows:  i)  study  and  document  the  issue  in  the  form  of  a  professionally 
written  policy  paper  with  clear  analysis  and  recommendations;  ii)  organize  dissemination 
events  such  as  seminar  with  concerned  stakeholders  in  attendance  in  collaboration  with 
expert institutions, wherever applicable; iii) present the recommendations and policy paper 
to concerned policy makers; and iv) continue lobbying for the desired changes.     
7. COMPONENT 3: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT 
167.  Subcomponent 3.1 Institutional Strengthening of MAVIM: The activities and items 
presented and discussed follow the chronology provided in the COSTAB: C-3. The 
full COSTAB is available with the project. 
168.  Pre-project  activities  -  Retroactive  Financing:  The  following  activities  have 
been identified as critical for smooth launching and implementation of the project: 
80 
169.  A) Basic small business management Training.  This basic business management 
training is meant to provide basic understanding of concept of private business and 
management  of  single  business.  The  salient  features  and  implementation  of  this 
course are as follows:  
  Participants:  i)  As  pre-project  activity  the  trainees  will  be  all  MAVIM  HO 
professional  staff  members, 
  Regional  Coordinators,  and  District 
Coordinators; and ii) after the project is launched, all Nav Tejaswini District 
Supervisor/Monitoring officers will also receive this training. 
  Duration: 5 day  
  Objective: The objective is to provide the trainees with basic concept of a 
private  business,  management  of  a  business,  and  business  environment. 
The trainees after completion of the course should be able to analyse a small 
business, its business and financial performance, and make determination 
whether it should be able to expand and maintain profitability.      
  Main topics to be covered:  a) Business environment in Maharashtra and in 
rural areas; b) Four core areas of a business – i) product and marketing, ii) 
technology  and  production,  iii)  human  resources,  and  iv)  Finance;  c) 
Emphasis  should  be  on  product  and  market  analysis,  and  determining 
product-market fit, and analysis of profitability of the business; d) analyse 
income  statement  and  cash  flow;  e)  key  success  factor  in  each  sector  of 
business;  f)  various  legal  forms  of  business  and  role  of  regulators;  g) 
informal businesses run by SHG members; and h) Cooperatives as business 
entities.  
  Method  of  training:  a)  Lecture  to  explain  the  concepts;  b)  many  case 
analysis to understand  each business  function; d) field visit to analyse at 
least  one  business  by  each  participants;  e)  presentations,  group 
discussions, and interactive discussion; f) discussion/experience sharing by 
successful entrepreneurs etc. 
  Provider: The training course can organized by a) business school in reputed 
private/public  university,  b)  Consulting 
firm/training  centers  with 
specialization in business, c) NGO/govt training centers with specialization 
business management. MAVIM may customize the contents of the training 
course in consultation with the training provider.              
170.  B) Identify potential sectors/value chain development sectors. This is a preparatory 
for  speedy  launching  of  value  chain  subprojects  when  Nav  Tejaswini  is  finally 
approved.  The  design  mission  has  identified  commodities  by  districts  which 
potentially  be  further  expanded  by  districts.  MAVIM  with  the  help  of  DCOs  and 
CMRCs  should  conduct  rapid  survey  of  farm/non-farm  products  by  districts  and 
CMRC that can be organized under value chain. In doing so, it should also locate 
clusters by product and geography as well as potential locations for new clusters.  
171.  This  database  should  be  updated  annually  or  whenever  information  in  available. 
These information should be captured in the project management software.   
172.  C)  Identify  and  map  out  skill  development  training  services  providers:  MAVIM 
should develop a database of skill development training providers in the state for 
staff  training  as  well  as  vocational  training  for  SHG-members  and  their  family 
members.  The  database  should  contain  govt  (e.g.  DICs),  partners  of  GoM/GoI 
Skilling  programmes,  private  and  non-government  training  providers,  business 
chambers/associations, and if possible prominent individual trainers. 
173.  D)  Software  procurements  (microfinance  management  software,  project 
management software, HR software, and upgrading TALLY software): The following 
Table provides basic features of the proposed software: 
Software 
Key features and capabilities 
81 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Microfinance 
management 
software 
i) 
Handle profile of one million plus clients address, identification by 
national ID #, by SHG etc. 
All microfinance transactions real time;  
ii) 
iii)  Capability to handle mobile transactions by members 
iv)  Can handle individual as well as SHG loans 
v)  Consolidate info by member, by SHG, by CMRC, and by MAVIM; 
vi)  Can handle multiple banks 
vii)  Provision for future upgrading  
viii)  Act as MIS for microfinance program 
ix)  Produce different reports.     
Value chain 
Project 
Management 
software  
i)  Monitor all programmatic and financial data of all VCD subprojects 
ii)  Maintain beneficiary information  
iii)  Produce all reports  
iv)  Consolidate all reports by MAVIM and DCOs online. Will eliminate 
HR and office 
management  
Upgrade TALLY 
any need for sending reports by CMRCs. 
Available off the shelf; needs customization for MAVIM 
Upgrade TALLY to handle all project and MAVIM accounts. Upgrade to 
handle real time transactions.   
174.  E) Conduct baseline survey (sample survey) SHG families: The baseline survey is 
one of the critical pre-project activities. The baseline survey should: a) statistically 
valid  sample  with  control  groups;  b)  gather  basic  family  information;  c)  gather 
family income to determine poverty levels of sample groups in three categories ref 
to  PDR;  d)  gather  information  to  measure  all  logframe  indicators;  e)  should  be 
repeated  in  mid-term  and  end  project  to  ensure  longitudinal  analysis;  and  f) 
provide full analysis of the sample and by extension whole SHG members. A pro-
WEAI  survey  will  be  part  of  the  baseline  survey  in  order  for  the  project  to  track 
women’s empowerment and gender transformation.  
175.  Terms of reference. MAVIM has to get clearance of TOR for baseline survey from 
IFAD.  
176.  Complete recruitment process of new staff members. I) Follow established MAVIM 
recruitment process; ii) Follow the qualifications and TOR for each position; and iii) 
get IFAD concurrence for Manager and Deputy Manager positions. 
177.  Human Resources Development. Two basic activities are planned:  
178.  A)  Senior  official  development  Training  (strategic  planning,  senior  leadership 
training,  etc).  This  category  of  training  –  i)  strategic  planning  and  ii)  senior 
leadership training – are meant for present senior officials, Managers and above, 
or  who  are  expected  to  move  upward  to  take  up  senior  management  positions. 
Such short training courses are normally offered by to Universities, Think Tanks, 
Large  NGOs,  research  and  development  organizations,  Management  firms  etc. 
MAVIM should develop a calendar for sending senior officers for such training and 
identify potential providers/organizers for the training. 
179.  B) Exchange visits. The exchange/exposure visits are also meant for senior officials 
successful 
to 
chain 
FPOs/FPCs/Cooperatives, successful programs related to other components of the 
projects. 
development 
successful 
projects, 
value 
visit 
180.  Institutional  Development  of  MAVIM.  A  series  of  training  and  support  for 
setting up a center of excellence at MAVIM have been planned as follows: 
181.  A) Training on Value chain project design and management (5 day):                   
  Participants:  i)  all  MAVIM  HO  professional  staff  members,    Regional 
Coordinators, and District Coordinators; and ii) after the project is launched, 
all Nav Tejaswini District Supervisor/Monitoring officers will also receive this 
training. 
  Duration: 5 day  
  Objective:  The  objective  is  to  teach  the  trainees  with  basic  concept  of  a 
value chain development of businesses, designing a value chain project and 
implementation  of  a  value  chain  project.  The  trainees  after  completion  of 
82 
the  course  should  be  able  to  analyse  a  subsector,  its  opportunities  and 
constraints, and interventions needed.      
  Main topics to be covered:  a) concept of value chain; b) process of value 
chain  analysis;  c)  identification  of  opportunities  and  challenges;  d) 
Emphasis  should  be  on  product  and  market  analysis,  and  determining 
product-market  fit,  and  analysis  of  profitability  of  the  business;  d) 
determine  interventions  for  each  segment  of  value  chain;  e)  budget  and 
costing; f) Logframe development; and g) monitoring and evaluation.   
  Method  of  training:  a)  Lecture  to  explain  the  concepts;  b)  many  case 
analysis to understand value chain development; d) field visit to analyse at 
least one VCD project; e) presentations, group discussions, and interactive 
discussion;  f)  discussion/experience  sharing  by  successful  VCD  managers 
etc. 
  Provider: The training course can organized by a) business school in reputed 
private/public  university,  b)  Consulting 
firm/training  centers  with 
specialization in business, c) NGO/govt training centers with specialization 
business management, and VCD. MAVIM may customize the contents of the 
training course in consultation with the training provider.              
182.  B) Contract farming, subcontracting, contract negotiation.  This course for MAVIM 
HO  officials  who  will  negotiating  with  large  firms/buyers  on  contract  framing, 
subcontracting  arrangement  for  CMRCs,  SHG  members  or  VC  participants.  The 
course  should  be  hands  on  training  by  studying  various  contract  farming  and 
subcontracting arrangements in the state/country. 
183.  C)    Project  Management.  This  is  a  generic  project  management  training  courses 
meant  for  senior  as  well  as  district  and  Nav  Tejaswini  officials  to  enhance  their 
project  management  skills.  The  focus  should  be  rural  development  type  project 
management  courses.  This  type  of  courses  are  normally  offered  by  Universities, 
large NGOs, Think tanks, specialised research and training institutes etc. 
184.  D) M&E and KM management. This is a specialized training for persons involved in 
M&E and KM. Such courses are commonly available. Special focus should on M&E 
of value chain development projects. 
185.  E)  Skill  development  training  program  management.  This  course  is  also  a 
specialized training course on management of vocational training /apprenticeship 
program. This training course may not be available off the shelf. MAVIM may recruit 
individual consultant to develop the module for the training such training course is 
not offered by any institution. 
186.  F) Senior Management training. The training course is open for senior managers. 
The topics may be selected as per need of MAVIM as well as Nav Tejaswini. The 
training provider(s) may be selected per nature of the trainings. 
187.  G)  Exchange  visits  (to  projects  and  businesses)  [5  day].  Exchange  visits  are 
practical way of learning. MAVIM and Nav Tejaswini officials may choose successful 
VCD projects, businesses, cooperatives, FPOs, FPCs etc to enhance their knowledge 
and skills on relevant topics. 
188.  Support for KM and Training Center. The resource allocated for the proposed 
Center of Excellence at MAVIM can be invested in: a) setting up the center (physical 
facilities);  and  b)  development  of  trainers,  documents,  policy  papers,  training 
modules, publications, KM products; and c) subsidy for operational expenses. It is 
expected the center will be financial viable by selling services. 
189.  Conduct Institutional Assessment of MAVIM. The lump-sum amount is allocated for 
conducting institutional assessment of MAVIM. The assessment report may be used 
for  setting  direction,  activities  and  organizational  structure  of  MAVIM.  The 
assessment  conducted  by  an  institution  or  individual  expert(s).  The  TOR  for  the 
83 
assessment needs to be shared with and cleared by IFAD. The report will also be 
shared with IFAD. 
190.  Subcomponent 3.2 Project Management (M&E and KM products). The project will 
conduct  three  studies  –  baseline,  midterm,  end  of  project  –  to  evaluate 
performance  of  the  project.  Besides,  annual  outcome  survey,  selected  impact 
studies, selected VC impact studies, case studies will be prepared and distributed 
through  websites  and  other  social  media.  These  will  be  conducted  by  firms, 
individual consultants, in-house experts as per requirement.  
8. PROJECT OUTREACH AND BENEFITS 
191.  Project  benefits  and  beneficiaries.  The  project  with  multiple  components  and 
activities will have many different direct beneficiaries. An estimate of beneficiaries 
by category presented in Table 8. It is understood that one person may belong to 
multiple  categories  making  the  total  3.05  million  compared  to  actual  one  million 
person of direct beneficiaries.  
Table 8: Project beneficiary category 
9. NAV TEJASWINI PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
192.  Governance and oversight. There will be two oversight entities: (i) Empowerment 
Committee,  Chaired  by  the  Hon.  Chief  Secretary  Maharashtra;  and  (ii)  the 
Executive Committee, Chaired by the Secretary of Women and Child Department. 
193.  Management. The loan and grants from IFAD will be transferred to MAVIM which 
will implement the project as per project design report and project implementation 
manual (PIM). The project will be implemented in association with CMRCs and SHGs 
and  in  partnership  with  other  government  and  non-government  institutions,  and 
private  sector  businesses  as  per  needs  of  specific  business  sector.  MAVIM  has 
management autonomy and receives resources annually from GoM for staff salary 
and other management costs. 
194.  Project Director: The Managing Director of MAVIM will be ex-officio Project Director 
with  full  responsibility  of  proper  management  of  the  project  as  per  design  and 
achieving project goals/objectives. 
84 
Type of servicesNumber of beneficiaries 1Value chain participants (farm/non-farm)565,400             2Standalone businesses200,000             3Skill/Dev/Vocational training26,800               4Innovation projects 4,800                 5Nutrition/Gender services800,000             6Ultra-poor assistance80,000               7Convergences408,000             8Microfinance (Regular -SHG)800,000             9Microfinance - ME loans 100,000             10Livestock health/insurance pilot project 40,000               11New wage employment34,000               PROJECT TOTAL3,059,000           
195.  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU).  The  project  will  be  managed  by  a  Project 
Management  Unit  (PMU)  headed  by  Project  Coordinator  (General  Manager- 
Programme of MAVIM) to manage planning and implementation of the project. An 
appropriate number of full time officials of MAVIM at the HO will be responsible for 
various  activities  and  all  District  Offices  will  responsible  for  Nav  Tejaswini  at  the 
respective district. MAVIM will need to recruit additional experts including a) Market 
and  Business  Development  Specialist,  b)  Value  Chain  and  Project  Supervision 
Specialist  (3),  c)  Financial  Services  Program  Specialist,  d)  M  &E  Specialist,  e) 
Procurement  Specialist,  f)  KM  and  Communication  Specialist,  g)  short-term 
consultants  to  do  specific  jobs.  MAVIM’s  support  divisions  such  as  Audit, 
Administration, Human Resources, Accounts and Finance, Research, Training, MIS, 
and IT will provide relevant services to the project. The PMU will be supported by 
Regional Coordinating and District Coordinating Offices. 
196.  Qualification/experience and responsibilities of Specialists in the PMU. The following 
Table 9 provides overall qualification/experience and responsibilities of Specialists 
in the PMU. See Attachment 5 of this Annex for detailed TOR: 
Table 9: Qualifications and responsibilities of PMU Specialists 
Designation 
Qualification and 
experience 
Responsibilities 
1 
Manager 
(Business 
development) 
(1) 
Manager  (value 
chain and project 
supervision) (3) 
Post graduate degree in 
business administration, 
economics, finance, 
marketing, accounting, 
agricultural economics, or 
agri-business   
At least 15 years of work 
experience and 7 years in 
private sector business 
development and value 
chain management type 
jobs. 
Post graduate degree in 
business administration, 
economics, finance, 
marketing, accounting, 
agricultural economics, and 
agri-business   
At  least  15  years  of  work 
experience  and  7  years  in 
business 
private 
sector 
value 
development 
chain  management 
type 
jobs. 
and 
Manager 
finance)  
(rural 
(see  attachment 
5 for detail TOR) 
Post graduate degree in 
business administration, 
economics, finance, 
marketing, accounting, 
agricultural economics, 
development studies, or 
agri-business   
Negotiate  with 
to 
large 
participate  in  value  chain  development 
subproject; 
firm/buyers 
contract 
Develop 
and 
subcontracting  system  for  value  chain 
participants; 
farming 
Coordinate  with  technology  providers  and 
establish linkage with CMRCs 
Assist value chain and project supervision 
specialists 
in  designing  value  chain 
projects. 
Assist  Project  Coordinator  to  develop 
strategy for the whole project 
Assist in project report preparation   
Lead 
feasibility  studies,  value  chain 
analysis  and  design  of  value  chain 
subprojects in collaboration with DCOs and 
CMRCs. 
Supervise  implementation  and  monitor 
project  progress  in  collaboration  RCOs, 
DCOs and Nav Tejaswini supervisors at the 
DCOs. 
Undertake corrective actions, if needed in 
the subprojects. 
Evaluate performance of subprojects. 
Assist  Project  Coordinator  to  develop 
strategy for the whole project  
Assist in project report preparation 
Work with banks and financial institutions 
to build partnerships in SHG-Bank linkage 
program; 
Supervise SHG-Bank linkage program 
Supervise ME pilot program 
Supervise expanded ME program  
At least 15 years of work 
experience in financial 
institutions and 7 years in 
Lead  design  and 
livestock  health  and 
program 
implementation  of 
insurance  pilot 
85 
Manager 
(Training, Policy)  
Deputy Manager 
(M&E, KM and 
communications) 
(see attachment 
– for detail TOR) 
Deputy  manager 
(Procurement) 
management of SHG type 
finance, MFI-managed 
microfinance, small business 
finance etc. 
Post graduate degree in 
business administration, 
economics, finance, 
marketing, accounting, 
agricultural economics, 
development studies, or 
agri-business   
15 years of work experience 
in training related jobs as 
trainer, module developer, 
training manager, 
preferably in training related 
to business management. 
Preference will be for 
persons experienced policy 
advocacy   
7 year experience in 
training related to business, 
microfinance, value chain 
development etc.   
Post graduate degree in 
business administration, 
economics, finance, 
marketing, accounting, 
agricultural economics,  
agri-business or 
development studies   
12 years of work experience 
in M&E in business 
management type projects 
and  KM management  
5 year experience M&E 
related to business, 
microfinance, value chain 
development 
Post graduate degree in 
business administration, 
economics, finance, 
marketing, accounting, 
agricultural economics, agri-
business or relevant 
subjects.  
12 years of work experience 
in  business  management 
type projects. 
Demonstrated 
regarding 
procurement 
procedures  
knowledge 
GoM/GoI 
and 
rules 
least  5  year  direct 
procurement 
At 
experience 
management. 
Training in procurement.   
Manage  portfolio  risk  instruments  for  ME 
loan program 
Lead  development  of  training  modules  of 
the project for all levels 
Coordinate  all  training  activities  of  Nav 
Tejaswini  (Training  of  MAVIM  and  CMRC 
staff members) 
Manage  skill  development  subcomponent 
Component 2. 
Ensure quality of training; measure impact 
of training in the project 
Develop database of training providers; 
Coordinate  with  M&E  Specialist  regarding 
training; 
Occasionally conduct training sessions 
Lead all policy development and advocacy 
activities of Nav Tejaswini   
Design and manage MIS of the project 
Manage  all  surveys  and  studies  of  the 
project 
Ensure the MIS system and studies capture 
all logframe indicators. 
Assist 
Coordinator to prepare annual work plan 
Finance/Accts 
and 
Project 
Lead  production  of  all  KM  products  and 
ensure proper dissemination 
Prepare  quarterly/annual  reports  of  the 
project  
Coordinate  with  Manager  (Rural  Finance) 
and Managers (Value chain) for production 
of  necessary  data  for  various  project 
components    
Prepare  annual  procurement  plan  for  the 
project 
Ensure  all  IFAD  rules  are  followed  by  the 
project at MAVIM HO, DCOs and CMRCs. 
Prepare all procurement documents prior 
to procurement and complete 
procurement process as per MAVIM 
internal administrative procedures. 
Conduct  procurement  related  training  for 
DCOs and CMRCs 
Coordinate  with  Accts/Finance  regarding 
procurement.   
Accts/Finance 
Post graduate degree in 
finance or  accounting 
Maintain  all  books  of  accounts  for  the 
project 
12 years of work experience 
in relevant areas  
At least 5 year experience in 
accounts/finance  
Prepare  in  collaboration  with  M&E  and 
Project Coordinator annual work plan, and 
procurement 
Prepare all financial reports of the project 
Prepare all W/As 
86 
training 
Professional 
accounting is preferred 
in 
Conduct training on accounting for CMRCs, 
if needed 
District  project 
(Nav  Tejaswini) 
Supervisor/ 
Monitor  
Post graduate degree in 
business administration, 
economics, finance, 
marketing, accounting, 
agricultural economics, or 
agri-business  
Minimum 4 year work 
experience in private sector, 
NGO-MFI, or rural 
development type projects. 
One to two year experience 
in value chain 
implementation project  
for  value  chain 
Identify  opportunities 
development 
the 
district, support for standalone businesses 
as well as skill development in the district. 
(farm/non-farm) 
in 
Assist  MAVIM  HO  and  CMRCs  to  design 
value chain projects 
the  district. 
Monitor  VC  projects 
Undertake corrective actions with approval 
from  Manager  (VCD)  and  in  coordination 
with RC and DCO.  
in 
Prepare progress reports and report to RC 
and DCO.  
Coordinate with all private sector partners 
of VCs in the district 
197.  Regional  Coordinating  office  of  MAVIM.  The  Regional  Coordinating  Officer  will  be 
responsible for overall monitoring of activities of the project in the Region. He/she 
are fulltime persons for the project. 
198.  District Coordinating Office: DCOs will be responsible for overall implementation of 
the  project  in  collaboration  of  CMRCs.  Since  the  project  will  implement  several 
value chain development subprojects in each district, it deploy a full-time Project 
Supervisor and Monitoring Officer in each district who will report to DCO/MAVIM. 
199.  CMRCs:  CMRCs  will  be  grassroots  implementers  of  the  project.  The  project  will 
deploy one Project Supervisor in each CMRC when a CMRC starts implementation 
to supervise and monitor progress (see Table 9 for responsibilities of the project). 
200.  MAVIM’s role in project Management: MAVIM as the lead implementing agency will: 
(i)  be  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  project;  (ii)  continue  to  review  and 
evaluate  all  enterprise  development  proposals  through  an  Evaluation  Committee 
headed by Project Coordinator and represented by senior officials, and from time 
to time attended by sector experts; ii) MD will be final approver of all subprojects; 
(iii) organize and fund the capacity building of its own staff as well as CMRCs, banks 
and other organizations and value chain actors; (iv) identify potential market and 
market  players;  (v)  provide  clear  guidance  to  CMRCs  on  preparation  and 
management  of  enterprise  subprojects;  (vi)  contribute  to  the  preparation  of 
enterprise  proposals  by  CMRCs  by  providing  guidance  as  well  as  relevant  sector 
and marketing studies; (vii) share experiences with other enterprise development 
projects/agencies  and  rationalize  common  activities;  (viii)  engage  in  policy 
advocacy for necessary changes in rules, laws, and standards; (ix) identify suitable 
technical assistance providers or individual experts to provide capacity building to 
MAVIM staff, and value chain actors and associations. 
201.  Management  of  Convergences:  The  District  Coordinators  will  be  responsible  for 
management  of  convergence  projects  as  per  standard  government  process  and 
design of each convergence scheme.   
202.  Coordination  with  other  development  investment  projects:  MAVIM  is  one  of  the 
implementing  agencies  of  the  World  Bank  funded  SMART  project,  which  is 
somewhat similar in scope of Nav Tejaswini. Similarly, MAVIM is also functioning in 
areas where other projects such as IDH and BCI are active. The project will avoid 
investment in same value chain (product or groups of products) in same CMRC and 
SHG to avoid the duplication of works and implementation complications. 
203.  AWPB: The PMU will prepare Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for approval by 
IFAD. It will follow IFAD’s prescribed format and be consistent with PDR. 
87 
204.  Procurement  plan:  The  project  will  also  prepare  procurement  and  follow  IFAD 
approval requirement as prescribed in the Letter to Borrower.  
10. PLANNING, M&E, LEARNING AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
205.  Planning. The logframe of the project (see Table 1) will guide  the development of 
work  plans  and  budgets.  Planning  and  budgeting  will  be  integrated  in  the  GoM 
processes  and  budgets  and  will  be  based  on  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets 
(AWPBs). The planning process will start at CMRC level under the guidance of the 
DCO,  MAVIM  taking  into  consideration  the  overall  activities  under  different 
components and sub components. District plans and budgets will be consolidated 
into a comprehensive state level AWPB.  Yearly AWPB will be submitted to the PSC 
for review and approval and then to IFAD for review and the issuing of no objection. 
The AWPB will clearly indicate the project expenditure, resources to be mobilised 
from  the  Government  programmes  through  convergence,  credit  from  financial 
institutions and beneficiaries’ contribution. The approved AWP&B would be used as 
a key document for reviewing the performance and progress during the supervision 
missions and project steering committee meetings. 
206.  Monitoring  and  Evaluation.  Nav  Tejaswini  will  develop  a  robust  M&E  system  in 
compliance  with  IFAD  and  the  GoM  requirements  and  fully  aligned  with  IFAD’s 
Operational Results Management System (ORMS). The M&E system will (i) collect, 
and analyse information on project results and impact; (ii) support PMU in planning 
and making informed decisions especially on course correcting actions; (iii) review 
the performance of partnerships with technical service providers, marketing players 
including contract farming, financial institutions etc.; (iv) create opportunities for 
learning and sharing results.  
207.  Systematizing  M&E:  Tejaswini  Maharashtra  established  a  robust  MIS  system  in 
2012  with  the  introduction  of  the  SHE  software,  through  which  MAVIM  could 
monitor    physical  and  financial  progress  of  SHGs  portfolio  regularly.  This  also 
generated  SHG  data  that  was  shared  with  private  commercial  banks  as  credit 
history of SHG members, to facilitae provision of loans to the SHGs. This system 
continues  to  function  even  after  the  closure  of  Tejaswini  and  will  be  further 
strengthened under Nav Tejaswini. For the new project, as part of implementation 
readiness  activities,  PMU  will  develop/procure  project  management  software  for 
management of all enterprise development activities of the project. The project will 
establish  a  robust  computerized,  web-based  MIS  that  will  be  accessible  for  data 
input,  analysis  and  reporting  by  CMRCs,  producer  collectives  as  well  as  for  data 
browsing  by  parties  external  to  the  project.  The  MIS  will  include  Geographic 
Information  System  (GIS)  data  on  the  locations  of  the  clusters  of  farm  and  non 
farm value chains, producer collectives. MIS will generate quarterly reports on the 
physical progress of the project. Both VC linked producers as well as stand alone 
micro  enterprises will  be facilitated to input data on key enterprise development 
indicators  through  mobile  based  apps  linked  to  the  software  to  analyse  the 
enterprise performance. Nav Tejaswini will also study M&E  system in other  IFAD 
supported  projects  in  India  including  Integrated  Livelihood  Support  Project  in 
Uttarakhand. 
208.  Under the new project,  a digital M&E  framework  would also be set that that will 
provide  management  information  for  project  activities,  i.e.  to  track  progress  in 
outreach,  activities 
financial  progress. 
implemented,  and  corresponding 
Furthermore,  the  project  will  invest  in  the  installation  of  a  robust  microfinance 
software  that  can  handle  SHG  and  individual  loans  and  real  time  tracking  of 
transactions including mobile phone based financial transactions; and will upgrade 
TALLY software to monitor all MF transactions real-time. 
88 
209.  Project  M&E  indicators  and  means  of  verification  are  defined  in  the  logical 
framework (Annex  I)  which includes relevant core indicators  from the ORMS. All 
people-specific indicators will be disaggregated by gender and youth. The PMU will 
fine-tune progress, performance and outcome indicators at the Start-Up Workshop 
with support from IFAD and will report on targets bi-annually as part of the internal 
planning processes. The project will use IFAD’s revised Core Indicators to enhance 
the measurement of IFAD's results at the outcome level and will launch the core 
indicator survey at baseline, mid-term and end-line. 
210.  Based  on  the  Project  Logical  Framework  (Annex  1),  the  Project  Implementation 
Manual  (PIM)  will  be  further  developed  to  define  the  responsibilities  of  each 
implementation level in collected and aggregating data for selected indicators that 
to be monitored and their frequency and reporting requirements. Within each unit 
of  implementation,  namely  PMU,  Regional  Coordination  Office  and  District 
Coordination  Office,  a  focal  person  will  be  designated  to  report  on  specific 
monitoring and outcome indicators, which will then be aggregated at the PMU level. 
The  Project  will  produce  regular  statistical  reports  and  annual  reports  that 
document the performance of the project and provide lessons for further refining 
the project approach. 
211.  The  Nav  Tejaswini  M&E  and  MIS  systems  will  be  prepared  during  the  project 
preparation period, to ensure that the key tools are ready and all key information 
is  recorded  from  the  start  of  the  project.  In  line  with  recommendations  IFAD 
Financial Management Team, the MIS will also track beneficiary contributions and 
private sector contributions to project costs so that these can be consolidated in 
project accounts. 
212.  A  Impact  and  Outcome  Survey  of  beneficiary  households  will  be  undertaken  to 
capture baseline, mid-term and end-line data through a focused survey of expected 
beneficiaries  in  the  34  districts  of  Maharashtra.  Sample  size  will  be  determined 
based  on  the  guidelines  established  by  the  new  COIS  methodology.  The 
Impact/Outcome  Survey  will  primarily  measure  indicators  for  the  Project 
Development  Objective  and  Outcomes  indicators.  Data  on  skills,  technology  and 
entrepreneurship will be collected in the survey and will be cross-compared with a 
treatment group at completion. The project will hire reputed agencies to conduct 
the surveys. Longitudinal study of both project beneficiaries and control group by 
setting up a panel and revisiting them periodically will be carried out.  
213.  Apart  from  outreach  data,  data  for  the  project  will  be  collected  on  three  levels: 
impact, outcome and output. Impact level data (goal and development objective) 
will be collected at project completion and will assess the long term effect of the 
project’s services on its participants. Outcome data (Components 1,2 and 3) will 
be  collected  at  mid-term  and  completion.  Output  data  will  be  collected  regularly 
and reported bi-annually. The impact indicators will assess the overall achievement 
of the project in supporting participating women and their SHGs/CMRCs to establish 
economically sustainable micro-enterprises, i.e., an assessment to be based on an 
index  comprising  of  the  following  elements:  number  of  years  in  operation, 
minimum  level  of  investment,  entrepreneural  returns  (or  owner’s  income),  sales 
(turnover), marketing linkages and ability, competition and business environment. 
SHG  sustainability/viability, on the other hand, will be assessed  on the following 
criteria: number of years in operation, available corpus amount, lending portfolio 
and PAR. At impact level, improvement of women’s agency will also be assessed 
through  a  pro-WEAI  survey  at  baseline  and  completion.  Once  the  baseline  is 
established, a target for minimum adequacy score will be set in consultation with 
the  PMU.  At  the  goal  level  the  project  will  also  undertake  an  assessment  at 
completion of the environmental sustainability promoted by the project, namely, 
an assessment on determining if project activities have been implemented in a way 
89 
that pollution into the environment (air, water and land) is avoided or minimised 
and the project promoted efficient use of natural resources to avoid or minimise 
environmental  degradation.  The  project’s  environmental  sustainability  will  be 
achieved    by  implementing  environmental  mitigation  measures  described  in  the 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Matrix  which  forms  part  of  the  SECAP 
Review Note and included in the PIM.  
214.  Nav Tejaswini is expected to provide lessons that can be important to shape the 
government policy regarding graduation of SHGs from savings and credits groups 
to  established  micro-enterprises.  The  new  project  offers  a  unique  opportunity  to 
show case the growth of SHG members to be entrepreneurs accessing appropriate 
technical support, business development services and access to micro enterprise 
loans  on  a  sustainable  basis.  Nav  Tejaswini  will  offer  learning  opportunities  for 
other SHG programmes in Maharashtra, in other states in India as well as in other 
countries,  on  individual  and  collective  enterprise  promotion.  MAVIM  will  be 
supported to document their experiences, develop training and learning modules. 
215.  Annual  Outcome  Surveys  will  be  carried  out  starting  from  PY3.  The  surveys  will 
cover (i) emerging intermediate outcomes of the services provided, the uptake of 
new  technology;  (ii)  the  views  of  participants  about  effectiveness  of  services 
provided  by  project;  (iii)  assessment  of  the  emerging  impact  on  incomes, 
employment, growth in businesses and rural enterprise. Annual outcome surveys 
will enable the project to report on achievement of the project outcomes as per the 
project log frame. The annual outcome survey will be carried out during the months 
of  January  and  February  from  the  second  project  year  onwards.  The  annual 
outcome survey report will be made available online. The annual progress report 
for a given year will be submitted no later than 30 June of the following year. Other 
thematic studies as relevant, including qualitative studies will be carried out. 
216.  Participatory  monitoring:  Beneficiaries  participation  in  project  monitoring  will  be 
ensured  through  three  primary  tools:  (i)  participatory  supervision:  focus  group 
discussions  and  consultations  with  randomly  selected  SHGs  and  CMRC  executive 
committee will be organized during supervision missions. These consultations will 
assess if participants are receiving the services requested at design, if services are 
timely provided, if participants are involved in deciding activities and services; (ii) 
annual  outcome  surveys:  satisfaction  of  beneficiaries  with  quality  of  services 
provided  will  also  be  assessed  through  annual outcomes  surveys,  to  be  initiated 
from  PY2.  The  annual  outcome  surveys  are  an  efficient  and  effective  way  of 
receiving  feedback  from  beneficiaries  on  which  activities  they  most  benefit  from 
and their satisfaction with the package of service delivered. The survey is designed 
in a simple yes/no format which is easy and  time effective for  respondents; (iii) 
grievance redressal mechanism: the Government of Maharashtra has a grievance 
redressal portal to register complaints about all government financed schemes and 
departments.  The  portal  is  also  accompanied  by  a  24x7  call  centre  helpline  to 
register  complaints.  During  orientation  workshop  for  all  CMRCs,  the  helpline 
numbers of the  Government  of  Maharashtra and IFAD’s SECAP complaints email 
address  will  be  distributed  among  participants  for  information.  The  redressal 
phasing and systems will be spelt out to participants for future reference. 
217.  Knowledge Management and Learning: The project's KM activities will support the 
effective flow of relevant information between project staff, beneficiaries and other 
stakeholders. A comprehensive KM action plan will be developed in the early stage 
of implementation. Output, outcome and impact data generated by the M&E system 
will  inform  high-quality  case  studies,  briefs  and  reports.  These  will  be  used  for 
policy dialogue, peer-learning, and potential scaling-up of activities. KM products 
90 
will  be  communicated  through  multiple  sources  including,  blogs,  written 
publications, video and social media. 
218.  REPORTING:  The  project  PMU  will  produce  program  and  financial  reports  as  per 
agreed format with IFAD.  
219. 
Innovations piloted through the project. (i) Approach. Make the SHGs and CMRCs 
function effectively by a promoting a) robust microfinance software that can handle 
SHG  and  individual loans  and  real  time  tracking  of  transactions  including  mobile 
phone based financial transactions; b) project management software to manage all 
subprojects;  (ii)  Activities.  Subprojects  will  promote  piloting  new  enterprises, 
technologies and products that have not been fully tested or adopted in the project 
area;  and  (iii)  Products.  The  project  will  pilot  a  livestock  health  service  cum 
insurance program in collaboration with vet service providers and private insurance 
firm to develop a low-cost and reliable livestock health and insurance service. 
11. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND PROCUREMENT 
Financial Management 
221. 
220.  Brief introduction: This section lays down the basic principles of financial management of 
the project. It lays down the system of funds flow to the project and within the project, the 
disbursement  systems,  submission  of  withdrawal  application  for  reimbursement  of  funds, 
the system of recording transactions, reporting the same and the audit requirements.  
Lending terms: India is on IFAD ordinary lending terms. The maturity period for the loan 
is at the choice of the borrower, subject to a ceiling of 35 years and to a maximum average 
repayment maturity of 20 years.  IFAD reference rate that the GoI will be charged will be 
based on the average repayment maturity bucket which is a pre-defined range of average 
repayment maturities. There are currently six average repayment maturity buckets, and GoI 
can choose any of the average repayment maturity buckets. The grace period is variable at 
the  choice  of  GoI,  subject  to  a  ceiling  of  10  years.  Interest  is  paid  on  the  loan  principal 
disbursed and not yet repaid  by  the  Borrower.  GoI can choose  either the  fixed spread  or 
variable spread and denomination currency in either EURO, SDR or USD. The terms related 
to the loan assistance will be as per the Guidelines for IFAD Lending Terms and Financing 
Conditions.  
222.  Retroactive  Financing:  At  the  Borrower’s  request  IFAD  financing  can  be  provided  as 
retroactive financing as an exception to the General Conditions and with Executive Board 
approval,  to  cover  eligible  expenditures  between  the  date  of  approval  of  the  design 
document by IFAD and the date of Entry into Force. Some of the activities that can be funded 
under retroactive financing will be: (i) costs related to studies to be initiated (ii) procurement 
of various software; (iii) some operating costs; (iv) staff and consultants recruitment cost; 
(v) purchase of a minimum set of equipment and materials; and (vi) activities related to a 
baseline survey. To be eligible for retroactive financing, goods and services must have been 
procured  according  to  the  procurement  procedures  applicable  to  loan  financing.  The 
activities retroactive finances are in the PDR as well as in the COSTAB (Component 3). It is 
expected  that  the  costs  for  these  activities  will  not  exceed  USD  1,000,000  and  will  be 
charged  to  the  respective  loan  categories.  The  funds  for  these  activities  will  be  provided 
initially  by  the  GoM  which  will  be  reimbursed  once  the  IFAD  conditions  precedent  to  first 
withdrawal have been met.  
223. 
Start-up Financing: IFAD encourages the use of pre-approved start-up advance for specific 
activities  that  enable  project  fast-start  between  the  date  of  signature  of  the  Financing 
Agreement (Entry into Force) and the conditions precedent to the first withdrawal having 
been met. 
224.  Fund Flow mechanism:  
(I) To the Project:  The Project will be funded from the following sources: IFAD Loan, IFAD 
Grant,  GoM  contribution  to  MAVIM,  by  way  of  operational  costs  and  salaries,  GoM 
91 
contribution by way of taxes, contributions from beneficiaries and by way of convergence 
from other Govt schemes besides banks, financial institutions and  private 
sector 
enterprises.  Funds from IFAD loan will flow to a Special/Designated Account maintained 
in  USD  in  a  bank  acceptable  to  IFAD  and  operated by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF), 
Government of India (GoI). MoF will transfer the IFAD loan to the State Treasury of the 
Government  of  Maharashtra  (GoM)  through  the  prescribed  national  procedures  for 
budgetary support to State Governments. The GoM will release these funds to MAVIM 
as soon as it receives the same from GOI.     
a)  IFAD Funds: Proceeds of IFAD loan funds will be disbursed using one of the following 
four  methods:  (i)  advance  withdrawals  or  replenishments  to  the  bank  account(s) 
designated  to  receive  loan  resources;  (ii)  direct  payment;  (iii)  Special  Commitment 
(under letter of credit); and (iv) reimbursement.  IFAD will make an initial advance of 
USD 4.2 million which is about six months of IFAD allocation towards the project into 
the Designated Loan Account  and  USD  0.1 million into the Designated Grant Account 
and  then  replenish  the  Designated  Accounts  on  the  basis  of  Withdrawal  Applications 
submitted by the Project through the State Government to the CAA&A, Government of 
India.  
b)  Counterpart Funding   
(i) 
Budgetary Allocations: The PMU of the project will be responsible for preparing 
the Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB) for the Project by consolidating the AWPBs 
of all DMUs which will be based on CMRC and community level activities. The AWPB 
comprising of IFAD and GoM funds will be a separate line item in the budget of the 
Department of Women and Child Development (DWCD) for Grant-in-Aid and will be 
presented for legislative sanction from the State Assembly. Fund will flow from the 
DWCD  to  MAVIM  bank  account  as  Grants-in-Aid  in  one  or  two  tranches  once  the 
annual  State  budget  is  approved  by  the  State  Assembly.  Taxes  on  project 
implementation will be borne by the GoM 
c)  Beneficiary  Contribution:  The  project  also  envisages  beneficiary  contribution.  The 
DCOs/  CMRCs  shall  evolve  a  system  to  collect  information  in  respect  of  beneficiary 
contribution to the project on a regular and ongoing basis. This could form part of the 
reporting system by the DCOs to the PMU. The utilization certificates of funds disbursed 
for  activities  which  involve  beneficiary  contribution  could  be  used  as  a  basis  for 
accounting the beneficiary contribution. 
(II)  Within  the  Project:    Initially  the  PMU  shall  provide  an  advance  to  the  DCOs  to 
cover  the  expenditure  for  six  months  based  on  their  AWPB.  The  DCOs  shall  submit 
monthly statements of expenditure to the PMU. The DCOs shall seek replenishment of 
the amount spent when it has utilized at least 60% of the amount advanced earlier. The 
DCOs will fund the CMRCs and all other activities at the community level.  
225. 
The  CMRCs  shall  maintain  separate  bank  accounts  in  respect  of  funds  received  from  the 
Project and the amounts utilized towards the project activities. A copy of such bank account 
statement shall be submitted to the DCOs every month along with the utilization certificate. 
The  project  staff  or  any  person  authorized  by  it  shall  be  entitled  to  verify  the  books  of 
accounts and all supporting documents and records of the CMRCs in respect of the project 
expenditure. 
226.  Accounts  by  type:  designated  accounts,  project  account,  district  accounts  etc., 
operation  of  accounts  and  accountability:  Two  Designated  Accounts  in  USD,  one  for 
Loan and the other for Grant, will be opened by the GoI at Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to 
which  funds  will  flow  from  IFAD.  GoI  will  transfer  IFAD  assistance  to  GoM.  The  advance 
funding from IFAD to the Designated Accounts will be equivalent to six months of projected 
annual budget. GoM will make a request to DEA to transfer the advance funding received 
from  IFAD  to  the  state  and  thereafter  GoM  will  release  this  amount  to  MAVIM.  GoM  will 
transfer the estimated budget for the year to MAVIM (project account) in a timely manner. 
MAVIM will submit WAs for the IFAD financed eligible expenditures as per the procedures 
and formats agreed with IFAD to the Office of CAA&A, Ministry of Finance, GoI.  
227. 
Each of the districts will have a project account in which funds from the PMU will flow. The 
DCOs will utilize the funds for project implementation based on the AWPB for the year. The 
92 
funds from the district offices shall be advanced/disbursed to the communities through the 
CMRCs. The CMRCs shall be required to provide utilization certificate for each quarter based 
on which further releases shall be made. The districts shall provide expenditure statements 
to  the  PMU  every  month  based  on  which  the  PMU  shall  prepare  and  submit  withdrawal 
applications  every  quarter  after  consolidating the  actual  expenditure incurred  at  the  PMU 
and districts. The counterpart funds, other than salaries to the GoM staff, (which will be paid 
directly by the Govt) will also be made available by the GoM to the PMU account from which 
expenditure  will  be  incurred.  GoM  will  provide  the  details  of  expenditure  incurred  by  it 
directly (salaries and allowances) towards the project, to enable consolidation and reporting 
of total expenditure of the project. 
228.  Disbursement procedures, withdrawals and Withdrawal Applications (WA):  There 
are four standard procedures that are used for disbursing Loan funds from IFAD. The Loan 
Disbursement  Handbook  for  IFAD  Directly  Supervised  Projects  provides  details  of 
disbursement methods and submission of Withdrawal Applications. 
229.  Procedure  I:  Designated  Account  (DA)  and  initial  advance:  IFAD  financing  to  the 
Project will be routed through a Designated Account denominated in United States Dollars 
maintained  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI).  Controller  of  Aid,  Accounts  and  Audit 
(CAA&A), Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance (MoF) will administer 
the  Designated  Account.  IFAD  will  establish  an  Authorized  Allocation  for  initial  advance, 
initially up to USD 4.2 million for Loan and USD 0.1million for Grant will be indicated in the 
Letter to the Borrower. However, the quantum is subject to the agreement of both GoI and 
GoM at Loan Negotiations, as this will count for the payment of interest and service charge.  
230.  Procedure II: Reimbursement of funds to DA: The DA shall be reimbursed periodically 
based on the utilization of  funds by  the  project.  It  is proposed to adopt Interim  Financial 
Reports (IFRs) modality for submission of withdrawal applications to IFAD through CAA&A, 
Ministry of Finance. The sample format of the IFRs are provided in the  Attachment 6 1 to 
the PIM.  
231.  MAVIM  shall  submit  withdrawal  applications  every  quarter  based  on  the  actual  eligible 
expenditures  incurred  at  PMU  and  district  level.  These  expenditures  shall  be  reported  in 
quarterly consolidated IFRs, subject to audit certification at the end of each financial year. 
Expenditure categories eligible for financing under the Financing Agreement and as per the 
disbursement percentage will be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD loan/Grant. 
232. 
233. 
234. 
IFRs  shall  be  prepared  by  grouping  expenditures  in  accordance  with  the  disbursement 
categories as outlined in Schedule  II  of the Financing  Agreement.  Background/supporting 
documentation shall be retained by the project and submitted to IFAD upon request. IFRs 
shall  contain  in  annex  the  list  of  contracts  above  USD  50,000  equivalent  for  which 
disbursements have been executed during the period as well as all the required supporting 
documentation.  Full  supporting  documentation  shall  be  annexed  to  the  IFRs  for  single 
payments  above  USD  50,000  equivalent  executed  in  the  period.  These  prescriptions  are 
applicable to all cost categories outlined in Schedule II of the Financing Agreement. 
IFRs  shall  be  submitted  to  IFAD  on  a  timely  basis  within  45  days  after  the  end  of  each 
quarter. In case of fund requirements above USD 5 million equivalent, ad-hoc IFRs can be 
prepared and submitted to IFAD anytime. 
IFRs, together with all required annexes, shall be prepared by the project’s GM (F& A), and  
shall be signed by the GM and the Project Director before submission to CAA&A in New Delhi 
for the signature of the authorized representative and subsequent claim to IFAD. In its claim, 
CAA&A shall indicate the bank account placed at RBI where IFAD funds for reimbursement 
shall be transferred. Detailed disbursement modalities shall be indicated in the Letter to the 
Borrower. 
235.  Procedure III: Direct Payment. Under this procedure, the government requests the Fund 
to pay suppliers directly from the loan/grant funds. The procedure is similar to Procedure I 
described above but the payment is made direct to the third party as advised and instructed 
by the Government. 
93 
236.  Procedure  IV:  Direct  Payment  to  a  foreign  supplier.  Under  this  procedure,  the 
government uses a Letter of Credit (L/C) as a mode of payment to a foreign supplier. Form 
301, an Application for a Special Commitment, Form 302 Letter of Commitment from IFAD 
to a Bank and Form 303 Bank’s Request for Payment. This is extensively used for financing 
import of goods and under this procedure IFAD gives assurance to the suppliers. 
Disbursement 
Procedure 
Procedure I 
Procedure II 
Disbursement 
Type 
Special/ 
Designated 
Account 
Reimbursement 
Procedure III 
Direct Payment 
Procedure IV 
Special 
Commitment 
Description 
This is for advance funding from IFAD for start up 
activities and is used for claiming further deposits 
to replenish the Special/ Designated Account 
This procedure is used for claiming reimbursement 
where eligible project expenditure reimbursable by 
IFAD have been pre-financed by the Government    
IFAD makes direct payment to a third party on the 
basis of Government instructions 
This  is  used  for  items  imported  by  the  Project 
under  a  Letter of  Credit  requiring  guarantees  for 
reimbursement 
237. 
The formats of the above mentioned forms will be provided at the time of start-up of the 
project. 
238. 
Checklist for compiling a withdrawal application: Following aspects need to be checked 
and  verified  before  an  Application  for  withdrawal  is  sent  to  IFAD  for  reimbursement  or 
payment. The supporting documents mentioned below are needed only if the expenditure 
exceeds the threshold of USD 50,000 for a single payment: 
  Designation of WA signatory 
  Designation for operation of the special/designated account 
  WA Sequential number and coverage period 
  WA signatory 
  Currency and the amount due 
  Account number 
  Banking instructions 
  Correspondent bank 
  Supporting documents 
 
  Disbursement procedure used 
 
  Contract or purchase order no and date 
  Description of goods, works or services 
  Currency and total amount of contract 
Invoice numbers and net amount of invoice covered by this application 
 
  Withdrawal details: category and % of expenditures to be financed by IFAD 
Percentage of Financing 
Procurement details 
239. 
The  records  evidencing  such  expenditures  need  not  be  submitted  to  IFAD,  but  will  be 
retained by the project and made available for inspection by the representatives of IFAD. 
The PMU will retain the relevant documents and make them readily available for inspection 
and review by joint review missions and the auditors. No taxes and duties will be financed 
out  of  the  proceeds  of  the  IFAD  loan.  The  PMU  will  compile  and  consolidate,  on  a  timely 
basis, eligible Project expenditures for all project activities and consolidate and process, on 
a timely basis, withdrawal applications for all eligible Project expenditures and submit such 
withdrawal  applications  to  IFAD  through  MoF  for  reimbursement  or  replenishment  of  the 
Special/Designated Account. 
240.  No withdrawal can be made in respect of expenditures until the conditions precedent to the 
first withdrawal as specified in the Letter to Borrower/ recipient have been fulfilled such as   
((i)  the PMU and the DCOs shall have been duly established and finance staff recruited 
(iii) the GOI shall have duly opened the Special/Designated Accounts  
(iv) the Project shall have duly opened the Project Accounts; and  
(v)  the  first  AWPB,  including  the  procurement  plan  for  the  initial  18  months  of  Project 
implementation, shall have been submitted to, and approved by IFAD. 
94 
241.  Audit  procedures  and  arrangements  for  conducting  effective  audit  for  each  year 
and arrangement for internal audit and its procedures: The accounts of the Project for 
each Fiscal Year shall be audited by independent auditors acceptable to IFAD. The audit shall 
be in accordance with Article 9 of the IFAD’s General conditions and the IFAD Handbook of 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects.  The ToR for the auditors is also 
provided in the aforesaid Handbook. An independent firm of Chartered Accountants will be 
engaged for the purpose. The appointment of the auditor shall be through a fair, transparent 
and competitive process and within 90 days after loan effectiveness for the first year and 
also for each of the subsequent years of the project period. Besides the annual audit by the 
chartered accountant, the AG office will continue to carry out the transaction audit of MAVIM 
as is the current practice. 
242. 
243. 
244. 
245. 
The auditors should not be appointed as consultants responsible for designing accounting 
and control systems on which they would be required to comment. Such appointments would 
create a conflict of interest and create a risk that auditors might not report shortcomings in 
the project. 
The PMU shall prepare a TOR for selection of the auditors and send the same to IFAD for 
approval  which  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  IFAD  Handbook  of  Financial  Reporting  and 
Auditing  of  IFAD-financed  Projects.  On  receipt  of  the  approval the  PMU  shall  conduct  the 
selection process subject to IFAD prior review and convey to IFAD the name of the auditor 
appointed and the selection process adopted. The agreed time frame for appointment of the 
auditor in accordance with the financing agreement will be adhered to.  
In making a proposal for appointment of a private auditor, the project should provide IFAD 
with relevant supporting documentation and should address the following questions: 
i.  Does  the  firm  adhere  to  nationally  accepted  auditing  standards?  The  firm’s  audit 
procedures and methods should ensure compliance with such standards. 
ii. Is the firm independent of the project entity to be audited and of the people appointing 
the auditor? 
iii. What is the legal status of the firm? This includes such aspects as partners’ status and 
any limited liability provision in the firm’s articles. 
iv. Are any of the assigned audit staff employed by or closely linked to the project entity to 
be audited, or to any government body or public agency? 
v. Can the auditor confirm that there is no conflict of interest or lack of independence implicit 
in accepting the appointment? 
vi.  Is  the  auditor  committed  to  providing  qualified  and  experienced  staff  that  can  ensure 
timely submission of audit reports? 
The auditors shall adopt the Standards of Auditing acceptable to IFAD and the Government 
while auditing and reporting on the Project Accounts. The accounting and auditing standards 
adopted should be disclosed in the notes to the accounts. The audit report shall contain a 
clear expression of the auditor’s opinion regarding the financial statements. The auditor is 
required  to  deliver  an  audit  package  that  includes:  (i)  the  audited  financial  statements 
including additional disclosures as required by IFAD Handbook (ii) an audit opinion on the 
financial statements (iii) a report on factual findings and any ineligible expenditure identified 
should be reported (iv) a Management Letter. Through the management letter, the auditor 
will identify deficiencies in the project accounting records, procedures, systems and internal 
controls and make appropriate recommendations for improvement. It will also include any 
significant matters that come to the auditor’s attention and might have a material impact 
on project implementation. The audit of the Designated Account will be done by the Office 
of the C&AG.   
246. 
In reviewing the project accounts and financial statements, the auditor will adhere to the 
scope of audit provided in the IFAD Handbook (Appendix 7). The auditor also will: 
 
 
verify  that  acceptable  accounting  standards  have  been  consistently  applied  and 
indicate  any  material  deviation  from  these  standards,  and  the  effect  of  such 
deviation on the annual financial statements; 
assess  the  adequacy  of  accounting  and  internal  control  systems  (procedures  and 
responsibilities)  for  monitoring  expenditures  and  other  financial  transactions 
(commitment,  review,  approval,  payment  and  accounting)  and  ensuring  safe 
95 
247. 
248. 
249. 
250. 
custody of project-financed assets, and document any instances where controls are 
lacking or need strengthening; 
determine whether the PMU/DCOs have maintained adequate documentation for all 
transactions; e.g. procurement documents, contracts, suppliers. invoices, letters of 
credit  and  evidence  of  payment,  and  ascertain  that  expenditures  were  properly 
authorized and in compliance with legal requirements; 
verify the numerical accuracy of statements and accounts; 
verify that disbursement  requests for  expenditures submitted to IFAD  are  eligible 
for  financing  under  the  loan  agreement,  and  identify  clearly  any  ineligible 
expenditures; and  
carry out a physical verification of any significant assets purchased and confirm their 
existence and use for project purposes. 
report on the status of implementation of recommendations issued in the previous 
years 
 
 
 
 
 
The auditor shall discuss the findings in the form of a draft report with the project's finance 
and accounts department and the Project Director. The auditor shall consider and include 
the response of the project in the final report. 
The audited statement of accounts along with the audit report and the Management Letter 
shall be furnished by the project to IFAD within six months of the end of each Fiscal Year. 
The  auditor  shall  discuss  the  draft  management  letter  with  the  PD/GM  and  include  the 
Project’s replies/comments in the final version of the management letter. In any case, the 
project  shall  submit  to  the  auditors  and  IFAD  the  reply  to  the  management  letter  of  the 
auditors within one month of receipt thereof. 
The Project shall maintain an Log of Audit Observations made by the auditors and also a 
Table of Summary Status of Audit Observations and get it validated by the auditor during 
the subsequent audit or earlier. While, the conduct of project audit is the responsibility of 
the Government, it will keep IFAD informed at various stages of the audit process. 
Internal Audit: MAVIM does not have a system of internal audit. It is proposed that a firm 
of Chartered Accountants will be engaged as Internal Auditor (IA) of the project who will be 
responsible for the internal audit of the PMU on a quarterly/ half yearly basis. MAVIM will 
form an in-house team to conduct the internal audit of the DCOs. The report of the DCOs 
will be shared with the internal auditor of the PMU who will consider its main observations 
for  drafting  the  report  to  the  Vice  Chairman  &  Managing  Director  (VCMD).  A  copy  of  the 
report along with the Management replies to the observations will also be submitted to IFAD. 
The  internal  auditors  will,  besides  the  financial  audit,  will  review  the  systems  of  internal 
control  and  suggest  improvements,  if  required,  thereto.  The  internal  audit  should  also 
include statutory compliances. The terms of reference for the internal audit are included in 
the  Project  Implementation  Manual.  The  TOR  will  include  the  key  aspects  of  financial 
management  and  procurement.  The  internal  auditors  will  submit  quarterly  reports  to  the 
VCMD. Corrective follow up action shall be taken by the GM (F&A)/ CAFO at the PMU. The 
action  taken  report  shall  be  submitted  to  the  PD  and  the  internal  auditors.  The  internal 
auditors  will  evaluate  action  on  previous  internal  audit  reports,  and  effectiveness  thereof 
and  report  on  the  compliance  thereof  in  the  subsequent  report.  The  Project  Director  will 
place the reports and its action taken reports before the Board every six months. The quality 
of internal audit reports submitted by the internal auditors in the first year of implementation 
will  be  reviewed  by  the  Review  Mission/  IFAD  ICO  and  if  these  reports  are  found  to  lack 
quality, MAVIM may be requested to make alternate arrangements, acceptable to IFAD, for 
conducting the internal audit in later years. The ToR of the Internal Auditor will be submitted 
to IFAD for prior review. 
251. 
Ineligible  Expenses.  If  the  auditors  during  the  course  of  their  review  find  ineligible 
expenses,  these  will  be  reported  as  an  exception  regardless  of  their  materiality.  If  the 
ineligible expenditures are immaterial and if the project agrees on the auditor’s review, IFAD 
recommends immediate correction, in order to avoid unnecessary qualifications. If the WA 
96 
are  found  to  include  ineligible  expenditures,  the  borrower  will  be  required  to  refund  the 
amounts in question. 
252.  Accounting  systems,  policies,  procedures  and  financial  reporting.  The  project  will 
follow a double entry and computerized accounting system at all levels. The accounting will 
be in accordance with Standards of Accounting accepted in India with consistently applied 
accounting practices adequate to reflect the operations, resources and expenditures related 
to the project until the Financing Closing Date, and shall retain such accounts and records 
for at least ten (10) years thereafter. 
253.  MAVIM currently uses Tally software for its accounting at the PMU and the DCOs. CMRCs 
also use the same software.  The project will have a uniform chart of accounts across all its 
offices  and  consolidation  of  accounts  will  be  done  at  the  PMU  every  month  using  the 
synchronization  feature  of  the  software.    It  is  proposed  that  the  software  be  used  more 
efficiently  by  using  groupings  and  cost  centres  function  to  record  transactions  by 
components  and  categories.  Customization  of  the  software  should  be  undertaken  to 
generate reports from the system itself in the format required for preparation of the project 
financial statements (PFS). The accounts at the DCOs are synchronized every month at the 
PMU based on which the GM/ CAFO at the PMU shall be responsible for the preparation of 
consolidated  quarterly  financial  reports.  The  reports  will  be  useful  for  preparation  of  the 
quarterly withdrawal applications. The GM shall be also responsible for the preparation of 
the annual financial statements of the project which will be subject to external audit. The 
AWPB,  six-monthly  reports  prepared  by  the  project  and  the  audited  accounts  shall  be 
submitted to the Board of Directors of MAVIM for approval and then forwarded to IFAD. The 
PFS shall include financial statements covering the reporting period in accordance with IPSAS 
– Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting. In addition, the following specific 
disclosures will be included in the financial statements 
  Withdrawal application statement – appendix 1 to the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting 
and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects 
  Sources and uses of funds statement- appendix 2 to the IFAD Handbook 
  Statement of Expenditure – appendix 5 to the IFAD Handbook (applicable to grants) 
254. 
The formats of the PFS are provided in Attachment 1 to the PIM  
255. 
Taxes: Section 11.01 of the General Conditions stipulates that the Loan and all Loan Service 
Payments shall be exempt from all Taxes, and all loan service payments shall be made free 
and clear of taxes. It is the policy of the Fund that Loan proceeds are not to be used to pay 
Taxes, including (but not limited to) any taxes levied on the imports, procurement or supply 
of any good, civil work or services financed by the Loan but excluding taxes on the overall 
income. If taxes are to be absorbed by the Government, they will be recorded under the 
counterpart contributions. A separate record should be kept for taxes paid by the Project.  
256.  Materiality:  Information  is  material  if  its  omission  or  misstatement  could  influence  the 
decisions  or  assessment  of  the  users  made  on  the  basis  of  the  financial  statements. 
Materiality  depends  on  the  nature  or  size  of  the  item  or  error  judged  in  the  particular 
circumstance  of  omission  or  misstatement.  In  the  public  sector,  materiality  includes 
compliance with authorities, legislative concern or public interest. In the context of IFAD-
financed  operation  will  include  compliance  with  the  Project  Financing  Agreement  and  in 
particular the requirement that IFAD funds may only be used for the purpose stated therein. 
257.  Project completion report with reference to financial management:  The Project will 
be completed and loan/grant closed as specified in the Finance Agreement. 
  Withdrawal Applications may be continued to be submitted up to the Loan Closing date 
i.e. six months after the project completion date. 
  Only  payments  made,  or  payments  due  for  goods  and  services,  which  have  been 
provided  prior  to  the  project  completion  date,  qualify  for  disbursement.  The  only 
additional expenditures allowed are for winding up activities (salaries, audit fees, project 
completion report) 
  No replenishment will be made after the project completion date. 
97 
 
 
The  Special/Designated  Account  recovery  will  begin  early  enough  to  ensure  that  no 
balance remains in the special/designated account at the closing date. 
The  following  three  steps  will  be  adhered  to  for  loan  closing:  (i)  final  statement  of 
accounts, (ii) preparation of final audit report, and (iii) preparation of Project Completion 
Report 
258.  Asset Management: Proper record of fixed assets shall be maintained at the PMU and the 
DMUs which shall include the date of purchase, the specification, the unique identification 
number, the location  and the cost. In case assets are  allocated to any staff  member this 
should be mentioned in the asset register. The fixed assets shall be physically verified at 
least  once  in  a  year  and  the  evidence  thereof  shall  be  recorded  in  the  asset  register.  All 
assets procured by the project shall be adequately insured. The asset registers should be 
regularly reconciled with the books of accounts. 
259. 
Financial Manual: MAVIM has a manual for Financial Regulations which was approved and 
adopted  in  2004.  The  regulations  contain  operational  processes  of  accounting,  financial 
rules, maintenance of books of accounts, procurement rules, structure of various committees 
and its roles, delegation of financial powers and Travel Allowance/ Daily Allowance (TA/DA) 
rules  etc.  Since  these  regulations  were  formulated  and  adopted  in  2004,  MAVIM  should 
update this with the current rules, regulations, policies and accounting systems which have 
undergone significant changes since then and the same can be used as a Financial Manual 
for the project. 
Procurement     
260. 
261. 
262. 
263. 
To ensure effective implementation of project procurement activities and compliance with 
IFAD  procurement  guidelines,  the  project  will  ensure  that  the  project  has  an  effective 
procurement system in place, with a dedicated full-time procurement officer  recruited  for 
the project.  
The  procurement  officer’s  responsibilities  will  include  the  preparation  and  updating  of 
procurement plans for the project, acting as the focal person for NOTUS, maintaining the 
contracts register, carrying out all procurement activities of the project, coordinating with 
the  project  team  on  initiating  the  procurement  actions  as  per  the  procurement  plan, 
reviewing  procurement  activities  carried  out  at  districts  and  CMRCs/  community  levels, 
monitor  procurement  compliance,  and  provide  training  to  all  project  staff  involved  in 
procurement. S/he will report to GM (Project) directly. A detailed ToR for the procurement 
officer will be prepared and included in the PIM. 
All procurement requiring IFAD prior review will be uploaded in IFAD No Objection Tracking 
and Utilities System (NOTUS) portal. The prior review thresholds for different categories will 
be included in the Letter to the Borrower. 
The  project  will  prepare  a  procurement  plan  initially  for  18  months  followed  by  yearly 
procurement  plans  which  be  based  on  the  AWPB.  The  procurement  plan  will  need  to  be 
revised with the revision of the AWPB. Any procurement which is not in accordance with the 
approved AWPB and procurement plan will be treated as ineligible expenditure and not be 
financed by IFAD. 
264.  Prior and Post Reviews: IFAD will undertake prior and post reviews of procurement made. 
(a) Prior review is when IFAD is required to provide a No-Objection (NO) at key stages of a 
procurement process.  This requirement and the associated prior review thresholds will  in 
the Letter to the Borrower. The Country Programme Management Teams and the PMU are 
required to use the No-Objection Tracking and Utility System (NOTUS) to manage NOs.  (b) 
Post  review  is  the  assessment  by  IFAD  of  the  procurement  processes  conducted  by  the 
Borrower/Recipient  for  a  sample  of  contracts  that  are  not  subject  to  prior  preview.    Post 
reviews  will  cover  procurement  planning,  procurement  process,  contract  awarding  and 
management, and risk identification and mitigation. The project will be required to submit 
to IFAD the bidding document, the bid evaluation report and the draft contract documents 
for the prior review of procurement  of  goods, works and  non-consulting services  and the 
draft RFP, the technical evaluation report, the combined evaluation report and the negotiated 
draft contract and the minutes of negotiations in case of procurement of consulting services.  
98 
The procurements covered under prior review, thresholds for the same and the thresholds 
for the mode of procurement will be specified in the Letter to Borrower (LTB). 
265.  Governance,  transparency  and  anti-Corruption.  In  line  with  the  IFAD  General 
Conditions on Agricultural Development Financing and IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and 
Corruption  in  its  projects,  the  project  should  provide  a  commitment  to  abide  by  these 
provisions and establish credible deterrent mechanisms and internal controls and cooperate 
fully  with  IFAD  and  the  notified  Government  investigative  agencies/authorities.  The 
consultants and the suppliers will also be made aware of the provisions and are compliant 
to  these  provisions.  The  detailed  measures  will  be  included  in  all  the  bid  documents, 
contracts and Grant agreements ensuring IFAD rights for auditing, investigating provisions 
and debarment. 
266. 
Transparency  framework.  IFAD’s  applies  a  zero-tolerance  approach  in  cases  where 
investigation  determines  that  fraudulent,  corrupt,  collusive,  or  coercive  actions  have 
occurred in projects financed through its loans and grants. Project design includes several 
measures  to  promote  transparency:  (i)  autonomous  central  project  office  and  relevant 
district project management offices, operating on the basis of good governance; (ii) annual 
independent  audit;  (iii)  verification  of  fiduciary  compliance  during  supervision;  (iv) 
independent  impact  assessments;  and  (v)  more  efficient  public  financial  management 
systems and ensuring of transparency by strengthening state oversight.  
A.  Applicability of the Procurement Provisions 
267. 
Procurement  of  goods  and  consultancy  services  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  of  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  Procurement  Handbook,  2010,  and  as 
amended  from  time  to  time.  (The  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  can  be  accessed  from 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421027/procure_e.pdf/e1a99511-d57d-
4695-a05b-3d9b597d0149  and  the  IFAD  Procurement  Handbook  can  be  accessed  from 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421018/proc_handbook_e.pdf/2febc53a-
4244-4447-a788-d06a632fd3b5).  In  the  absence  of  national  law  which  safeguards  the 
interests  of  transparency,  fairness,  and  grievance  redressal  of  the  participating 
bidders/suppliers, IFAD Procurement Guidelines shall be followed both at all implementing 
levels.  IFAD  Procurement  guidelines  takes  precedent  over  Government  rules  and 
regulations, to the extent such are inconsistent with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. The 
PMU has the overall implementation responsibility of procurement and on the interpretation, 
the  update  of  this  Manual,  and  obtain  the  necessary  agreements,  clarifications  and  no 
objection from IFAD. 
B.  Guiding principles of Procurement 
Transparency, Competition, Fairness and Elimination of Arbitrariness 
268. 
Public  procurement  should  be  conducted  in  a  transparent  manner  to  bring  competition, 
fairness  and  elimination  of  arbitrariness  in  the  system.  This  will  enable  the  prospective 
bidders to formulate competitive tenders with confidence. The following are some important 
measures to achieve the same and, thus, secure best value for money: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
text  of 
The 
the  bid  document  should  be  user-friendly,  self-contained, 
comprehensive,  unambiguous,  and  relevant  to  the  objective  of  the  procurement. 
The use of terminology used in common parlance in the industry should be preferred. 
The specifications of the required goods/terms of reference for consultants should 
be framed giving sufficient details in such a manner that it is neither too elaborately 
restrictive as to deter potential bidders or increase the cost of procurement nor too 
sketchy to leave scope for sub-standard supply. 
The  bid  document  should  clearly  mention  the  eligibility  criteria  to  be  met  by  the 
bidders such as minimum level of experience, past performance, technical capability, 
manufacturing  facilities,  financial  position,  ownership  or  any  legal  restriction  etc. 
Restrictions on who is qualified to bid should not stifle competition amongst potential 
bidders. 
99 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
The  procedure  for  preparing  and  submitting  the  bids;  deadline  for  submission  of 
bids; date, time & place of public opening of bids; requirement of earnest  money 
and performance security; parameters for determining responsiveness of bidders; 
evaluating and ranking of bids and criteria for full or partial acceptance of bids and 
conclusion of contract should be incorporated in the document in clear terms. 
Bids  should  be  evaluated  in  terms  of  the  criteria  already  incorporated  in  the  bid 
document, based on which bids have been received. Any new condition, which was 
not incorporated earlier, should not be brought into consideration while evaluating 
the bids. 
Sufficient time should be allowed to the bidders to prepare and submit their bids. 
Suitable  provisions  should  be  kept  in  the  bid  document  allowing  the  bidders 
reasonable  opportunity  to  question  the  bid  conditions,  bidding  process,  and/or 
rejection  of  its  bid  and  the  settlement  of  disputes,  if  any,  emanating  from  the 
resultant contract. 
It should be made clear in the bid document that bidders are not permitted to alter 
or  modify  their  bids  after  expiry  of  the  deadline  for  receipt  of  bid  till  the  date  of 
validity of bids.  
Negotiations with the bidders for procurement of goods must be avoided. In case of 
consultancy  services  negotiations  may  be  conducted  with  the  highest  combined 
ranked  consultant,  to  clarify  certain  aspects  and  to  confirm  the  team  of  experts 
proposed.  
The  name  of  the  successful  bidder  to  whom  the  contract  is  awarded  should  be 
appropriately notified by the project for the information of general public through its 
website or any other means. 
Efficiency, Economy and Accountability 
269. 
Public  procurement  procedures  must  conform  to  exemplary  norms  of  best  practices  to 
ensure efficiency, economy and accountability in the system. To achieve this objective, the 
following key areas should be taken care of: 
a)  To reduce delays, MAVIM should prescribe appropriate time frame for each stage of 
procurement; delineate the responsibility of different officials and agencies involved 
in  the  purchase  process  and  delegate,  wherever  necessary,  appropriate  purchase 
powers to the lower functionaries with due approval of the competent authority. 
b) 
MAVIM should ensure conclusion of contract within the original validity of the bids. Extension 
of  bid  validity  must  be  discouraged  and  resorted  to  only  in  absolutely  unavoidable, 
exceptional circumstances with the approval of the competent authority after duly recording 
the reasons for such extension. 
Value for money 
270.  Underpinning all of the above is the need to obtain value for money for all project procurement 
activities through the optimum combination of several factors, including: 
a)  Applying sound, internationally recognized procurement principles. 
b)  Ensuring that the goods, works or services procured meet the requirements for the 
task and are not over-specified. 
c)  Ensuring that the goods, works or services are contracted on the best possible terms, 
taking into account their expected life cycle. 
d)  Ensuring  that  the  provider/supplier  of  the  goods,  works  or  services  is  qualified, 
legally entitled and competent to execute the contract. 
271. 
Best value does not necessarily mean the lowest initial price option, but rather represents 
the  best  return  on  investment,  taking  into  consideration  the  unique  and  specific 
100 
circumstances of each procurement activity; the balance of time, cost and quality required; 
and the successful overall outcome of the contract in meeting its original objectives. 
General Provisions 
272. 
The procurement of goods and consulting services under the project is to be undertaken by 
observing the following specific requirements. 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Procurement  is  to  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  IFAD’s  Procurement 
Guidelines,  the  respective  Loan/  Grant  agreement,  and  any  duly  agreed 
amendments thereto. 
Procurement  is  to  be  conducted  within  the  project  implementation  period,  except 
where  the  financing  agreement  provides  for  retroactive  financing  and  then  within 
the limits therein specified. 
The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated funds 
as per the financing agreement. 
Procurement is to be consistent with the duly approved annual work plan and budget 
(AWPB)  including  a  procurement  plan  for  at  least  the  initial  18  months  and 
subsequently updated annually. 
Procurement  is  to  result  in  the  best  value  for  money  as  defined  by  the  IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines. 
C.    Codes of Conduct and Conflicts of Interest 
Codes of Conduct 
273.  Negative  perceptions  of  procurement  can  quickly  and  easily  be  formed  by  individuals  or 
groups looking in at the process from the outside. It is therefore imperative that procurement 
is not only conducted in an ethical, transparent and fair manner, but that it  is seen to be 
conducted that way. 
274. 
The ethical conduct require that no person shall use his/her authority, position or office for 
personal  gain,  which  will  be  defined  as  soliciting,  accepting  or  otherwise  benefiting  from 
anything of material value, in any form, either in person or indirectly through close relatives 
or associates, as a result of procurement financed by IFAD. The officials of MAVIM and its 
district units shall respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and 
not use such information for personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder or supplier 
or contractor. Information given in the course of his or her duty shall be true, fair and not 
designed to mislead. 
Gifts and Hospitality  
275. 
Any official of MAVIM involved in IFAD- funded procurement activity shall: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
not be permitted to accept  any business gifts from  current or potential suppliers, 
contractors or consultants unless such gifts are of very small intrinsic value such as 
a calendar or business diary. 
refrain from accepting any business hospitality that might be viewed by others as 
having  an  influence  in  making  a  business  decision  as  a  result  of  accepting  that 
hospitality; and  
has a duty to promptly report refer any cases of irregular practices which include 
but not limited to fraud and corruption as defined in IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy 
by  a  colleague,  bidder,  supplier,  contractor  or  consultant  to  IFAD  and  National 
Authorities as required 
 Mis-procurement 
276. 
IFAD shall have the right not to finance contracts which are not procured strictly following 
the procedures as set forth in the Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook, IFAD 
101 
Letter to the Borrower, and  will  cancel  such portion  of the Financing. If mis-procurement 
continues,  IFAD  may  suspend  the  Financing  or  even  go  up  to  the  cancellation  of  the 
Financing. 
Good Governance and Accountability Policies 
277. 
The  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  Anti  Corruption  Policy,  which  are  adapted  to  this 
Project  through  the  Financing  Agreement  and  IFAD  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural 
Development  Financing,  require  zero  tolerance  to  prohibited  practices.  Therefore,  the 
procurement process also requires a strict adherence to these Guidelines and Policy. 
278. 
Pursuant  to  this  policy,  the  following  provisions  shall  be  applied  throughout  the  project 
implementation: 
(a)  For the purpose of this provision, the terms set forth below are defined: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
“Corrupt Practices” mean the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting directly or 
indirectly  of  anything  of  value  to  influence  improperly  the  actions  of  another 
party.  
“Fraudulent Practices” is any act or omission including a misrepresentation that 
knowingly  or  recklessly  misleads,  or  attempts  to  mislead,  a  party  to  obtain 
financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation; 
“Collusive Practices” is an arrangement between two or more parties, designed 
to achieve an improper purpose, including to influence improperly the actions of 
another party; 
“Coercive Practices” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, 
directly  or  indirectly,  any  party,  or  the  property  of  the  party  to  influence 
improperly the actions of a party.  
“Obstructive  Practices”  mean:  deliberately  destroying,  falsifying,  altering,  or 
concealing of evidence material to the investigation or making false statements 
to  investigators  in  order  to  materially  impede  an  IFAD  investigation  into 
allegations  of  a  corrupt,  fraudulent,  coercive,  or  collusive  practice;  and/or 
threatening, harassing, or intimidating any party to prevent it from disclosing its 
knowledge  of  matters  relevant  to  the  investigation  or  from  pursuing  the 
investigation; or acts intended  to materially impede  the exercise  of the  IFAD’s 
inspection and audit rights provided for under sub-clause (e) below. 
(b)  The Borrower and IFAD will reject a proposal for award if it determines that the bidder 
or consultant recommended for award, or any of its personnel. Or its agents, or its 
sub-consultants, subcontractors, service providers, suppliers and/or their employees 
has  directly  or  indirectly  engaged  in  corrupt,  fraudulent,  collusive,  coercive  or 
obstructive practices in competing for the contract in question; 
(c)  IFAD will declare mis-procurement and cancel the portion of the loan/grant allocated 
to the contract if it determines at any time that representatives of the borrower or of 
a  recipient  of  any  part  of  the  proceeds  of  the  loan  engaged  in  corrupt,  fraudulent, 
coercive, collusive or obstructive practices during the procurement or implementation 
of the contract in question without the borrower having taken timely and appropriate 
action  satisfactory  to  the  DP  to  address  such  practices  when  they  occur,  including 
failing to inform the DP in a timely manner at the time they knew of the practices. 
(d)  IFAD will declare a consultant or firm ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period 
of time, to be awarded a future IFAD financed contract if it at any time determines 
that  the  bidder,  supplier, contractor,  service  provider  or  consultant  has  engaged  in 
corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, collusive or obstructive practices in competing for, or in 
executing, an IFAD-financed contract; and 
102 
(e)  All  contracts  financed  out  of  the  proceeds  of  the  project  has  a  provision  requiring 
supplier, contractor or consultants to permit both the Borrower and IFAD to jointly or 
separately  inspect  their  accounts  and  records  relating  to  the  performance  of  the 
contract  and  to  have  them  audited  by  auditors  appointed  by  the  Borrower  and/or 
IFAD. 
279. 
280. 
All staff involved in the procurement process has a duty to report to the Project Director and 
IFAD  (i.e. through its Country  Director/ Program Manager) of any suspected instances  of 
prohibitive practices when identified.  
In the case of collusive behavior, if the evidence suggests that all or some of the bidders or 
consultants are  involved, the evidence  should  be reviewed by the Project Director, and if 
necessary, the procurement process is cancelled and all of the involved firms or individuals 
are sanctioned which could be up to the debarment. If the procurement is still in process, 
then the procurement must be cancelled and reinitiated only after the matters have been 
addressed properly.  
Complaint Handling Mechanisms (CHM) 
281. 
282. 
283. 
284. 
285. 
286. 
287. 
288. 
There are three distinct types of complaints that are typically found in a Project; i.e., (a) 
complaints concerning bid protest from aggrieved contractors, suppliers, service providers 
and  consultants,  which  are  addressed  during  or  immediately  after  the  bid  process,  (b) 
performance disputes, which are governed by the General Conditions of Contract (GCC) and 
Special Conditions of Contract (SCC), and, (c) non procurement related complaints from any 
parties. 
A complaint is any notification regarding an alleged illegal or improper procurement action 
and/or  conduct  of  procurement  officials,  consultants,  and/or  sub-contractors  directly  or 
indirectly supporting a project or associated with its implementation, which the complainant 
believes is wrong, either under the law or on the grounds of unacceptable behavior.  
The  PMU  shall  ensure  the  confidentiality  of  any  complainant  and  shall  hold  harmless  any 
person reporting a complaint, oftentimes referred to as a “whistle blower”, with provisions 
to shield complainant(s) or public official(s) from retaliation when they provide information 
that they reasonably believe to be a violation of the provisions of the agreed procedures. 
All  procurement  related  complaints  shall  be  addressed  to  the  Vice  Chairman  &  Managing 
Director, MAVIM, to which the PMU shall respond within 7 business days. If PMU needs more 
time due to complex investigation related to the complaints, then it shall state so in writing 
to the complainants, but in any case a complaint shall be put into closure within 30 business 
days.   
The complainant need not be personally aggrieved or impacted, and may be acting merely 
in accordance with a sense of civic duty, such as an NGO or private citizen, in bringing an 
occurrence to the attention of project authorities. 
All complaints, whether notified by persons who feel personally aggrieved or acting out of a 
sense  of  civic  duty,  will  be  acknowledged  and  acted  upon  by  responsible  authorities  in 
accordance with the procedures specified in this section. 
Concerning bid protests, from time to time, with and without justification bidders, suppliers, 
contractors, service providers and consultants may choose to lodge a complaint concerning 
some aspect of the contract award process. In the event the contract has been awarded and 
a  contractual  relationship  exists  between  the  parties,  there  are  established  dispute 
mechanisms in the GCC that shall be followed, up to and including judicial review.  
A formal mechanism to satisfactorily respond to bid protest complaints must be followed, 
consistent with  this Manual  and  the  steps to  be followed by aggrieved bidders, suppliers, 
contractors  and  consultants  and  the  complaints  procedure  will  be  specified  in  the 
Bid/Request for Proposal documents. 
103 
289. 
Complaints may also be addressed directly to IFAD, to which IFAD will resolve the complaints 
within its service standard.  
Conflicts of Interest 
290. 
It  is  a  requirement  of  the  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  that  any  public  official  of  the 
Borrower/recipient involved in IFAD-funded procurement activity shall declare any personal 
interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed by others to affect, impartiality in 
any matter relevant to his duties (conflict of interest).  
291.  Upon being aware of such a situation of this nature arising or having the potential to arise, 
the  official(s)  concerned  should  immediately  recuse  themselves  from  any  aspect  of  the 
procurement process to avoid being placed in a position of conflict.   
292.  Where IFAD becomes aware of a situation where a conflict of interest may have existed but 
was not declared then this is sufficient grounds to declare mis-procurement in line with the 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
293.  Where there is doubt that a conflict of interest, or potential conflict of interest, may exist or 
arise, IFAD may be consulted for advice or guidance, however the general principle is that 
if it there is uncertainty then it is safer to recuse oneself from the process than to risk a 
negative perception of the process and mis-procurement being declared. 
294.  A firm/entity/individual participating in a procurement process under this project shall not 
have  a  conflict  of  interest.  Any  firm/entity/individuals  found  to  have  a  conflict  of  interest 
shall be ineligible for award of a contract. 
295.  A  conflict  of  interest  is  a  situation  in  which  a  party  has  interests  that  could  improperly 
influence  that  party’s  performance  of  official  duties  or  responsibilities,  contractual 
obligations,  or  compliance  with  applicable  laws  and  regulations,  and  that  such  conflict  of 
interest is not acceptable under the FABS Project. The Recipient will take appropriate actions 
to manage such conflicts of interest which may include rejecting a proposal for award if it 
determines that a conflict of interest has flawed the integrity of any procurement process.  
296.  A firm shall be considered to have a conflict of interest in a procurement process if:  
a)  such  firm  is  providing  goods,  works,  or  non-consulting  services  resulting  from  or  directly 
related  to  consulting  services  for  the  preparation  or  implementation  of  a  project  that  it 
provided or were provided by any affiliate that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, 
or is under common control with that firm.; or 
b)  such firm submits more than one bid, either individually or as a joint venture partner in another 
bid, except for permitted alternative bids. This will result in the disqualification of all bids in 
which the Bidder is involved; or 
c)  such  firm  (including  its  personnel)  has  a  close  business  or  family  relationship  with  a 
professional staff of the Recipient (or of the project implementing agency, or of a recipient of 
a part of the grant) who: (i) are directly or indirectly involved in the preparation of the bidding 
documents or specifications of the contract, and/or the bid evaluation process of such contract; 
or  (ii)  would  be  involved  in  the  implementation  or  supervision  of  such  contract  unless  the 
conflict stemming from such relationship has been resolved acceptable to IFAD throughout the 
procurement process and execution of the contract; or 
d)  such  firm  does  not  comply  with  any  other  conflict  of  interest  situation  as  specified  in  the 
Bidding Documents relevant to the specific procurement process. 
297. 
It is the duty of all project staff and any other public employee directly or indirectly involved 
with  the  procurement  process  and  particularly  the  preparation  of  bid  documents,  bid 
evaluation,  contract  negotiations,  contract  management  and  payments  to  avoid  any 
potential conflicts of interest. A conflict of interest arises when the individual has a direct or 
indirect relationship with a bidder, consultant, contractor, service provider or supplier.  
298. 
In  the  event  that  a  project  staff  or  a  member  of  the  procurement  committee  (PC)  or  an 
employee  who  is  directly  involved  with  the  procurement  process  feels  that  there  is  the 
104 
potential for a conflict of interest they shall declare it to the PC and remove themselves from 
the procurement process. 
Standard of Ethical Conduct 
299.  All project staff and consultants involved in procurement activities, shall observe the Code of 
Business Ethics as outlined below. 
300.  No individual shall use his/her authority or office for personal gain. Personal gain includes 
accepting  or  requesting  anything  of  material  value  from  bidders,  prospective  bidders  or 
suppliers for the individual, his or her spouse, parents, children or other close relatives, or 
for other persons from whom the individual might gain direct or indirect benefit of the gift. 
301. 
An individual shall seek to maintain and enhance the reputation of the Government by: 
a)  Maintaining the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all relationships both inside and 
outside the Entity in which he works. 
b)  Developing the highest standards of professional competence. 
c)  Using  funds  and  other  resources  for  which  he/she  is  responsible  to  provide  the  maximum 
benefit to the Government 
302. 
Conflict of interest - An individual shall declare any personal interest that may affect or might 
reasonably be deemed by others to affect impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties. 
303.  Disclosure  of  personal  relationships  –  an  individual  shall  declare  any  relationship  with  a 
bidder, supplier, contractor, service provider or consultant and shall take no part in either 
the decision making process or the implementation of any contract where such a relationship 
exists.  A  personal  relationship  is  defined  as  consanguinity  or  affinity  up  to  the  third  civil 
degree. 
304. 
305. 
306. 
Confidentiality and accuracy of information - An individual shall respect the confidentiality 
of information gained in the course of duty and shall not use such information for personal 
gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, supplier, contractor or consultant. 
Information  given  by  an  individual  in  the  course  of  their  duty  shall  be  true,  fair  and  not 
designed to mislead. 
Competition  -  All  bidders,  suppliers,  contractors  and  consultants  shall  be  treated  with 
fairness  and  impartiality,  and  avoid  any  business  arrangement  that  might  prevent  the 
effective operation of fair competition. 
Examples of Unethical Conduct 
307. 
The following are examples of the type of conduct prohibited by this Code of Ethics: 
a)  Revealing  confidential  or  “inside  information”  either  directly  or  indirectly  to  any  bidder  or 
prospective bidder; 
b)  Discussing a procurement with any bidder or prospective bidder outside the official rules and 
procedures for conducting procurements; 
c)  Favoring or discriminating against any bidder, prospective bidder or consultant in the Preparing 
of  technical  specifications,  terms  of  reference  or  standards  or  the  evaluation  of  bids  and 
proposals; 
d)  Destroying,  damaging,  hiding,  removing,  or  improperly  changing  any  formal  procurement 
document; 
e)  Accepting  or  requesting  money,  travel,  meals,  entertainment,  gifts,  favors,  discounts  or 
anything  of  material  value  from  bidders  or  prospective  bidders,  suppliers,  contractors  or 
consultants; 
f)  Discussing  or  accepting  future  employment  with  a  bidder  or  prospective  bidder,  suppliers, 
contractors or consultants; 
g)  Requesting any other person to violate the public procurement rules or procedures; 
105 
h)  Ignoring evidence that the Code of Ethics has been violated; and 
i) 
Ignoring illegal or unethical activity by bidders or prospective bidders, suppliers, contractors, 
service providers or consultants, including any offer of personal inducements or rewards or 
otherwise. 
Debriefing  
308. 
All bidders and consultants whose offers are unsuccessful have the right to request a de-
briefing from  the Project Manager,  however  no  debriefing will be delivered until after the 
contract has been signed. The debriefing will be limited to the content of the bidder’s bid or 
consultants’ proposal and in no way will cover the content of any other firms offer or provide 
any information on the details of such other than information in the public domain such as 
minutes of opening and the Summary of Evaluation. The reasons for this are four-fold:  
(a)  It increases the levels of transparency in the procurement process,  
(b)  It will provide essential guidance (especially to local firms) on the relative strengths 
and  weaknesses  in  their  offers.  Local  firms  will  be  able  to  take  the  opportunity  to 
strengthen their bids and proposals in the future leading to a more competitive local 
market. 
(c)  The more equitable potential bidders and consultants feel the process to be, the more 
likely they are to submit bids or pursue shortlisting again increasing the overall levels 
of competition. 
(d)  It will provide a benchmark for unsuccessful bidders and/or consultants, i.e. they will 
become aware of the quality and pricing levels required to win contract awards. 
309. 
The overall goal of this debriefing process is to improve the level and quality of competition. 
310.  When de-briefing bidders and consultants care should be taken to ensure that no commercial 
confidences are breached, i.e. it is acceptable to give an indication of where a bid or proposal 
was  weak  but  not  acceptable  to  disclose  details  of  other  bids  and  proposals  received. 
Debriefing’s should be requested in writing and may either be delivered in writing or in a 
meeting chaired by the Project Manager at the Project Manager’s option. If a meeting is held 
it must be documented and signed by both parties and a copy of the minutes of the meeting 
placed on the relevant contract file. 
311.  To  facilitate  the  de-briefing  process  simultaneously  to  the  notice  of  award  or  award  of 
contract  (services)  being  sent  to  the  successful  bidder  or  consultant,  all  un-successful 
bidders  and  consultants  will  be  sent  a  in  a  Notice  of  an  Awarded  Contract,  the  following 
details: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The name of each bidder or consultant submitting an offer 
Bid prices as read out at bid opening21 
In case of services, the technical points score of each consultant 
The name and evaluated price of each bid or proposal and in the case of services the 
financial score 
The  name  of  bidders  or  consultants  whose  bids  or  proposals  were  rejected  and  the 
grounds for the rejection 
Name of the winning bidder or consultant, the amount of the contact, the duration and 
final scope of the contract. 
Details of how to request a de-briefing from the Project. 
21 Except in Quality Based Selection of Services where only the highest ranked firm’s financial proposal is 
opened. 
106 
312. 
In case an unsuccessful bidder or consultant feels that it has valid  grounds for a complaint 
regarding the procurement process, it may lodge a complaint in accordance with the process 
outlined in the Bidding Document or Request for Proposals as the case may be. 
D.  Role of Lead Implementing Agency in Procurement 
313.  The ‘Lead Implementing Agency for Nav Tejaswini is MAVIM which has overall responsibility 
for the execution of the project and retains overall responsibility and accountability for the 
project  to  IFAD  and  the  Government.  In  respect  of  procurement,  MAVIM  would  be 
responsible for the entire procurement process, including but not limited to functions such 
as: 
a)  preparing procurement plans; 
b)  preparing  statements  of  requirements,  specifications,  terms  of  reference  and/or  bills  of 
quantities; 
c)  agreeing with IFAD on the procurement method or method of selection for each procurement 
activity;  
d)  undertaking pre-qualifications, advertising, management of expressions of interest and short-
listing; 
e)  preparing bid solicitation documents and draft contracts; 
f) 
issuing  bidding  documents,  responding  to  clarification  requests  and  overall  management  of 
the bidding process; 
g)  bid receipt, bid opening and bid evaluation; 
h)  evaluation reporting;  
i)  bid cancellation; 
j)  contract award and negotiation; 
k)  drafting contract documents and contract placement; 
l)  contract management; - draft of contract monitoring format is provided in Annex 1 
m)  invoicing and payment; 
n)  dispute resolution;  
o)  contract completion and assessment. 
E. 
Procurement methods 
314.  Procurement of goods, works and consultancy services under the project will be obtained using 
any one of the following selection methods: 
Goods  
a)  National Competitive Bidding 
b)  National Shopping 
c)  Direct Contracting 
Consultancy Services 
a.  Quality cum Cost Based Selection (QCBS) 
b.  Fixed Budget Selection (FBS) 
c.  Least Cost Selection (LCS) 
d.  Selection based on Consultants’ Qualification (CQS) 
107 
e.  Single Source Selection (SSS) 
f. 
Individual Consultants 
315. 
Each  of  these  selection  methods  involve  different  processes  like  preparation  of  bid 
documents, preparation of technical requirements, selection criteria and evaluation. These 
processes are described in the IFAD Procurement Handbook. MAVIM will develop a detailed 
Procurement Manual which will contain the processes, procedures and standard document 
templates adopting the provisions contained in the IFAD Procurement Handbook for the use 
of the project team. Procurement Manual, will be prior reviewed by IFAD.  
F. 
Project Procurement Plan 
316. 
317. 
318. 
319. 
It is a requirement of the IFAD Procurement Guidelines that at the outset of each project, 
the Borrower/recipient, in conjunction with IFAD, establishes a procurement plan covering 
the first 18-months of the project followed by 12 months successive plans synchronised with 
the Annual Work Plans and Budget during implementation.  
Planning is a critical part of the procurement process to enable objectives and priorities to 
be set, workloads to be estimated and resources allocated.  It enables the procuring entity 
to plan, organise, forecast and schedule its procurement activities and to identify potential 
areas for aggregation of needs.   
As far as possible, procurement planning should be integrated with financial planning of a 
project so that budgets and procurement needs are synchronised as far as is practical. 
Each procurement plan shall identify procedures which must be implemented by MAVIM to 
ensure  consistency  with  the  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines.  As  provided  in  appendix  I, 
paragraph  1  of  IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines,  IFAD  review  of  and  no  objection  to  the 
Borrower/Recipient’s procurement plans is compulsory and the first 18 months procurement 
plan  and  the  update  for  the  subsequent  12  months  procurement  plan  submitted  by  the 
Borrower/Recipient must include as a minimum (format provided in Annex 2):  
a.  A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period and name 
of the implementing agency responsible for the procurement; 
b.  The estimate value of each procurement activity; 
c.  The method of procurement to be adopted for each procurement activity and; 
d.  The method of review IFAD will undertake for each procurement activity indicating either post 
review or prior review.  
320. 
Any amendments to the Consolidated Procurement Plan shall be subject to the Fund’s no 
objection. 
Updating a plan 
321. 
As  already  stated  above,  the  initial  18-month  project  procurement  plan  is  required  to  be 
prepared at the outset of each project with successive 12 month procurement plans to follow 
during the course of implementation. 
322.  Once this initial plan receives a ‘no objection’ from IFAD the plan should form the basis of 
the procurement activity for the project.    
323. 
It is important however that procurement plans are not static documents.  They should be 
considered as ‘live’ documents and updated on a regular basis. Any major adjustments or 
amendments  should  be  done  promptly,  but  in  any  event,  plans  should  be  reviewed  and 
updated  at  least  annually  but  ideally  every  six  months.  Any  major  adjustment  or 
amendments would require IFAD no objection. 
G. 
Prior Review by IFAD 
324.  In accordance with the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, the following will be subject to 
prior review by IFAD: 
108 
325.  Award of any contract for goods and equipment to cost USD 100 000 or equivalent or more. 
The following will be reviewed: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Prequalification documents and shortlist when prequalification is undertaken; 
Bid Documents for goods and works; 
Evaluation Reports and Recommendations for Award; and 
Draft contracts and subsequent amendments. 
326.  Award of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost USD 50 000 or equivalent or 
more. The following will be reviewed: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
and 
Prequalification documents and shortlist when prequalification is undertaken; 
Request for Proposal (RFP); 
Technical Evaluation Report; 
Combined (technical and financial) evaluation  report and the recommendation for award; 
e. 
The minutes of Negotiation, draft contracts and subsequent amendments. 
327. 
All direct contracts above the prescribed procurement method thresholds (indicated in the 
Letter to the Borrower issued by IFAD) shall be undertaken in accordance with the provisions 
of IFAD Procurement Guidelines for direct contracting and single source selection and subject 
to  IFAD  prior  review.  All  the  single  source  selection  of  consultancy  services 
(national/international  organizations/UN  agencies)  would  require  a  detailed  proposal 
including budget and deliverables, which will be evaluated by the project and submitted to 
IFAD’s prior review before entering into the contract. 
328. 
In  addition  to  prior  review  threshold  of  consultancy  services  (ii)  above,  the  first  two 
procurement  actions  of  consultancy  services,  irrespective  of  the  selection  methods,  in  a 
programme year, will also subject to IFAD prior review. 
IFAD Prior Review Portal – NOTUS 
329. 
IFAD has introduced a new system to manage ‘No Objections’ for project procurement and 
non-procurement related activities requiring prior review. The system, known as NOTUS (No 
Objection  Tracking  Utility  System),  has  been  rolled  out  across  IFAD-financed 
projects/programmes.  
330.  NOTUS  is  a  user-friendly  tool  that  will  systematize  the  submission,  monitoring,  review, 
commenting, and archiving of documents sent by projects to IFAD for ‘No Objection’. It will 
significantly mitigate risks (e.g. data loss) from use of different and often manual methods 
of document naming, versioning, submission and archiving, as well as streamline the no-
objection process. Ultimately, NOTUS will ensure better organization and efficiency in these 
processes,  and  in  turn  help  project  implementing  agencies  and  IFAD  realize  important 
productivity gains. 
331.  All actions, which require IFAD prior review, will only be uploaded in NOTUS portal by the 
project  team.  PMU  will  nominate  3-4  staff  members  to  IFAD  for  providing  access  to  the 
portal. This access requires a two factor authentication. Only the staff members who have 
been granted access will be able to upload the documents/comments/replies. PMU will inform 
IFAD about the changes in the nominations forthwith during implementation 
H.  
Contract Management 
332.  Good  contract  management  is  necessary  for  all  contracts  therefore  the  guidelines  below 
applies  equally  to  goods,  consulting  and  non-consulting  services.  Effective  contract 
administration is critical to successful contract implementation and meeting the objectives 
of the procurement requirement. Contract administration procedures are designed to ensure 
that: 
i. 
the  supplier  performs  the  contract  in  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions 
specified in the contract;  
109 
ii. 
iii. 
the procuring entity fulfils its obligations and duties under the contract; and 
swift remedial or preventative action is taken when problems arise or are foreseen. 
333. 
The procuring entity has the overall responsibility for contract management, but will draw 
on other resources, such as technical expertise, payment services, legal services and supply 
management systems, as required. Where such other services and systems are used, the 
procuring entity will remain responsible for monitoring their performance and ensuring that 
their activities, in relation  to the contract,  are  completed on time and in accordance  with 
procurement rules. Day-to-day contract management/administration will often be assigned 
to an end user or technical expert.  
Contract management responsibility 
334.  The procuring entity will always retain overall responsibility for contract management but not 
necessarily the day-to-day functional activity which can often be undertaken from outside 
the  procuring  entity  if  deemed  to  be  appropriate.  For  example,  the  procuring  entity  will 
normally retain control of contract amendments, payments and dispute resolution, but may 
allocate day-to-day liaison with the supplier, contractor or consultant to the end user. 
335.  When considering the  most appropriate person  or  team to manage/administer the contract 
the procuring entity should take into account:  
a)  whether supervision needs to be conducted by a person with appropriate technical skills, 
such as for construction contracts or the installation of complex plant and machinery. If 
so, contract administration is best allocated to the end user or an external consultant; 
b)  where  contract  administration  is  likely  to  be  time-consuming  or  require  skills  not 
available  within  the  procuring  entity,  an  external  contract  administrator  should  be 
appointed, such as a project manager for a major construction contract; 
c)  where goods are to be delivered directly to the end user, contract administration is best 
allocated to either the end user or procurement staff; 
d)  where a consultant is required to work with the end user in conducting a study, providing 
advice or building capacity, contract administration is best allocated to the end user and 
particular counterpart staff may need to be designated to work with the consultant. 
336.  Where services are provided in support of the general management or administration of the 
procuring entity, contract administration is best allocated to the member of staff responsible 
for that function. The nominated Contracts Manager or Contracts Management Team should:  
a.  carry out a review of the contract to assimilate the details of the requirements 
and the program for fulfilling them; 
b.  ensure  that  a  signed  copy  of  the  contract  is  received  from  the  supplier, 
contractor or consultant;  
c.  ensure that any required performance security or advance payment security is 
received from the supplier, contractor or consultant; 
d.  ensure  that  the  procuring  entity  meets  any  immediate  obligations,  such  as 
advance payment; 
e. 
for  larger  contracts,  prepare  a  contract  implementation  plan,  showing  key 
milestones,  such  as  dates  for  mobilisation,  deliveries  or  completion  of  certain 
deliverables or sections of work, and the procuring entity’s obligations, such as 
providing access to a works site, payment or approval of reports. 
337. 
The contract implementation plan is a key management tool to ensuring that the contract is 
performed as intended and within the obligations undertaken in the contract by both parties.  
It enables the Contract Manager to formulate an expediting plan for the contract to proactively 
ensure that deliverables are received on time. 
Monitor implementation of contracts 
338. 
The  task  of  contract  monitoring  is  to  ensure  that  both  parties  to  the  contract  perform  in 
accordance  with  that  contract  and  to  take  action  as  required  to  address  any  problems  or 
delays, whether actual or anticipated. 
110 
339. 
For goods contracts ensuring that goods are delivered on time, that the goods are acceptable 
to the procuring entity, in terms of quantity, quality and supporting documentation, and that 
the procuring entity meets its obligations to pay for the goods delivered. 
340.  When managing services contracts, the focus is on ensuring that services are delivered on 
time and to an acceptable quality. This can be difficult, as the quality of services, particularly 
consultancy services, can be subjective and difficult to measure. A good working relationship 
with  the  consultant  and  ongoing  monitoring  of  services  is  therefore  important,  to  ensure 
successful  contract  performance.    The  procuring  entity  must  also  ensure  that  it  meets  its 
obligations,  particularly  where  the  performance  of  consultancy  services  is  dependent  on 
certain inputs or information from the procuring entity or where staff must be made available 
to benefit from capacity building initiatives. 
Documents/Records Required: 
341. 
All correspondence and documentation relating to contract administration must be kept on 
the procurement file. In particular, records are required of: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
all invoices and other payment documents; 
all documentation relating to contract performance, such as delivery notes, progress reports 
and other deliverables; 
all contract variations; 
all contract amendments; 
all documents relating to claims under the contract, including warranty claims; 
all documents relating to contract disputes and dispute resolution.  
12. PROJECT COSTS AND FINANCING 
342.  Project financing strategy: The following Table 8 summaries the financing strategy 
of the project where banks/financial institutions are the main co-financiers of the 
project followed by convergence schemes. The project will be leveraging funds via 
MAVIM. See COSTAB for detail. 
Table 10: Summary of project finances 
Financing Sources 
1 
2 
IFAD loan  
IFAD grant 
3  MAVIM/GoM (in kind) 
4  MAVIM/GoM Taxes 
5  Converges  
6  Banks/financial institutions 
7  Beneficiaries 
8  Enterprises (private sector) 
9  Total 
Amount 
million  
in  USD  – 
% of total project cost 
50.00 
1.40 
33.08 
4.71 
66.99 
250.84 
4.95 
9.90 
421.87 
11.85 
0.31 
7.84 
1.11 
15.88 
59.47 
1.17 
2.35 
100 
111 
Attachment 1  - DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF SUB-PROJECTS 
Background 
Nav Tejaswini shall be focussing on assisting women to setup and manage their own farm or off / 
non-farm  micro-enterprises.  These  women  are  already  engaged  in  some  or  the  other  form  of 
livelihood  /  income  generating  activity,  but  to  graduate  them  to  the  level  of  a  micro-enterprise 
requires handholding. 
Nav Tejaswini intends to identify and support suitable value chains along which these women can 
set up their micro-enterprises and earn a decent income from. This activity shall be done as a part 
of ‘sub-projects’ which shall be proposed and executed by one or more CMRCs with the support of 
professional experts. 
The objective of these sub-projects shall be to streamline specific value chains and enable the women 
micro-entrepreneurs to participate in the same. These sub-projects shall focus on developing the 
capacities of these women as well as setting up common infrastructure where required. 
The design mission has identified some 25 types of sub-projects in the farm sector and another 10 
in the off / non-farm sector. However, these projects are only indicative, and Nav Tejaswini (with 
CMRCs) is expected to identify other potential opportunities which can facilitate the development of 
more women micro-entrepreneurs. 
Process of Sub-Project Identification & Implementation 
•Survey - Production / 
Identification
Market
•CMRC selection
Feasibility
•Approval for Feasibility Study
•Expert Selection
•Feasibility Study
Approval
•Approval for Sub-Project
•TA / Consultant Selection
•Team Recruitment
•Transfer of Funds
Implementation
•Beneficiary Selection
•Capacity, Infrastructure & 
Systems Development
•Partnership Development
•Activities Roll-out
Closure
•Impact 
Assessment
•Asset 
Handover
•Post-Project 
Support
112 
S. 
No. 
Stage 
Activity 
Responsibility 
1 
Identification 
Survey – Production / Market 
Identify  value  chain  based  on  production  in 
member network or market demand 
Production – CMRC 
Market - MAVIM 
CMRC Selection 
Identify CMRC with the potential to engage in 
the selected value chain 
MAVIM 
Approval for Feasibility Study 
MAVIM Committee 
2 
Feasibility 
Define  TOR  and  select  Expert  to  conduct 
Feasibility Study 
MAVIM 
Expert Selection 
3 
Approval 
4 
Implementation 
Feasibility Study 
Conduct  Value  Chain  analysis, 
potential Markets, and design Roll-out Plan 
identify 
Expert 
Sub-Project Approval 
Define  Targets,  Timeline,  Impact  Metrics, 
Activities & Budget including Convergence 
MAVIM Committee 
TA / Consultant Selection 
Define TOR and select TA / Consultant 
Team Recruitment 
Define TOR and select implementation team 
Transfer of Funds 
Transfer funds from MAVIM to CMRC(s) 
Beneficiary Selection 
Identify beneficiaries and conduct baseline 
MAVIM 
CMRC 
MAVIM 
CMRC 
Capacity, 
Development 
Infrastructure 
& 
Systems 
Train beneficiaries, set up infrastructure, and 
design systems for micro-enterprises 
TA / Consultant 
Partnership Development 
Identify  and  on-board  relevant  partners 
especially markets (with alternatives) 
TA / Consultant 
Activities Roll-out 
Implement  sub-project  activities  as  per  the 
timelines and implementation plan 
TA / Consultant + CMRC 
Impact Assessment 
Conduct  post-project  survey  and  assess 
impact  across  the  value  chain  especially  on 
micro-entrepreneurs 
/  Consultant  + 
TA 
MAVIM 
5 
Closure 
Design & execute post-project asset handover 
plan 
CMRC 
Asset Handover 
Post-Project Support 
Identify post-project support requirements for 
micro-entrepreneurs  including  convergence 
and set up relevant systems 
MAVIM  +  Relevant  Line 
Department 
113 
Structure of MAVIM Committees 
Feasibility Study Sanctioning Committee 
Role:  Responsible  for  identification  of  high  potential  value  chains  for  micro-enterprise 
development and sanctioning feasibility studies to further analyse those value chains 
Composition:  General  Manager  (Program)  +  Manager  (Business  Development)  + 
Managers (projects Implementation/Monitoring)  
Sub-Project Approval Committee 
Role:  Responsible  for  analysing  feasibility  reports  on  value  chains,  identifying  TA  / 
Consultant for supporting sub-projects, and sanctioning of sub-projects 
Composition:  Managing  Director  +  General  Manager  (Program)  +  Manager  (Business 
Development) + Expert from Relevant Line Department 
Components of Feasibility Study 
The Feasibility Study should include the following aspects: 
  Beneficiary Identification 
o  Profile & number of current producers in the target sub-project area 
o  Potential to increase number of beneficiaries over time 
o  Expected incremental income of beneficiaries post sub-project 
  Value Chain Analysis 
o 
List of Stakeholders in the entire Value Chain 
o  Requirements & constraints analysis of each Stakeholder 
o  Opportunities to remove stakeholders or add value; List of potential micro-enterprises 
o  Current marketing strategy of sub-project beneficiaries 
  Market Size 
o 
List of all products / services generated in the value chain 
o  Overall Maharashtra, India and International market size 
o 
List of potential customers / markets, and competitors 
 
Production 
o  Current raw material production amongst all members 
o  Opportunity to improve productivity / quality of raw material 
o  Design of value addition infrastructure / facilities / systems 
  Support System 
o 
List of govt. schemes to support enterprise development in value chain including capacity 
development & financial products 
o  Existing infrastructure / facilities to add value in the target area 
Terms of Reference 
Expert for Feasibility Study 
Prior Experience: 10 years of experience in business planning; 5 years of experience in the selected 
value chain; Prior experience of conducting landscape analysis and developing feasibility reports 
Responsibility:  Analysing  the  feasibility  of  developing  a  selected  value  chain  for  micro-enterprise 
promotion; All components as described above to be included 
114 
TA / Consultant for Sub-Project Implementation 
Prior  Experience:  10  years  of  experience  in  the  selected  value  chain;  Prior  consulting  /  project 
management experience is beneficial 
Responsibility: Guide the CMRCs on project execution; Identify potential markets & onboard buyers; 
Identify & avail relevant govt. subsidies & convergence; Design standard operating procedures and 
information flow protocols 
Team for Sub-Project Implementation 
Prior Experience: Graduate with 2 years of Sales / Business Dev experience 
Responsibility: Overall implementation of the sanctioned sub-project 
Criteria for Buyer Partnership 
Due Diligence 
It following steps are recommended to be undertaken before MAVIM / CMRC agree any contract with 
a potential buyer: 
 
Presentation by buyer to MAVIM and CMRC representative on past performance and future plans 
  KYC documents of the buyer like: a) incorporation certificate, b) PAN Card copy, c) Bank account 
details, and d) audited annual financial statements (preferably for the last three years); Most 
documents are also available on the Ministry of Corporate Affairs website 
  Analysis  of  buyer’s  audited  financial  statements  by  a  specialist  and  comparison  with  the 
presentation made to MAVIM and CMRC 
Agreement 
A formal agreement should be put into force whenever MAVIM / CMRC plan to work with a potential 
buyer. The agreement should capture the following: 
  Specify quality and quantity of products / services to be delivered by MAVIM / CMRC to buyer 
  Define payment process, terms and penalties 
 
Include a contingency plan in case of environmental disasters or market failures 
  Build a guarantee mechanism to ensure buyers fulfil their obligations 
Reporting Formats 
The CMRCs shall send regular updates on the status of the sub-projects to MAVIM DCOs. The MIS 
which  shall  be  developed  as  a  part  of  Nav  Tejaswini  shall  assist  the  CMRCs  in  preparing  and 
managing these updated. Some of the reports which shall be required are as follows: 
  Names and profiles of beneficiaries; Pre-subproject status of beneficiaries 
 
 
 
List of trainings / interactions, no. of participants / beneficiaries, and next steps agreed 
List of assets procured, capacity utilization, no. of beneficiaries, benefits accrued per beneficiary 
Increase in beneficiary incomes including data on productivity, quality, cost of production, price 
realization, etc. 
  No. of new jobs created 
 
Funds utilization and progress status as per agreed timelines 
115 
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE - DAIRY SUB-PROJECT 
Identification 
Survey - Production / Market 
 
Total dairy processing capacity in the state by region 
  Current capacity utilization of each processor 
CMRC selection 
 
Total milk production in the state by the CMRC 
  Select CMRCs with sizeable milk production / scope for increased production 
Feasibility 
Approval for Feasibility Study 
 
Feasibility study approved by internal MAVIM committee 
Expert Selection 
  Design TOR and call for EOI 
  Seek Dept. of Animal Husbandry to shortlist prospective experts 
 
Interview applicants and finalize 
Feasibility Study 
  Survey markets for milk purchase 
  Survey target CMRCs 
  Analyse milk value chain, and identify constraints 
  Submit report based on desired format 
Approval 
Approval for Sub-Project 
 
Present feasibility report in Sanctioning Committee meeting with a special invitee from the Dept. 
of Animal Husbandry 
 
Finalize targets and TOR for TA / Consultant 
  Approve sub-project for implementation 
TA / Consultant Selection 
  Design TOR and call for EOI especially from experts like NDDB 
  Seek Dept. of Animal Husbandry to shortlist prospective experts 
 
Interview applicants and finalize 
Team Recruitment 
  Design TOR and organize recruitment drive 
  Select and appoint appropriate team to lead the sub-project implementation 
Transfer of Funds 
  Agree on milestone-based release of funds with the CMRC, TA / Consultant and Team 
116 
  Release funds as per agreed schedule 
Implementation 
Beneficiary Selection 
 
 
Identify high potential villages within the CMRC network 
Identify members already engaged in or interested in taking up dairy farming 
Capacity, Infrastructure & Systems Development 
 
 
Identify existing bulk milk coolers, milk routes, etc. 
Link up interested farmers with existing collection centres 
  Set up Village Level Collection centres in collaboration with buyer 
  Redesign or set up milk routes to procure, and bulk coolers to chill 
Partnership Development 
 
 
 
Identify potential buyers and onboard 
Tie up with insurance  companies, veterinary service  providers, govt. schemes, etc. to enable 
value chain development 
Tie up with existing village-level collection centres, bulk milk coolers, transporters, etc. 
Activities Roll-out 
 
 
 
Train farmers on good agricultural practices 
Ensure proper operations of collection centres, transporters, bulk coolers, etc. 
Ensure access to proper services to dairy farmers 
Closure 
Impact Assessment 
  Determine impact on incomes of associated farmers pre and post sub-project 
 
Identify micro-enterprises like village  level collection centres,  transporters, bulk milk coolers, 
para-vets, etc. generated due to the sub-project 
  Determine increase in cattle population, productivity improvement, reduced mortality, etc. 
Asset Handover 
 
 
Ensure ownership and management of all assets is clearly defined 
Enable CMRCs to intervene in case assets have been created as a part of the sub-project but 
are not being utilized properly 
Post-Project Support 
 
 
Link  up  Dept.  of  Animal  Husbandry,  para-vets  cadre  and  insurance  company  to  provide  a 
package of services to dairy farmers 
Ensure  availability  of  high-quality  feed  &  fodder  by  promoting  micro-entrepreneurs  for  those 
businesses 
  Organize regular cattle health camps with the support of partner buyers 
117 
Attachment 2: VC profiles 
1. PADDY 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
80,000 (25 sub-projects of 3,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Bhandara, Chandrapur, Gadchiroli, Gondia, Kolhapur, Raigad, Ratnagiri, 
Sindhudurg 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
Paddy Trading 
 
  Rice 
  Rice Flour 
 
Processed / Packaged Foods 
Local Markets 
  Government’s PDS / FCI 
  Government’s Mid-Day Meal / ICDS programmes 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
Institutional Buyers like Rice Mills, Traders, etc. 
 
E-Commerce 
Shift to higher value varieties (coloured / aromatic) 
Improve productivity 
 
 
  Reduce cost of cultivation / water usage 
 
 
Convert Paddy to Rice -> Rice to Rice Flour / Other Value Added Products 
Improve packaging 
 
 
 
 
Climate change especially due to high water consumption 
Lack of institutional market for high quality rice 
Lack of grading and packaging facilities 
Test coloured / aromatic varieties in collaboration with potential markets, 
and promote over time 
STRATEGY 
new capacity where not available) 
  Add value by converting paddy to rice (use existing milling capacity / set up 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
  Grade produce and link with appropriate markets 
 
 
Improve packaging design and quality 
Explore e-commerce and inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-NRRI, ICRISAT, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Govt. (WCD / PDS), Rice Mills / Traders, Local, e-Commerce, MAVIM 
members 
Processing: Local Millers, CFTRI, Manufacturers in Rajkot / Ambala 
 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify Local Miller for Processing / Set up Processing Capacity 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
118 
2. SOYBEAN 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
70,000 (25 sub-projects with 3,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Buldhana, Hingoli, Jalana, Latur, Osmanabad, Wardha, Washim, Yavatmal 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
 
 
Soybean Trading 
Institutional Buyers like Oil Processors / Traders 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Shift to better quality, high yielding varieties 
 
  GAP / Sustainability certification 
  Organic production 
  Reduce cost of cultivation 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
 
 
 
 
Climate change and higher instances of pest attack 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
Limited opportunities for post-harvest value addition 
Test high oil / protein varieties in collaboration with potential markets, and 
promote over time 
  Grade produce and link with appropriate markets 
Technical Support: ICAR-IISR, State Universities, RTRS, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Traders 
 
Processing: Local Soy Millers 
 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
  Guide CMRCs on improved production practices 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
119 
3. MAIZE 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
20,000 (6 sub-projects with 3,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Aurangabad, Nandurbar, Sangli 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
  Maize Trading 
 
Corn Flour 
 
Processed / Packaged Food 
 
Cattle / Poultry Feed Manufacturing 
Local Markets 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
Institutional Buyers like Corn Processors, Traders, etc. 
 
 
 
Shift to better quality, high-yielding varieties 
Improved post-harvest practices to control aflatoxin 
Convert to Feed, Flour or other value added products 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Climate change and higher instances of pest attack especially FAW 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
 
 
  Management of aflatoxin post-harvest 
Test higher yielding varieties, and promote over time 
Ensure aflatoxin free maize by improving post-harvest practices 
 
 
  Add value by converting to corn flour, cattle / chicken feed 
 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-IIMR, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Traders, Local, Feed Manufacturers, e-Commerce, MAVIM members 
 
Processing: Local Flour Mills, CFTRI, Manufacturers in Rajkot / Ambala 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify Local Flour Mill for Processing / Set up Processing Capacity 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
120 
4. COTTON 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
45,000 (15 sub-projects with 3,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Amravati, Aurangabad, Buldhana, Chandrapur, Dhule, Jalana, Wardha, Yavatmal 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Organic / BCI cotton 
  Raw Cotton Trading 
 
 
 
 
Cotton Fibre & Seed Trading 
Yarn 
Fabric 
Textile 
Local Markets 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
 
Institutional Buyers like Traders, Ginners, Spinners, Mill, Brands, etc. 
E-Commerce 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
  Organic / BCI certified 
 
  Ginning, Spinning and Fabric Manufacturing 
Improved variety (colour & length) 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
 
 
 
Climate change and higher instances of pest attack 
Limited opportunities for post-harvest value addition 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
Test higher length varieties with controlled use of pesticides 
 
  Add value by ginning raw cotton to fibre & seed (use existing ginning 
capacity / set up new capacity where not available) 
  Grade produce and link with appropriate markets 
 
 
Explore yarn / fabric manufacturing 
Explore e-commerce and inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-CICR, Agri Universities, etc. 
Certification Agencies: BCI, Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
 
 
  Buyers: Traders, Ginners, MAVIM weavers, etc. 
 
Processing: Local gins 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner including certification agency 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
 
Link with other CMRCs requiring cotton fibre / yarn / fabric especially for 
bag-making 
Identify Local Ginner for Processing / Set up Ginning Unit 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
121 
5. PULSES 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
60,000 (20 sub-projects of 3,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Akola, Amravati, Beed, Buldhana, Chandrapur, Hingoli, Osmanabad, Sangli, 
Wardha, Washim, Yavatmal 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
Pulses Trading 
 
  Dal Trading 
 
Flour 
 
Processed / Packaged Food 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
Local Markets 
  Government’s Mid-Day Meal / ICDS programmes 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
 
Institutional Buyers like Dal Mills, Traders, etc. 
E-Commerce 
Shift to shorter duration, better quality, higher yielding variety 
 
  GAP certified 
 
 
 
Convert to Dal / Processed Foods 
Standardisation of quality and grading 
Improved packaging & branding 
 
 
 
Climate change and higher instances of pest attack 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
Test higher yielding / shorter duration, better quality varieties and promote 
over time 
  Add value by converting to dal (use existing milling capacity / set up new 
STRATEGY 
capacity where not available) 
  Grade produce and link with appropriate markets 
 
 
Improve packaging design and quality 
Explore e-commerce and inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-IIPR, ICRISAT, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Govt. (WCD / PDS), Dal Mills / Traders, Local, e-Commerce, MAVIM 
members 
Processing: Local Millers, CFTRI, Manufacturers in Rajkot / Ambala 
 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify Local Miller for Processing / Set up Processing Capacity 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
122 
6. MILLETS 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
20,000 (8 sub-projects of 2,500 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Hingoli, Jalana, Nandurbar, Pune, Solapur, Ratnagiri 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Millets Trading 
 
 
Flour 
Processed / Packaged Food 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Local Markets 
  Government’s Mid-Day Meal / ICDS programmes 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
  Health Food Companies / Startups 
 
E-Commerce 
Shift to better quality, higher yielding varieties 
 
  GAP certified 
 
 
  Manufacture Feed 
Premium market coming up due to status as health food 
Convert to Flour / Processed Food 
CHALLENGES 
 
 
Limited market due to change in food habits 
Test higher yielding / shorter duration, better quality varieties and promote 
over time 
STRATEGY 
  Grade produce and link with appropriate markets 
  Add value by converting to flour (use existing milling capacity / set up new 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
capacity where not available), or packaged foods 
Improve packaging design and quality 
Explore e-commerce and inter-CMRC market linkages 
 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-IIMR, ICRISAT, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Govt. (WCD / PDS), Traders, Local, e-Commerce, MAVIM members 
 
Processing: Local Flour Mills, CFTRI, Manufacturers in Rajkot / Ambala 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify Local Flour Mill / Set up flour mill 
 
  Develop and produce packaged foods 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
123 
7. WHEAT 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
10,000 (3 sub-projects of 3,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Ahmednagar, Jalana 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Wheat Trading 
 
 
Flour 
Processed / Packaged Food 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
Local Markets 
  Government’s PDS / FCI (if prices are below MSP) 
  Government’s Mid-Day Meal / ICDS programmes 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
Institutional Buyers like Flour Mills, Traders, etc. 
 
E-Commerce 
Shift to better quality, higher yielding varieties 
 
  GAP certified 
 
Convert to Flour / Processed Food 
 
 
Competition from cheaper wheat available from other regions 
Test higher yielding / shorter duration, better quality varieties and promote 
over time 
STRATEGY 
  Grade produce and link with appropriate markets 
  Add value by converting to flour (use existing milling capacity / set up new 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
capacity where not available), or packaged foods 
Improve packaging design and quality 
Explore e-commerce and inter-CMRC market linkages 
 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-IIWBR, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Govt. (WCD / PDS), Traders, Local, e-Commerce, MAVIM members 
 
Processing: Local Flour Mills, CFTRI, Manufacturers in Rajkot / Ambala 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify Local Flour Mill / Set up flour mill 
 
  Develop and produce packaged foods 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
124 
8. SPICES 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
5,000 (5 sub-projects of 1,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Hingoli, Sangli, Wardha, Washim 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Spices Trading 
 
  Organic / EU-MRL compliant 
 
Processing 
Local Markets 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
Institutional Buyers like Spice Processors, Traders, etc. 
 
E-Commerce 
Shift to better quality, higher yield varieties 
 
  GAP certified 
 
 
Convert to masala 
Standardise quality and improve packaging 
CHALLENGES 
 
 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
Competition from cheaper spices available from other regions 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Test higher yielding varieties & better agricultural practices 
Introduce organic / EU-MRL compliant production 
 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading, and processing 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets 
Explore e-commerce and inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-NRCSS & IISR, SSI, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Traders, Local retail & institutional, e-Commerce, MAVIM members 
 
 
Processing: Local Units, CFTRI, Manufacturers in Rajkot / Ambala 
Certification: APEDA empanelled agencies 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify Local processor / set up processing unit 
 
  Develop masala mixes 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
125 
9. GROUNDNUT 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
10,000 (4 sub-projects of 2,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Kolhapur, Sangli, Satara, Solapur 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Groundnut Trading 
  Deshelling 
  Oil Extraction 
 
Cattle Feed Manufacturing 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Local Markets 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
 
Institutional Buyers like Oil Mills, Traders, etc. 
E-Commerce 
Shift to better quality, higher yield varieties 
 
  GAP certified 
 
  Oil extraction and cattle feed manufacturing 
Improve post-harvest practices to control aflatoxin 
CHALLENGES 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
 
  Management of aflatoxin post-harvest 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Test higher yielding varieties, and promote over time 
Ensure aflatoxin free groundnut by improving post-harvest practices 
 
 
  Grade produce and link with appropriate markets 
  Add value by converting to oil, snacks / packaged foods, cattle feed, etc. 
 
 
Improve packaging design and quality 
Explore e-commerce and inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-DGR, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Govt. (WCD), Traders, Local, e-Commerce, MAVIM members 
 
Processing: Local Oil Mills, CFTRI, Manufacturers in Rajkot / Ambala 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify Local Oil Mill / Set up oil mill 
Set up feed manufacturing unit / Feed distribution set up 
 
 
  Develop and produce oils & packaged foods 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce including aflatoxin compliance 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
126 
10. ONION 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
10,000 (8 sub-projects of 1,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Ahmednagar, Dhule, Nashik, Osmanabad, Pune, Satara, Solapur 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
  Onion Trading 
  GAP Certified Onion 
  Dried Onions 
 
Processed / Packaged Food 
 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers & Food Processors 
E-Commerce 
Shift to better quality, high-yielding varieties 
 
  GAP Certified 
 
Convert to dried flakes / processed foods 
Increased input costs 
Limited opportunities for post-harvest value addition 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
 
 
 
 
Test higher yielding / strategically suitable varieties & better agricultural 
practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading, and processing 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-DOGR, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
  Value-Addition: Local warehouses, Driers 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
 
Identify warehouse / sorting & grading unit / drying unit, or set up required 
infrastructure 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
127 
11. POTATO 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
2,000 (2 sub-projects of 1,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Pune, Satara 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
 
Potato Trading 
  GAP Certified Potato 
 
Processed / Packaged Food 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
Local Markets 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Wafer Manufacturers, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Shift to better quality, higher-yielding varieties 
 
  GAP certification 
  Dried chips / Processed foods 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Increased input costs 
Limited opportunities for post-harvest value addition 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
 
 
 
 
Test higher yielding / strategically suitable varieties & better agricultural 
practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading, and processing 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore e-commerce & inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-CPRI, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
  Value Addition: Cold Storages, Processors 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner including certification agency 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
 
Identify cold storage / sorting & grading unit / processing unit, or set up 
required infrastructure 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
128 
12.TOMATO 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
5,000 (3 sub-projects of 1,500 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Dhule, Nashik, Pune 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
 
Tomato Trading 
  GAP Certified Tomato 
 
 
Tomato Pulp 
Processed / Packaged Food 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Pulp Manufacturers, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Shift to better quality, higher-yielding varieties 
 
  GAP certification 
 
 
Ensure year-round production 
Pulp / Process inferior quality 
Climate change 
Increased input costs especially due to pest attacks 
Limited low-cost opportunities for post-harvest value addition 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
 
 
 
 
 
Test higher yielding / strategically suitable varieties & better agricultural 
practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading, and processing 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-IIVR, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
Certification Agencies: Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
 
Processing: Pulping units 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner including certification agency 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres / pulping unit, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver, with focus 
on coordinated, year-round production 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
 
129 
13. OTHER VEGETABLES 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
5,000 (6 sub-projects of about 1,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Kolhapur, Sangli, Raigad, Nagpur, Dhule, Pune 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Vegetables Trading 
  GAP Certified Vegetables Trading 
  Dried Vegetables 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Pulp Manufacturers, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Shift to better quality, higher-yielding varieties 
 
  GAP certification 
 
Ensure year-round production 
 
 
 
 
Climate change 
Increased input costs especially due to pest attacks 
Limited low-cost opportunities for post-harvest value addition 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices at the time of harvest 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-IIVR, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
Certification Agencies: Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
 
Processing: Drying units 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner including certification agency 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver, with focus 
on coordinated, year-round production 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
 
130 
14. SUGARCANE 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
20,000 (7 sub-projects of 3,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Kolhapur, Sangli 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
 
 
 
Sugarcane Trading 
Jaggery Manufacturing 
Processed / Packaged Food 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
Local Markets 
 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers and Traders 
E-Commerce 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Shift to better quality, high-yielding varieties 
 
  GAP certification 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Climate change especially due to high water consumption 
 
  Delay in payments from sugar mills 
 
  High investment required during sowing 
Payment cycles are between 1 and 1.5 years 
 
 
 
 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production with certification 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
Technical Support: ICAR-IISR, Agri Universities, etc. 
Certification Agencies: Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
 
 
  Buyers: Sugar mills, Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
 
Processing: Jaggery units, Processed Food Units 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
 
 
 
 
Identify prospective cane buyers 
Introduce improved varieties and production practices to increase 
productivity 
Identify / set up jaggery manufacturing units 
Coordinate linkages with prospective buyers and ensure timely payments 
131 
15. MANGO 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
2,000 (2 sub-projects of 1,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Mango Trading 
  GAP Certified Mango Trading 
 
Pulp Manufacturing 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Nearby Urban Centres like Mumbai, Pune, etc. 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Exporters, Processors, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Shift to better practices including drip irrigation to increase yield 
 
  Develop new plantations on the UHDP model 
  GAP certification 
 
 
 
Improve packaging 
Collective marketing 
Pulp / Process inferior quality 
CHALLENGES 
Climate change and increased occurrence of extreme weather conditions 
 
  Unavailability of labour during harvest 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading, and processing 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-IIHR & CISH, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
Certification Agencies: Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
 
Processing: Pulping units 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identifying or set up pulping units 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
Coordinate with weather insurance providers 
Engage with certification & testing agencies 
132 
16. ORANGE 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
1,000 (2 sub-projects of 500 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Amravati, Nagpur 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Orange Trading 
  GAP Certified Oranges Trading 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Nearby Urban Centres like Mumbai, Pune, etc. 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Exporters, Processors, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Shift to better practices including drip irrigation to increase yield 
 
  Develop new plantations on the UHDP model 
  GAP certification 
 
 
 
Improve packaging 
Collective marketing 
Pulp / Process inferior quality 
Climate change and increased occurrence of extreme weather conditions 
 
  Unavailability of labour during harvest 
 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices 
  High instances of pest & disease attacks, and increase in input costs 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading, and processing 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-CCRI, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
Certification Agencies: Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
 
Processing: Pulping units 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identifying or set up pulping units 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
Coordinate with weather insurance providers 
Engage with certification & testing agencies 
133 
17. GRAPES 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
5,000 (2 sub-projects of 2,500 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Nashik, Sangli 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Grapes Trading 
  GAP Certified Grapes Trading 
  Raisins 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Nearby Urban Centres like Mumbai, Pune, etc. 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Exporters, Processors, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Shift to better practices including drip irrigation to increase yield 
 
  GAP certification 
 
 
 
Improve packaging 
Collective marketing 
Pulp / Process inferior quality 
Climate change and increased occurrence of extreme weather conditions 
 
  Unavailability of labour during harvest 
 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices 
  High instances of pest & disease attacks, and increase in input costs 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading, and processing 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-NRCG, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
Certification Agencies: Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
 
Processing: Drying units 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identifying or set up drying units 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
Coordinate with weather insurance providers 
Engage with certification & testing agencies 
134 
18. BANANA 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
1,000 (1 sub-project of 1,000 farmers) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Jalgaon 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Banana Trading 
  GAP Certified Banana Trading 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Nearby Urban Centres like Mumbai, Pune, etc. 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Exporters, Processors, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Shift to better quality, high-yielding varieties 
 
  GAP certification 
 
 
 
Improve packaging 
Collective marketing 
Process inferior quality 
Climate change and increased occurrence of extreme weather conditions 
 
  Unavailability of labour 
 
  High instances of pest & disease attacks, and increase in input costs 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages, and Govt. markets 
Technical Support: ICAR-NRCB, Agri Universities, etc. 
Certification Agencies: Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
 
 
  Buyers: Govt., Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver, and 
promote year-round production 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
Coordinate with weather insurance providers 
Engage with certification & testing agencies 
 
 
 
135 
19. POMEGRANATE 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
2,000 (3 sub-projects of 500 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Ahmednagar, Pune, Solapur 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
Pomegranate Trading 
 
  GAP Certified Pomegranate Trading 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Nearby Urban Centres like Mumbai, Pune, etc. 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Exporters, Processors, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Shift to better practices including drip irrigation to increase yield 
 
  Develop new plantations on the UHDP model 
  GAP certification 
 
 
 
Improve packaging 
Collective marketing 
Process inferior quality including drying 
Climate change and increased occurrence of extreme weather conditions 
 
  Unavailability of labour during harvest 
 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices 
  High instances of pest & disease attacks, and increase in input costs 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading, and processing 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-NRCP, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
Certification Agencies: Agencies empanelled by APEDA, etc.  
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
Identifying or set up processing units 
 
Estimate production 
 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
 
Coordinate with weather insurance providers 
 
Engage with certification & testing agencies 
136 
20. COCONUT 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
1,000 (2 sub-projects of 500 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
Copra 
 
  Mature Coconut 
 
Tender Coconut 
 
Coir 
 
Coconut Processing – Virgin Oil / Milk  
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Nearby Urban Centres like Goa, Mumbai, Pune, etc. 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Processors, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Shift to better practices including drip irrigation to increase yield 
 
  Use better saplings (dwarf / hybrid) for new plantations 
 
  Value addition through virgin coconut oil, other products 
Tender coconut marketing 
  Unavailability of labour to harvest 
 
Increased instances of pest & disease attacks, and challenges in managing 
due to height to plants 
 
 
 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
Focus on tender coconut production, and other value added products 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-CPCRI, CDB, Agri Universities, etc. 
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Restaurants, MAVIM members, etc. 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver, and 
promote year-round production 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
 
137 
21. CASHEW 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
2,000 (2 sub-projects of 1,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Raw Cashew Nut Trading 
 
 
Kernel Extraction 
Kernel Processing / Value Addition 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Nearby Urban Centres like Mumbai, Pune, etc. 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers like Retailers, Exporters, Processors, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Shift to better practices including drip irrigation to increase yield 
 
  Develop new plantations on the UHDP model 
  GAP certification 
 
 
 
Improve packaging 
Collective marketing 
Convert broken / inferior quality into processed food 
CHALLENGES 
 
 
Climate change and increased occurrence of extreme weather conditions 
Increased y-o-y variation in prices 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Test higher yielding & better agricultural practices 
 
  Add value by sorting & grading 
 
 
 
Link with appropriate markets especially retailers 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages 
Explore value addition to develop premium markets 
Technical Support: ICAR-DCR, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Processors, MAVIM members, etc. 
 
Processing: Processing units 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure 
 
  Aggregate and grade / standardize produce 
 
Identifying or set up processing units 
 
Estimate production 
 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver 
 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
 
Coordinate with weather insurance providers 
138 
22. DAIRY 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
40,000 (20 sub-projects of 2,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Gondia, Kolhapur, Sangli, Solapur 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
  Milk Trading 
  Organic / Safe Milk Trading 
  Bulk Milk Cooler 
  Milk Processing – Curd / Cottage Cheese / Khoa 
  Milk Packaging 
 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers in urban clusters 
Processors including Dairy Cooperatives 
  Organic / Safe milk production 
  Bulk collection 
  Bulk milk cooling 
  Basic processing including curd / khoa / paneer manufacturing 
 
Packaging for retail sales 
  Highly perishable commodity 
  High variation in prices over the last few months 
 
Limited residual value of cattle past its productive stage 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
 
Test higher yielding & better production practices including breed 
improvement, feeding technologies, etc. 
Introduce organic / Global GAP compliant production 
 
  Add value by streamlining production and logistics including better testing, 
 
 
bulk milk cooling, etc. 
Link with appropriate institutional markets like dairies 
Explore inter-CMRC market linkages for value added products like cottage 
cheese, etc. 
 
Technical Support: NDDB, ICAR-NDRI, Vet Universities, etc. 
  Buyers: Local, Dairies (generally coop), MAVIM members, etc. 
 
  Veterinary service provider 
Processing: BMC, Transporter 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
 
Identify collection centres, or set up required infrastructure with testing 
equipment 
  Aggregate and transport milk 
 
 
 
 
Identify or set up processing units especially bulk milk coolers 
Identify or set up feed manufacturing 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver with focus on 
consistent year-round supply 
Coordinate with cattle insurance providers 
Coordinate with ‘Safe Milk’ certification agencies 
 
 
139 
23. POULTRY 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
50,000 (15 sub-projects of 3,000 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Bhandara, Chandrapur, Dhule, Gadchiroli, Gondia, Nandurbar, Palghar, Raigad, 
Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg, Thane, Yavatmal 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
 
 
 
 
 
For Meat 
For Meat – By the variety / GAP Certified 
Eggs 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers in urban clusters 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Produce premium varieties 
Improve production practices to increase yields 
 
 
  GAP certification 
  Differentiated packing for country eggs 
 
Collective marketing 
CHALLENGES 
 
Threat of bird flu and other diseases 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Test premium varieties and improved production practices 
Ensure availability of good quality day-old chicks and feed 
Introduce antibiotic-free / GAP compliant production 
 
 
 
  Add value by streamlining production and logistics especially for layers 
 
Link with appropriate institutional markets 
 
Technical Support: ICAR-DPR, Agri Universities, etc. 
  Buyers: Traders, Processors, Local, MAVIM members, etc. 
  Hatchery 
 
  Veterinary service provider 
Transporter 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
  Aggregate and transport birds 
 
Identifying or set up hatchery 
 
Identify or set up feed manufacturing 
 
Estimate production 
 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver with focus on 
consistent year-round supply 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
Coordinate with insurance providers 
Coordinate with ‘antibiotic-free / safe meat’ certification agencies 
 
 
 
140 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
30,000 (25 sub-projects of 1,000 farmers each) 
24. GOAT 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
Ahmednagar, Akola, Amravati, Aurangabad, Beed, Bhandara, Buldhana, 
Chandrapur, Dhule, Gondia, Hingoli, Jalana, Kolhapur, Latur, Nagpur, Nanded, 
Nandurbar, Nashik, Osmanabad, Parbhani, Pune, Sangli, Satara, Solapur, Thane, 
Washim, Yavatmal 
For Meat 
For Meat – By the variety / GAP Certified 
 
 
  Milk & Milk Value Added Products 
 
 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers in urban clusters 
Produce premium varieties 
Improve production practices to increase yields 
 
 
  GAP certification 
 
Collective marketing 
CHALLENGES 
Threat of disease outbreaks 
 
  Negative outlook towards consumption of red meat 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
 
Test premium varieties and improved production practices 
 
Ensure availability of good quality bucks and feed 
 
Introduce disease-free / GAP compliant production 
  Add value by streamlining production and logistics 
 
Link with appropriate institutional markets 
Technical Support: ICAR-CIRG, Goat Trust, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Traders, Local, MAVIM members, etc. 
 
  Veterinary service provider 
Transporter 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
  Aggregate and transport animals 
 
 
 
Identifying or set up nursery for better quality bucks 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver with focus on 
consistent year-round supply 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
Coordinate with insurance providers 
Coordinate with ‘disease-free / safe meat’ certification agencies 
 
 
 
141 
25. FRESHWATER AQUACULTURE 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
1,000 (2 sub-projects of 500 farmers each) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Gadchiroli, Gondia 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
 
 
 
 
For Meat 
For Meat – GAP Certified 
Local Markets 
Institutional Buyers in urban clusters 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
Produce premium varieties 
Improve production practices to increase yields 
 
 
  GAP certification 
 
Collective marketing 
 
 
 
Climate change and threat of droughts / floods 
Lack of hatcheries 
Limited demand for freshwater fishes in the state 
 
Test popular fish varieties and improved production practices 
 
Ensure availability of good quality fingerlings 
 
Introduce disease-free / GAP compliant production 
  Add value by streamlining production and logistics 
 
Link with appropriate institutional markets 
Technical Support: ICAR-CIFA, WorldFish, Agri Universities, etc. 
 
  Buyers: Traders, Retailers, Local, MAVIM members, etc. 
  Hatchery 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
  Aggregate and transport fishes (requires cold chain) 
 
 
 
Identifying or set up hatchery 
Estimate production 
Ensure availability of inventory in case of agreement to deliver with focus on 
consistent year-round supply 
Coordinate linkage with potential markets 
Coordinate with insurance providers 
Coordinate with ‘disease-free / safe meat’ certification agencies 
 
 
 
142 
26. Mini ready to wear garments 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
All 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Job-Work basis 
Standalone enterprise 
Local (district and block level, small market) 
Large garment manufacturers 
Sub-contracting relations for big buyers/brands 
Improved designs, materials, workmanship, fashion and responding to 
trends  
Poor/cheap raw materials, old/poor design, not trendy,  targeted to low-
price market; often sold locally  
Improve design and quality and trendy products for district level market 
 
  Become subcontractors for larger buyers/brands 
 
Large buyers, design house, designer developers, good raw materials 
suppliers 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
 
 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
  Organize entrepreneurs; organize training on tailoring; establish linkage 
with designer; facilitate training of designers.  
  Organize peoples who are interested to work as wage employee; organize 
training, negotiate with buyers in case of subcontracting arrangement   
143 
27. FOOD PROCESSING 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
33,000 (33 sub-projects) 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
All 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Dal / Millet Processing 
  Masala Manufacturing 
 
 
Papad / Pickle / Prasad / Namkeen Manufacturing 
Local Markets 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
  Non-Nav Tejaswini MAVIM members especially urban 
 
 
Improve input quality and production process 
Standardize production quality 
  Aggregate demand for inputs across MEs and purchase in bulk 
 
 
Improve packaging quality to increase shelf life 
Introduce Food Safety processes and certifications 
  Variations in input costs 
  Variations in input quality 
CHALLENGES 
 
 
 
Competition from existing processors especially in the unorganized sector 
Price sensitive customer 
Low brand differentiation 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
  Define input purchase parameters and quality testing protocols 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tie up MEs with producers within the MAVIM network 
Improve and define processing procedures 
Improve packaging design 
Explore setting up Common Facility Centres for activities like packaging 
Engage with local administration to get contracts for government catering, 
prasad making, etc., and facilitate appropriate infrastructure 
Technical Support: CFTRI, ICAR-CIPHET, etc. 
Input producers preferably from within the MAVIM network 
  Buyers especially retail sales outlets, MAVIM members, govt. agencies, 
etc. 
FSSAI and other relevant certification agencies 
Common Facility Centres 
Packaging material providers 
 
 
 
  MAVIM for support on design and product standardization 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
 
 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
ROLE OF CMRC 
 
 
Identify Technical Support Agency 
Ensure product standardization through input, process and packaging 
improvement and control 
144 
 
 
 
Coordinate with government and other institutional buyers / partners 
Identify or set up Common Facility Centres 
Coordinate with certification agencies especially FSSAI 
145 
29. BAMBOO CRAFT 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
8,000 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
Sindhudurg, Others (Total 16 sub-projects of 500 members each) 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Bamboo Handicraft 
  Bamboo Furniture 
  Bamboo Building Material 
 
 
Local markets and word of mouth 
Exhibitions and fairs 
  Retail outlets especially Souvenir shops for handicrafts 
 
Institutional buyers like Ikea, Pepperfry, Urban Ladder, etc. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
  Quality improvement and product standardization 
  Design improvement and regular updating 
  Access to premium markets 
CHALLENGES 
STRATEGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Low focus on end-quality since current target markets more price sensitive 
than quality sensitive 
Limited focus on input material quality and sustainability of supply chain 
Limited mechanization in production processes 
Limited improvement in designs 
Improve skills of producers and introduce mechanization 
Improve bamboo supply chain 
Link producers with designers 
Set up common facility centres for higher end production 
  Bamboo producers 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical and design support agencies like NID, NIFT, IIT, etc. 
Institutional Buyers like KONBAC, Ikea, furniture retailers, etc. 
Common facility centres 
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
ROLE OF CMRC 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
 
 
 
Improve skills of associated producers 
Improve sustainability in supply chain and quality of bamboo production 
Identify and engage with providers for machines & tools to improve 
production 
  Regularly engage with designers to improve designs 
 
 
Set up and manage common facility centres 
Identify and engage with institutional buyers 
146 
32. ECO-TOURISM 
NO. OF BENEFICIARIES 
2,500 
TARGET DISTRICTS 
As per requirement 
POTENTIAL 
ENTERPRISES 
  Home Stays & Eateries 
 
 
Tour Guide 
Photographs 
POTENTIAL MARKETS 
  Urban / International tourists seeking a rural experience 
OPPORTUNITY FOR 
VALUE-ADDITION 
CHALLENGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improve and standardize stay facilities 
Train on food preparation, presentation and quality for urban / 
international clientele 
Train on cleanliness and hospitality management 
Prepare for ancillary services like tour guides, photographers, etc. 
Limited existing infrastructure for providing stays / home stays 
Limited understanding of urban / international tastes 
  Availability of multi-lingual individuals 
STRATEGY 
STAKEHOLDERS 
ROLE OF MAVIM 
ROLE OF CMRC 
 
 
Train interested members on cleanliness, hospitality management 
Train local eateries on cleanliness, presentation and preparing food for the 
urban / international clientele 
  Design layout for stay infrastructure and develop infrastructure 
accordingly 
  Design tour plans with focus on local cultural experiences 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepare notes / brochures on local history 
Train interested members on skills like photography 
Link up with tour operators in urban areas 
Engage with the Tourism department / local administration to promote 
tourism in the area 
Link up with corporate training organizations / HRs of companies 
  Urban / International tourists seeking a rural experience 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stay providers 
Eateries 
Tourism spots in the area 
Tour and travel operators in urban areas 
Local taxi operators 
Technical Support partners including CSR of  
Identify & engage Technical Support partner 
Identify potential markets and link with CMRCs 
  Guide CMRCs on standardization of processes & products 
 
 
Training individuals on various skills 
Identifying tourism destinations and designing tour plans 
  Aligning all stakeholders for smooth tour operations especially stay 
providers, eateries, cab providers, etc. 
147 
  Assisting MEs in designing stay infrastructure 
 
 
Engaging with tourism department / local administration to promote eco-
tourism in the area 
Taking feedback from customers on experience and appropriately 
tweaking tour plans / guiding stakeholders 
148 
Attachment 3: STRUCTURE OF PRODUCER COLLECTIVES & COMPANIES 
Background 
MAVIM under Tejaswini have mobilised women into three tier structures of community owned and 
managed  structures  of  Self-Help  Groups  (SHGs),  Village  Organisations  (VOs)  and  Community 
Management Resource Centers (CMRCs), which are federations of SHGs. 
SHGs: At the village neighbourhood level 10 to 20 members chosen on the basis of mutual trust and 
affinity  form  a  SHG.  SHGs  undertake  savings  and  credit  functions  and  are  the  key  institutions 
through  which,  services  are  accessed  by  members.  The  SHGs  in  a  village  form  the  Village 
Organisation.  
VOs: Voluntary unregistered structure functioning as a pressure group of the women in a village. 
VOs  carry  forward  the  social  agenda  set  by  the  CMRCs  as  well  as  address  local  issues  affecting 
members and community. VOs in select blocks also carry out financial intermediation function. 
CMRCs:  The registered apex structures,  are  member owned and managed with good  governance 
structure,  and  with  systems  and  processes to  ensure  sustainable  operations.  The  CMRCs  broadly 
carry  out  six  key  functions;  (i)  group  maintenance  functions  –  books  writing,  auditing,  training, 
conflict resolution, sharing good practices, monitoring the group performance; (ii) facilitating access 
to financial services – linking the groups to banks, insurance companies, post office, participating in 
pilots and studies; (iii) facilitate livelihood support services - effectively putting in place a system of 
community based support services to provide technology, package of practices, credit, CRP support 
and marketing support, (iv) convergence with various Government programmes for livelihoods and 
social  entitlements  thus  mobilizing  HH  level  government  support  (v)  running  of  profitable  social 
enterprises, and (vi)trainings/studies for other agencies. 
CMRCs  are  vibrant  institutions  and  a  one  of  its  kind  model  where  CMRCs  cover  their  operational 
costs of an average Rs. 6 lakhs per year. Members of CMRCs pay for services thus creating a mutually 
reinforcing quality control mechanism.  
MAVIM  has  created  the  “brand”  CMRCs,  which  is  widely  recognised  by  banks,  Government 
departments, and Companies under CSR. CMRCs with MAVIM support mobilise every year Rs. 60 
crores  worth  of  convergence  under  different  Government  programmes  and  schemes.  Business 
development partnerships were formed between banks and the CMRCs which has enabled credit flow 
of Rs. 500 crores annually and CMRCs earn a commission of 2 percent to ensure quality and discipline 
of  SHGs  and  bank  loan  repayments.  With  their  effective  outreach  to  poor  households  especially 
women and also efficiency in delivering  services, companies fund CMRCs under CSR and  districts 
mobilise Rs.    2 crores on an average every year though this is not uniform across all districts. .  
Proposed Structure under Nav Tejaswini 
Nav  Tejaswini  intend  to  convert  these  CMRCs  into  hubs  of  economic  activities  and  business 
enterprises. This will need a relook at suitable legal forms. The CMRCs, with a membership of 2,500-
3,000  women  each  are  registered  under  the  Societies  &  Trusts  Act.  Most  CMRCs  are  registering 
robust growth in funds with diversified income sources and their balance sheet sizes are increasing. 
As per the acts, these institutions can neither carry out businesses nor share profits with members. 
The other limitations are Societies and Trusts cannot mobilise share capital to initiate and expand 
businesses, and corporates hesitate to have business dealings with Societies and Trusts.  
To run and grow businesses CMRCs need to facilitate formation of co-operatives and farmer producer 
companies/non farm producer collectives. 
Two  legal  forms  are  suitable  for  community  owned  businesses-  co-operatives  and  producer 
companies.  Given  the  complexity  of  legal  compliances  in  companies,  Nav  Tejaswini  will  promote 
cooperatives at CMRC level (about 247) and commodity-based producer companies at higher level 
(about  30).  An  apex  producer  company  will  also  be  promoted  at  state  level  for  forging  market 
linkages and standardization of processes, products and packaging. 
149 
Fig: Recommended structure of Nav Tejaswini Producer Organizations 
Ownership Structure 
Cooperatives  (Coop):  All  willing  producer  members  of  each  CMRC  will  collectively  promote  one 
Cooperative  per  CMRC.  These  members  will  be  shareholders  of  the  Cooperative.  Other  than  the 
present SHG members others in villages/neighbouring villages will be keen to participate in the value 
chain activities; Criteria for entry of any new shareholders should be properly defined so as to ensure 
that  only  like-minded  individuals  join.  CMRCs  can  consider  a  condition  that  they  should  first  join 
SHGs and thereafter join the co-operatives.  
Producer Companies (PC): The cooperatives promoted by CMRC members come together to set up 
commodity  /  product-specific  Producer  Companies.  The  shareholding  of  these  PCs  should  be 
restricted to only the Cooperatives promoted through MAVIM’s support. 
Apex Producer Company (Apex PC): The PCs promoted by Cooperatives shall together promote an 
Apex  Producer  Company.  The  shareholding  of  this  Apex  PC  should  be  restricted  to  only  the  PCs 
promoted through MAVIM’s support. 
Roles of CMRCs and Producer Collectives 
CMRCs: 
  Monitor and support SHGs at all stages including promotion of new SHGs 
  Spearhead the support services to standalone Micro Enterprises. 
  Continue to provide necessary support to SHGs. 
  MOUs with banks and insurance companies to ensure access to financial services including 
micro-enterprise loans and life, accident insurance. 
  Work  closely  with  the  District  Administration  to  access  Government  schemes  through 
convergence and other partners (including CSR) for resource mobilisation 
 
Focus on health and nutrition initiatives for the SHG members & their families 
150 
APEX PCPC 1PC 2PC 3PC 30Coop 1Coop 2Coop 3Coop 247CMRC 1CMRC 2CMRC 3CMRC 247 
 
Execute  Nav  Tejaswini’s  Ultra-Poor  programmes,  skill  development  initiatives  and 
innovations projects. 
  Social enterprises other than value chain related. 
Cooperatives (248 in number): 
  Business driven; Inward looking i.e. mostly coordination with members 
  Aggregate members’ / other individuals’ produce 
  Value add to members’ produce by sorting & grading / primary processing / packaging 
 
Identify  or  set  up  collection  centres  /  warehouses  /  sorting  &  grading  units  /  primary 
processing units 
  Coordinate  with  relevant  PCs  to  sell  members’  produce  and  ensure  timely  payments  to 
members 
  Aggregate  members’  /  other  individuals’  demand  for  inputs  &  services  including  crop, 
livestock insurance & technical support 
  Coordinate with relevant PCs to ensure timely availability of quality inputs & services 
  Understanding  market  requirements  with  the  support  of  relevant  PCs  and  sharing  with 
individual producers 
  Coordinating with certification agencies to validate production / processing procedures for 
improving marketability 
Producer Companies (30 companies): 
  Outward looking i.e. mostly coordination with external stakeholders 
 
Engage with external business stakeholders especially institutional buyers and input / service 
providers relevant to the commodities / products being handled by the PC 
  Understand requirements of buyers in terms of quality, quantity, finance and logistics while 
purchasing commodities / products from suppliers 
 
Track  production  quality  and  quantity  of  relevant  commodities  /  products  across  various 
cooperatives 
  Develop training modules and engage with cooperatives to standardize production quality 
including grading as per requirements of buyers 
 
 
Ensure availability of credit / value chain financing to Cooperatives to aggregate produce for 
inventory, value addition and / or sale to buyers 
Explore price-hedging mechanisms with the support of commodity exchanges 
  Negotiate  improved  deals  for  inputs  and  services  including  insurance  on  behalf  of 
cooperatives 
Apex Producer Company (one at state level): 
  Coordinate between the  various PCs to  ensure  standardization of procedures and product 
quality 
 
Provide technical and legal assistance to all PCs 
  Develop and manage a common brand and image for all member PCs, and ensure adherence 
to the norms by all PCs 
Engage with International Markets 
Engage with policy makers to support the Cooperative / PC landscape 
 
 
151 
Rationale for Structure and Roles 
CMRC: 
  Community ownership is high 
  Well  recognized  structures  across  the  state,  and  both  government  and  private  sector  are 
comfortable engaging with these. 
  Able to generate support from Govt. schemes as well as CSR 
  Have existing MoUs with Financial Institutions to provide SHG support services which might 
be difficult to transfer to a new agency 
  Some  CMRCs  are  tax-exempt,  and  don’t  have  to  pay  income  tax  or  GST  on  revenues 
generated, thus leaving a larger amount for servicing SHGs / developmental activities 
  Not allowed to engage in business activities, and certainly not allowed to redistribute profits 
severely limiting their ability to appropriately service members on the forward & backward 
linkages. 
Cooperatives: 
 
To be registered under the Cooperatives Act since structure familiar to and well-understood 
by most CMRCs; Compliance requirements are not very exhaustive but at a cluster of village 
level it is easier to ensure discipline in the functioning. 
  Democratic institution with each member having equal right and say in the functioning of 
the institution and selection of governance. 
  Allowed to engage in business activities including sale & purchase of produce, setting up of 
infrastructure, and holding of inventory 
  Able to redistribute profits amongst shareholders based on their shareholding / volume of 
business 
  A  Cooperative  can  become  the  shareholder  of  any  of  the  Producer  Companies  dealing  in 
products  produced  by  their  members  to  facilitate  forward  &  backward  linkages;  All 
shareholder Cooperatives in a Producer Company should have equal number of shares. 
Producer Companies: 
 
To  be  registered  under  the  Companies  Act  as  producer  company  which  requires  robust 
compliance and hiring of professionals 
  Company like in operations where each shareholder can influence the decision making by 
selection  of  the  Board  of  Directors,  but  all  day-to-day  operations  are  taken  care  of  by 
professional management 
  Allowed to engage in business activities, and redistribute profits based on the shareholding 
/ volume of business 
 
Exempt from paying income tax for annual turnover under INR 10 million 
  A second tier institution doesn’t have to expend too much effort and resources in managing 
its shareholders since they shall be represented by their Cooperatives 
 
PCs should be formed based on the set of customers they are dealing with i.e. a PC dealing 
in grains deals with one set of customers while a PC dealing in dairy deals with a completely 
different set of customers; The different kind of PCs which shall be required are as follows: 
152 
S. No.  Product Type  Operational Area 
Rationale 
1 
Seasonal & 
non-perishable 
i.e. grains, 
oilseeds, etc. 
State-wide 
  Requires large volumes for better price 
negotiation 
  Storable and hence not hypersensitive to 
logistical / decision-making delays 
  Requires similar handling & financing expertise, 
and engages with similar customer types 
 
Produced in large volumes in a short time and 
hence requires larger markets for better price 
realization 
2 
Seasonal & 
perishable i.e. 
fruits 
3 
Year-round & 
perishable i.e. 
vegetables 
Division-wide 
  Moderately perishable and hence decision 
making has to be quick 
  Generally similar crops are grown across 
multiple adjoining districts 
  Generally deals in smaller unit sizes but every 
day 
District-wide 
  Highly perishable and hence decision making 
4  Dairy 
District-wide 
has to be quick and decentralized 
  Mostly engages with local customers 
  Generally deals in smaller unit sizes but every 
day 
  Highly perishable and hence processing & 
decision making has to be quick and 
decentralized 
  Mostly engages with local customers 
  Generally deals with smaller unit sizes but 
every day 
5 
Meats i.e. 
poultry, goat, 
etc. 
Division-wide 
  Moderately perishable and hence decision 
making has to be quick 
  Mostly engages with regional customers 
  Generally deals in smaller unit sizes but every 
day 
6  Fish 
District-wide 
  Highly perishable and hence decision making 
7  Non-Farm 
Division-wide 
has to be quick and decentralized 
  Mostly engages with local customers 
  Requires extensive customization and quality 
control 
  Storable and hence not hypersensitive to 
logistical / decision-making delays 
  Requires similar handling & financing expertise, 
and engages with similar customer types 
Apex Producer Company: 
 
To  be  registered  under  the  Companies  Act  as  producer  company  which  requires  robust 
compliance and hiring of professionals 
  Company  like  operations  where  each  shareholder  can  influence  the  decision  making  by 
selection  of  the  Board  of  Directors,  but  all  day-to-day  operations  are  taken  care  of  by 
professional management 
153 
  Allowed to engage in business activities, and redistribute profits based on the shareholding 
/ volume of business 
 
Exempt from paying income tax for annual turnover under INR 10 million 
  All Producer Companies shall be equal shareholders of the Apex Producer Company 
  Brand, image, co-ordination, etc. have to be managed at a centralized level and should be 
standardized. 
Implementation steps before formation of co-operatives 
a)  MAVIM  needs  to  facilitate  sub  project  identification  under  farm  and  nonfarm  sectors.  Have 
simple forecasts on number of members and volume of business both input and outputs under 
different sectors. 
b)  Make a realistic assessment of work and activities under Nav Tejaswini for stand-alone micro 
enterprise promotion and also ultra poor interventions. 
c)  Make  a  holistic  assessment  of  the  services  needed  by  3,000  members  of  CMRCs  and  which 
institution should provide what type of services.  
d)  Facilitate  discussions  with  CMRCs  on  role  division  between  CMRCs  and  co-operatives; 
governance for both structures, staffing for both structures and how to create co ownership of 
both the structures.  
e)  Make business plans for CMRCs and the cooperatives including resource mobilisation. Staff hired 
for sub project implementation will be initially working with CMRCs but move into co-operatives 
once they are formed.  
f) 
In  case  CMRCs  decides  on  only  co  operative  form  to  be  continued,  work  out  modalities  for 
winding  down  especially  transfer  of  business  relationships  and  assets  from  CMRCs  to 
Cooperatives. 
g)  For cooperatives, mobilise additional resources from agriculture department/ATMA, horticulture 
department, NABARD etc. 
154 
Attachment 4: MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM 
Background 
Nav Tejaswini requires MAVIM and CMRCs to transition into business enterprises with the ability to 
obtain information at the click of a button and take informed business decisions quickly. These 
organizations and their members need to be digitally connected amongst themselves and with the 
outside world to unlock the power of enterprise development. 
The current SHE Software has enabled CMRCs to monitor SHG health and deliver great value to 
the SHGs on the financial linkages front. However with time this software has also become 
outdated with better technologies now available to track and deliver financial services to low-
income households. 
It is suggested that MAVIM invests in identifying / developing a technology solution to do the 
following: 
1.  Enable Financial Linkages including SHG and Micro-Enterprise Loans 
2.  Assist Micro-Enterprises and Farmer Producer Companies to take business decisions 
3.  Monitor the various sub-projects set up under Nav Tejaswini 
Process 
S. No. 
Stage 
Activities 
Implementor 
1  Stakeholder Identification 
2 
Requirement Gathering & 
Analysis 
3  Architecture Design 
4  Solutions Identification 
5 
Development / 
Customization 
6  Testing 
7 
Data Transfer + 
Deployment 
8  Maintenance 
 
List all potential 
stakeholders who will be 
required to be connected to 
the MIS 
  Understand data 
requirements of every 
stakeholder and the 
potential value this MIS can 
create for them 
  Use Case design 
  Database design 
  Security solutions and 
access control 
  User Interface design 
  Survey existing solutions 
Procure solution / recruit 
 
developer 
  Design and integrate 
modules 
  A/B Testing 
  Security Testing 
 
Transferring data from SHE 
Software 
  Creating user ids with 
 
appropriate access controls 
Training users on the new 
system 
  Regular security checks and 
system upgrades 
MAVIM 
Consultant + MAVIM 
Consultant 
Consultant 
Consultant + 
Developer / Solution 
Provider 
Developer / Solution 
Provider 
Developer / Solution 
Provider 
As per 
recommendation of 
Consultant 
155 
Salient Features of the new MIS 
  Always on, cloud-based preferably hosted on Amazon Web Services / Microsoft Azure / Any 
other secure cloud server 
  Scalable 
 
Follows required data security protocols 
  Database contains all required details about members, SHGs, enterprises, financial linkages, 
assets, inventory, etc. 
  Clearly defined levels of data access to users 
Additional Recommendation 
Please learn from the system currently being used by IFAD-funded Integrated Livelihood Support 
Project in Uttarakhand. 
TOR of Consultant 
Pre-requisite 
  At least 5 years of experience in IT Consulting / SaaS Product Development 
 
 
Prior experience of building organizational MIS especially in the social enterprise / 
development sector 
Exposure to latest web-based technologies and solutions 
Expected Activities 
 
 
Identify all relevant stakeholders for the purpose of this MIS 
Identify expectations and requirements of each of the identified stakeholders from this MIS; 
Conduct interviews / surveys / FGDs if required 
  Design use cases for each of the stakeholders 
  Design the system architecture based on the use cases 
 
 
 
 
Identify appropriate solutions / technologies already existing in the market which can be used 
Identify developers / solutions providers to develop / customize solutions as per the 
requirements 
Ensure appropriate data security protocols are built into the system 
Ensure smooth transition from existing systems to the new MIS 
  Develop training modules to onboard users on the new MIS 
 
Ensure all code is written cleanly and with proper documentation for future reference 
156 
Attachment 5: Terms of Reference for Specialists 
A.  Terms of reference for Rural Finance Manager 
Educational Background:  University post graduate degree in economics, business 
administration, finance, accounting, agri business etc.   
 Job Requirements & Experience:  
The candidate should have following experience, skills and knowledge mix:   
  Work experience in banking for 15 years out of which at least 7 years in rural 
banking, agri banking and small farmer and agri business credit, MSME financing. 
  Experience on implementation of internationally financed projects would be an 
added advantage; 
  Good knowledge of the different national banking and financial institutions, 
insurance companies, concerned with rural/agriculture finance and insurance strong 
ability and readiness to communicate, and work with them; 
  Strong communication skills, especially written communications; group facilitation 
skills; 
  Gender sensitivity in working with both men and women understanding and 
addressing their needs; 
  Team player with ability to work with different stakeholders and programme team; 
  Fluent written and spoken English; 
  Creative and pragmatic approach to problem solving;  well-organised and well 
oriented to details. 
Duties and Responsibilities; 
  To take overall responsibility and leadership on the planning, implementation and 
monitoring of the Rural Financial Services sub component. This involves the 
preparation and monitoring of Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB), progress 
reports and analytical reports; 
  Manage the sub component in accordance with the approved annual work plans, 
coordinate and ensure complementarities with Value Chain Development activities 
and support to stand alone businesses; 
  Carry out due diligence, prepare the ToRs and develop partnership with banking and 
financial institutions, insurance companies, capacity developers of cooperatives and 
training institutions; 
  Spearhead the pilot on Micro Enterprise loans including developing protocols, 
suggest modifications for products of financial institutions, monitor loan application 
sanction, disbursement and repayments and suggest modifications for scaling up 
157 
  Develop ToR, and selection criteria for contracting national and international 
consultants, for studies ensuring quality of their work and providing advisory support 
as required; 
  Ensure an assessment of annual credit requirement plans for the SHGs, and stand 
alone businesses, Micro entrepreneurs, and facilitate integration of plans in bankers’ 
credit plans and monitor flow of credit; 
  Maintain close coordination with implementation partners (banking and financial 
institutions, insurance companies, private service providers, and other stakeholders) 
and ensure satisfactory results; 
  Plan, supervise and monitor the trainings on business and advanced financial literacy 
trainings for effective results; 
  Spearhead the financial innovations sucha s livestock insurance. 
  Study financial innovations such as peer to peer lending, fintech solutions and forge 
appropriate partnerships where feasible. 
  Ensure policy studies and policy workshops  are conducted well and develop action 
plans for policy changes.   
  Assume a lead responsibility for the organisation of sub component-related study 
tours, conferences and workshops; 
  Provide support and guidance for the gathering of data and information needed to 
undertake an effective monitoring and evaluation of all the activities included in the 
sub component; 
  Oversee the design and establishment of channels for regular information 
dissemination, sharing, and networking among stakeholders. 
B.  Terms of reference of Monitoring and Evaluation Officer  
1.  The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system at the Project level has four objectives: 
(i) to  monitor  and  evaluate  results  and  impacts;  (ii) to  provide  a  basis  for  decision 
making on necessary amendments and improvements; (iii) to promote accountability 
for resource use; and (iv) to document, provide feedback on, and disseminate lessons 
learned. 
2.  Project monitoring and evaluation is conducted in accordance with established IFAD 
procedures  and  is  undertaken  by  the  Project  management  team  at  all  levels.    The 
Logical  Framework  matrix  provides  performance  and  impact  indicators  for  Project 
implementation  along  with  their  corresponding  means  of  verification.  These,  along 
with the objectives, procedures and tools described in the M&E plan would form the 
basis on which the Project's M&E system would be built.  
General scope of the job 
3.  The  M&E  officer 
is  responsible  for  guiding  the  overall  M&E  strategy  and 
implementation  of  related  activities  within  the  Project  and  Vis  a  Vis  partners  and 
providing timely and relevant information to the Project Director,  PMU and Project 
158 
stakeholders.  This  requires  close  coordination  and  communication  with  the  Line 
Agencies, Project stakeholder groups, and field staff as well as consultants of external 
M&E-related missions. 
4.  Critical tasks for the M&E officer(s) include setting up the M&E system and ensuring it 
is implemented efficiently and effectively. The M&E system would be based on the 
Project log-frame and the Project M&E plan and would build as much as possible upon 
existing M&E mechanisms and systems.  
5.  The M&E officer would report directly to the Project Coordinator 
Main tasks and responsibilities  
6.  Setting up the M&E system.  
a)  Develop the overall framework for Project M&E in accordance to the Project M&E 
plan; 
b)  Conduct a readiness assessment regarding M&E;  
c)  Guide and coordinate the review of the Project log-frame including:  
i.  Provide technical advice for the revision of performance indicators; 
ii.  Ensure realistic intermediate and end-of-Project targets are defined; 
iii.  Conduct a baseline study (situation at Project start); 
iv.  Identify sources of data, collection methods, who collects data, how 
often, cost of collection and who analyses it; 
v.  Ensure all critical risks are identified.  
d)  Identify the core information needs of PMU, the Project Steering Committee, IFAD 
and the Department of  Women and Child Development, Planning and Development, 
Finance etc.,; 
e)  Identify the requirements for collecting baseline data, prepare terms-of-reference 
for and arrange the conduct of a baseline survey, as required; 
f)  Clarify M&E responsibilities of different Project personnel at state and district level. 
g)  Contribute to the development of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), 
ensuring alignment with Project strategy, agreement on annual targets and inclusion 
of M&E activities in the work plan; 
h)  Prepare detailed M&E budget; 
i)  Prepare calendar of M&E activities; 
j) 
Identify M&E technical assistance that the Project needs to contract and guide its 
recruitment.  
k)  Ensure complete operationalization of project management software. 
7.  Implementation of the M&E system 
a)  Oversee and execute M&E activities included in the AWPB, with particular focus on 
results and impacts as well as in lesson learning; 
b)  Based on the AWPB design the framework for the physical and process monitoring of 
Project activities; 
c)  Promote a results-based approach to monitoring and evaluation, emphasizing results 
and impacts; 
159 
d)  Coordinate the preparation of all Project reports. Guide staff and executing partners 
in preparing their progress reports in accordance with approved reporting formats 
and ensure their timely submission. This includes quarterly progress reports, annual 
Project report, inception report, and ad-hoc technical reports; 
e)  Prepare consolidated progress reports for Project management including 
identification of problems, causes of potential bottlenecks in Project 
implementation, and providing specific recommendations; 
f)  Check that monitoring data are discussed in the appropriate forum (such as the 
review meetings of PMU, the quarterly meeting of the Project Steering Committee) 
and in a timely fashion in terms of implications for future action. If necessary, create 
such discussion forums to fill any gaps; 
g)  Undertake regular visits to the field to support implementation of M&E and to 
identify where consolidations might be needed; 
h)  Foster participatory planning and monitoring by training and involving primary 
stakeholder groups including CMRC staff  in the M&E of activities; 
i)  Prepare M&E reports for annual supervision missions, mid-term review and final 
evaluation in accordance to IFAD guidance; 
j)  Facilitate, act as resource person, and join if required any external supervision and 
evaluation missions; 
k)  Monitor the follow up of evaluation recommendations; 
l) 
Identify the need and draw up the ToRs for specific Project studies. Recruit, guide 
and supervise consultants or organizations that are contracted to implement special 
surveys and studies required for evaluating Project outcomes and impacts; 
m)  Organize (and provide) refresher training in M&E for Project and implementing 
partner staff, local organizations and primary stakeholders with view of developing 
local M&E capacity; 
Qualifications and experience required 
Suitable candidates should have a post graduation degree in a field related to development 
and/or management, experience in field research and statistics and at least  fifteen years of 
proven experience with:  
a)  The logical framework approach and other strategic planning approaches; 
b)  M&E methods and approaches (including quantitative, qualitative and participatory); 
c)  Planning, design and implementation of M&E systems; 
d)  Training in M&E development and implementation and/or facilitating learning-
oriented analysis sessions of M&E data with multiple stakeholders; 
e)  Data and information analysis; 
f)  Report writing. 
S/He should also have:  
a)  A solid understanding of public policies, development approaches with a focus on 
participatory processes, market economy management, and gender issues; 
b)  Familiarity with and a supportive attitude towards processes of strengthening grass 
root institutions and building theri capacities for self-management; 
c)  Willingness to undertake regular field visits and interact with different stakeholders, 
especially primary stakeholders; 
d)  Experience in data processing and with computers; 
160 
e)  Leadership qualities, personnel and team management (including mediation and 
conflict resolution); 
f)  High English language skills . 
Desirable: 
a)  Understanding of IFAD procedures. 
161 
Attachment 6 – Format of IFRs 
Quarterly Interim Unaudited Financial Reports  
Type of Report 
The Focus/Scope of the report 
Remarks 
Quarterly/Semi annual 
Financial Reports 
These reports are a formal requirement by IFAD and they  are 
to be sent to IFAD and to be used by the management to 
monitor the project's medium term financial performance. The 
report must be submitted to IFAD within 45 after the end of the 
respective reporting period, The exact content and format is 
agreed between IFAD and the Borrower/ Recipient. 
1  Sources and Uses of Funds 
(all financiers) 
This report discloses how much funds the project has received 
from different financiers how these funds have been spent by 
expenditure category during the reporting period as well as 
cumulative. This report also discloses the projects cash 
balances. 
Part of Project 
financial statements. 
Does not separate 
project expenditures 
by financier. 
2  Summary of Expenditures 
by Loan Categories and By 
Financiers (USD) 
This report discloses how much funds the project has spent by 
expenditure category and by financier. 
3  Financial performance by 
financier by component 
4  Cash forecast by financier 
This report discloses how much funds the has project received 
from each financier and how these sources have been spent by 
project component during the reporting period and 
cumulatively. The report also compares these figures with the 
targets set in the Annual Workplan and Budget and the Project 
design report (PDR). 
This report discloses the breakdown of the project's cash 
forecast for the following two quarters by financier. The 
breakdown includes opening and closing balances of the 
different accounts as well as estimated income and from 
different financiers and estimated expenditures by category. 
5  Progress report on Audit 
recommendations  
This report summarises all the recommendations made by the 
external auditors of the project, the project management's 
action plan to address these recommendations and the current 
status of these planned actions.  
Variation of this 
report already part 
of the Project 
financial statements 
(sources and uses of 
funds) 
Variation of this 
report already part 
of the aide memoire 
(table 1b of annex 1) 
Required by IFAD 
only on adhoc basis. 
Should be part of the 
project’s monthly 
internal reporting 
(for management 
use)  
Should be Part of the 
external audit report 
and management 
letter 
162 
163 
Quarterly IFRReport #1Cumulativeproject lifeFunds of IFAD Loan Funds of GOMFunds of BeneficiariesTotal Sources of FundsOther Income1 - Training2 - Consultancies3 - Goods Services and input4 - Grants and Subsidies5 - Salaries and allowancesAdvancesNote: Total Sources of fiunds should match with total uses of fundsSources and Use of Funds by Category (all financiers)Reporting period - for the Quarter from 01 April  xx - 31 March xxCumulative 20xxSources of FundsReporting periodTotal Funds Available (A)DiscrepancyUses of FundsUses of Funds (Project Expenditure)Total Uses of Funds (B) 
164 
Quarterly IFRReport #2Summary of Expenditures by Loan Categories and by FinanciersReporting period - for the Quarter from 01 April  xx - 31 March xxAllocationas perfinancingagreementReportingperiodCumulative 20xxCumulativeproject lifeCash forecastfor nextreporting period-half year, 20xxAllocationas perfinancingagreementReportingperiodCumulative 20xxCumulativeproject lifeCash forecastfor nextreporting period-half year, 20xxAllocationas perfinancingagreementReportingperiodCumulative 20xxCumulativeproject lifeCash forecastfor nextreporting period-half year, 20xxAllocationas perfinancingagreementReportingperiodCumulative 20xxCumulativeproject lifeCash forecastfor nextreporting period-half year, 20xx1 - Works 2 - Training3 - Consultancies4 - Goods Services and input5 - Grants and Subsidies6 - Salaries and allowancesSub-Total Project ExpenditureTotal Project ExpenditureTotal Project ExpenditureCategoryIFAD LoanGOMIFAD GrantSources of Funds 
165 
Quarterly IFRReport #3Summary of Expenditures by Loan Components and by FinanciersReporting period - for the Quarter from 01 April  xx - 31 March xxReporting periodCumulativethe first half of 20xxCumulative project lifeComponentPlanned(AWPB)Actual%Planned(AWPB)Actual%Planned(Design report)Actual%IFAD Loan    1.Market Driven Enterprise Development1.1 Farm sector enterprise development1.2 Manufacture and service sector enterprise development1.3 Capacity development of CMRCs1.4 Supporting Innovation   2. Enabling Support Services2.1 Facilitating financial linkages2.2 New pathways for ultra poor households2.3 Enhancing nutritional status and gender relations2.4 Policy engagement   3. Project Management3.1 Institutional strengthening3.2 Project managementGOM   1.Market Driven Enterprise Development1.1 Farm sector enterprise development1.2 Manufacture and service sector enterprise development1.3 Capacity development of CMRCs1.4 Supporting Innovation   2. Enabling Support Services2.1 Facilitating financial linkages2.2 New pathways for ultra poor households2.3 Enhancing nutritional status and gender relations2.4 Policy engagement   3. Project Management3.1 Institutional strengthening3.2 Project managementIFAD GrantBeneficiariesTotal Project Expenditure 
166 
Quarterly IFRReport #4Statement Of Expenditures / Withdrawal Application Statement by financing source and Disbursment MethodDateUSD at RBIINR receivedDateINR at RBIINR receivedUSDINRRejectedfrom IFADNetReimbursedWA submitted to IFAD during the reporting periodIFAD LoanWA No 1  WA No 2   Sub-Total 20xxWA No 3WA No 4Sub-Total 20xxSub-Total 20xxSub-Total 20xxTotalWA pending submission to IFADTotalDAreplesnishmentsReimbursmentsTotalReporting period - for the Quarter from 01 April  xx - 31 March xxDisbursement Method 
Appendix 2  
SAMPLE OF PROJECT AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
167 
Quarterly IFRReport #5Initial Allocation (Schedule 2)BalanceUndisbursedUSDUSDINRUSD (if INR to be converted)USDInitial deposit-1 - Training2 - Consultancies3 - Goods Services and input4 - Grants and Subsidies5 - Salaries and allowancesUnallocatedTotalDISBURSEMENT SUMMARYAs of December 31, 20xx Expenditure CategoryDisbursed AmountQuarterly IFRReporting period: Report #6Progress report on Audit recommendations Recommendation Date of the recommendationPlanned action to address the recommendation Current Status of the planned actionProgress report on Audit recommendations  
Project Name……………………………….. 
                                  Implementing Agency……………………… 
                                  IFAD Loan/Grant Number…………………….. 
PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 20XX 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 20XX 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE 
Project Information and performance                                                                   3 
Statement of project management responsibilities 
                  4 
Report of the independent auditor                                                                        5 
Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category)                                         6 
Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component)                                     7 
Statement of comparative budget and actual amount                                             8 
Statement of Special Account movements                                                             9 
SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement                                                                10 
Notes to the Financial Statements                                                                         12-15 
168 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
PROJECT INFORMATION AND PERFORMANCE 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
 
Institutional Details/Information:  Implementing agency, status, location, names, 
account numbers and address of bankers (Special and Project accounts) name and address 
of independent auditors 
  Members of the Project Coordinating Unit: Names and roles 
  Background Information on the Project: Source of financing: size of Loan/Grant(s), 
effective and closing date(s) 
  Project Objectives:   As per Design Completion/Appraisal Report 
  Project Costs: By component and category of expenditures as per Financing Agreement  
and Design Completion/Appraisal Report 
  Summary of Performance: Physical progresses as per Progress/Supervision Reports 
169 
STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTING OFFICER AND PROJECT COORDINATOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
170 
(INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S LETTERHEAD) 
REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS 
(Consolidated auditors report on the Project Financial Statements, the Special Account and the 
SOEs Opinion) 
171 
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 20XX 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
Notes 
20XX 
20XX-1 
Cumulative 
to date 
Local 
currency 
Local 
currency 
Local 
currency 
4 
XXX 
XXX 
Balance B/F 
FINANCING 
IFAD Credit22 
     Initial Deposit 
     Replenishments to SA 
     IFAD Direct Payments 
Government Funds 
Other Donors 
Other Receipts 
TOTAL FINANCING 
  PROJECT EXPENDITURES: 
(BY CATEGORY OF 
EXPENDITURES) 
Cat  IFAD CREDIT 
1  AAA 
2  BBB 
3  CCC 
4  DDD 
5  EEE 
6  GGG 
7  HHH 
8  LLL 
  Government Funds 
1  AAA 
2  BBB 
TOTAL 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
9 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
XXX 
XXX 
BALANCE C/F 
4 
XXX 
XXX 
22  Separate analysis to be provided in case of different sources of IFAD funding (loan, component grant, 
supplementary grant) detailing financing , expenditures and balance for each source of funding 
172 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY COMPONENT) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 20XX 
Balance B/F 
FINANCING 
IFAD Credit  
     Initial Deposit 
     Replenishments to SA 
     IFAD Direct Payments 
Government Funds 
Other Donors 
Other Receipts 
Notes 
20XX 
20XX-1 
Local 
currency 
XXX 
Local 
currency 
XXX 
4 
Cumulative 
to date 
Local 
currency 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
5 
6 
7 
8 
TOTAL FINANCING 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
  PROJECT EXPENDITURES: 
  (BY COMPONENT) 
Comp  IFAD CREDIT 
A  AAA 
B  BBB 
C  CCC 
  Government Funds 
A  AAA 
B  BBB 
TOTAL 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
XXX 
XXX 
BALANCE C/F 
4 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
173 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 20XX 
20XX 
Budget 
20XX 
Actual 
Variance 
Notes 
Local 
currency 
XXX 
Local 
currency 
XXX 
Local 
currency 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
FINANCING 
IFAD Credit 
    Replenishments to 
SA 
    IFAD Direct 
Payments 
Government Funds 
TOTAL FINANCING 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
PROJECT 
EXPENDITURES: 
(BY CATEGORY OF 
EXPENDITURES) 
Cat  IFAD CREDIT 
1  AAA 
2  BBB 
3  CCC 
4  DDD 
5  EEE 
6  GGG 
7  HHH 
8  LLL 
  Government Funds 
1  AAA 
2  BBB 
TOTAL 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Surplus/Deficit for the period 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the Budget of X% was 
due to…. 
174 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
STATEMENT OF SPECIAL ACCOUNT ACTIVITIES 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 20XX 
Account No:  ___________ 
Bank: ________________ 
Address:_______________ 
Opening Balance 
Notes 
USD (or as 
otherwise  
denominated) 
Local 
Currency 
Equiv 
XXX 
XXX 
Add: 
IFAD Replenishments: 
Date 
Date 
WA No  XXX 
WA No  XXX 
XXX 
Bank Interests 
Total 
Deduct: 
Transfers to Operating Accounts: 
XXX 
Date 
XXX 
Date 
XXX 
Expenses directly 
paid fro the 
account 
Bank Charges 
Exchange Rate Difference 
Closing Balance as at 
31/12/200X 
 (as per Bank Statement) 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
           XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
175 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
SOEs-WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 20XX 
by Category of Expenditures  in Local Currency 
Note
s 
Category 
descriptio
n 
Category 
descriptio
n 
Total 
In USD 
Equivale
nt 
Rejected 
from 
IFAD 
Net 
Reimburse
d 
Cat 
No 
WA 
No: 
1 
2 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Total 
 WA Pending for Submission: 
WA 
No: 
TOTA
L 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Withdrawal Applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the historical exchange 
rate of the transfers to the Operating Account 
Expenditures partially or totally rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here. 
This statement should be reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and Payments. 
176 
PROJECT NAME AND NUMBER 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X 
1. 
FINANCIAL REPORTING UNDER INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC SECTOR ACCOUNTING STANDARDS 
(IPSAS) 
In accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), notes to the 
financial statements of an entity should: 
 
 
Present any information about the basis of preparation of the financial statements and the 
specific accounting policies selected and applied for significant transactions and other 
events, and 
Provide additional information which is not presented on the face of the financial 
statements but is necessary for a fair presentation of the entity’s cash receipts, 
cash payments, cash balances and other statements as statement of financial 
position 
2 
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
The principle accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements are set 
out below: 
A  Basis of Preparation 
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Public Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS) with particular emphasis on Cash Basis Financial Reporting 
under the Cash Basis of Accounting 
B  Cash Basis of Accounting 
The cash basis of accounting recognizes transactions and events only when cash is received or 
paid by the entity. 
C Foreign Currency Transactions 
Foreign currency translation for the income and expenditure account items are converted using 
the actual historic exchange rate at the conversion from special to local account.  Where part 
of the expenditures has to be met from the proceeds of subsequent draw downs from special 
to local account, this is done on First in First out (FIFO) basis.    All local expenditures paid 
from the local accounts/currency are translated back to the USD at the actual rate used for the 
transfer from special to local account.   Cash balances held in foreign currency are reported 
using the closing rate.   Gains/Losses on foreign currency transactions/balances are dealt 
within the Statement of Special Account Activities  
3 
BUDGET 
The budget is developed on the same accounting basis (cash basis), same classification and for 
the same period as the financial statements.   Material variances (above  XXX) have been 
explained as notes to the financial statements 
177 
4 
CASH/FUND  BALANCES 
         Reconciliation 
Cash Accounts 
Advances 
20XX 
Loc 
currency 
20XX-1 
Loc 
currency 
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
Analyses of aging of advances to be included detailing and providing reasons for long outstanding 
advances 
4-a 
 CASH DETAILS  
A/c No______  Project Operating 
Account 
A/c No_______ IFAD Special 
Account (as per SA Statement) 
Petty cash 
5 
DIRECT  PAYMENTS 
20XX 
Loc 
currency 
20XX-1 
Loc 
currency 
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
These payments were made directly by IFAD from the Loan/Grant account to the specified 
supplier/service provider in accordance with the terms and conditions of the financing Agreement 
Include here details of direct payments 
WA, Date, currency and amount received, amount in local currency 
6  GOVERNMENT COUNTERPART FUNDS 
Details here.  Cumulative contributions, yearly contributions (compared to budget).  For 
information only Include details of tax treatment and counterpart contributions as tax exemption. 
178 
7  OTHER DONOR FUNDS 
List of Donors 
20XX 
Loc 
currency 
20XX-1 
Loc 
currency 
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
Add details of cumulative and expected contributions  
8  OTHER RECEIPTS 
Interest Income 
other income (specify) 
20XX 
Loc 
currency 
20XX-1 
Loc 
currency 
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
 XXX  
9 
NON-CURRENT ASSETS (for disclosure purposes only) 
Financial Statement Currency 
Cat 1 -
Infrastructure 
20XX-
1 
20XX 
Cat 2 Vehicles 
20XX-
1 
20XX 
Cat 3-
Equipment 
20XX 
20XX-
1 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
Opening Balance 
Additions 
(Statement of 
Receipts and 
Payments) 
Disposals 
Closing Balance 
This schedule includes all assets acquired from the commencement of the Project.  These assets 
are stated at cost.   Existence and beneficial ownership to be verified by the auditors.      Apart of 
the summary schedule, details schedules for yearly changes to be included. 
179 
10 
YEARLY PROCUREMENTS 
Include here a list of the yearly procurements including methods 
11 
ALLOCATION AND USE OF THE FUNDS OF THE LOAN 
Allocated 
Disbursed 
Available Balance 
Amount 
SDR 
Equivalent 
USD (or 
otherwise) 
Amount 
SDR 
Equivalent 
USD (or 
otherwise) 
Amount 
SDR 
Equivalent 
USD (or 
otherwise) 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
  XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
XXXX 
Category 
AAA 
BBB 
CCC 
DDD 
EEE 
FFF 
12 
RECONCILIATION OF FUNDS DISBURSED BY IFAD AND FUNDS RECEIVED BY THE 
PROGRAMME 
180 
Attachment 7: Procurement Formats 
Annex A of Attachment 7 
INDIVIDUAL CONTRACT MONITORING FORM 
Procurement File No. _____________________ 
Description of Contract: _______________________________________________ 
Component/ Category: ____________________ 
Name of Contractor/ Supplier: ___________________________ 
Address: ____________________________________________ 
   ____________________________________________ 
Contract Summary 
Number 
Amount 
Date 
Document 
Original Contract 
Amendment No 1 
Amendment No 2 
Amendment No 3 
Total 
Monitoring of payments 
Payment Schedule 
Approved 
progress 
certificate 
Amount  Number  Date 
Milestone 
Total 
Payments issued 
Balance 
due on 
contract 
Invoice 
No 
Date 
Amount  Cheque 
No 
181 
Annex B of Attachment 7 
Terms of Reference of Procurement Specialist 
 Position Purpose: Enable efficient procurement of goods and services for the project and 
adoption of good procurement practices. 
1.  Qualifications & Experience: 
a.  Formal Academic from recognized University or equivalent: 
 
Post graduate in commerce, business, finance or management   
b.  Relevant Training: 
 
Purchase management and procurement systems 
c.  Work Experience 
Post qualification, minimum five (5) years of professional experience in 
national bidding procedure, procurement procedure, especially preparation of 
Expression of Interest, Notice Inviting Tender, Terms of Reference, Request for 
Proposal and bidding document for procurement of consultant services, goods 
and works. Preference will be given for experience in handling procurement 
procedures for multilateral institutions. 
2.  Desirable Qualification:  
(a) Post Graduate Diploma in Material/Supply Management  
(b) Thorough knowledge of procurement procedures of multilateral institutions.  
(c) Good procurement skill and should be proficient in English.  
(d) MBA from any recognised university or institute. 
3.  Preferred Skills: 
  Good written and verbal communication skills 
  Computer literacy general MS package 
 
 
Proficient in computer based spread sheets for data analysis 
Proactive, work with minimum supervision, and as a team builder 
4.  Job Responsibilities: The responsibilities of the Procurement Specialist will be as follows:  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
i.  With reference to the project design document, IFAD procurement guidelines and 
Procurement Handbook and GoM procurement systems, draw up draft project 
procurement manual for the project for approval by the Board and IFAD, and inclusion 
in the PIM. Prepare and include relevant Community Procurement Guidelines and 
formats and include in the PIM. 
To prepare annual Procurement Plan in line with AWPB and Project Cost Tables and 
also ensure that the procurement under the project is conducted in accordance with 
the procedure and procurement plan agreed with IFAD  
To liaise with IFAD procurement staff.  
To co-ordinate with concerned subject matter specialist on procurement matters, 
especially preparation of TOR, technical specification etc.  
To collaborate closely with General Manager and others for preparing advertisements, 
short listing, bidding documents, evaluation, letters of awards, draft contracts etc. in 
the procurement of good and services including consultancies.  
To co-ordinate with General Manager regarding submission of advertisements bidding 
documents, letters of invitation, evaluation reports, contracts, etc. to IFAD for those 
items subject to prior review.  
To facilitate/assist in getting NOC from IFAD wherever required.  
To co-ordinate with project team, organize and support evaluation committees for 
prompt evaluation.  
To make necessary arrangement for contract signatures.  
To maintain Contract Management forms as per the formats of IFAD and prepare 
amendment letters to the contracts. As part of the contract management, in 
coordination with the concerned officials monitor the contractual provisions for 
compliance. 
To keep progress of procurement activities against procurement timetables, highlight 
variations in progress, record reasons and identify remedial actions, if any.  
To collect data on procurement from DCOs and contribute to periodic progress report.  
xi. 
xii. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
182 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
xvi. 
To co-ordinate with the GM for placement of various documents/papers before the 
Board of MAVIM for review and approval, all types of audits of procurement activities, 
post review of IFAD etc.  
To liaison with any other appropriate authority for any dispute among the parties 
relating to procurement.  
To provide documentations and data to IFAD fielded Supervision Mission and 
Implementation Support Missions 
To perform any other relevant work related to the project assigned by the General 
Manager/ Project Director.  
183 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
Annex C : Procurement plan of Attachment 7  
Goods 
Consultants 
184 
Country/Organisation:Project/Programme: PROCUREMENT PLAN (GOODS)Loan #:Description*LotNumberIssue #of Invitationfor BidsEstimated Amount in US $Procurement MethodPre-or Post QualificationPrior or Post ReviewPlan vs. ActualDateProposedDateNo-objectionBid Invitation DateBid Closing-OpeningBid Evaluation ReportNo-objectionContract Amount in US $DateContractAwardDateContractSignaturePlanActualPlanActualdatePlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualPlanActualTotal Cost0.00Plan0.000.00Actual0.00Fill gray cells only!Bid EvaluationContract FinalizationBASIC DATABid DocumentsBidding Period 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
185 
Country/Organisation:Project/Programme: Loan #:Description*Selection MethodLumpsumorTime-BasedEstimated Amount in US $Prior/Post ReviewPlan vs. ActualDatePublishedClosingDateDateProposedDateNo-objectionDateProposedDateNo-objectionPlan vs. Actual DatePrepared DateNo-objectionInvitationDateSubmission/OpeningDateSubmissionEvaluationReport (T)No-objectionEvaluationReport  (T)Opening Financial ProposalsSubmissionEval Report(T) & (F)No-objectionEval Report(T) & (F)Plan vs. ActualContract Amount in US $Contract Award Contract SignaturePlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualPlanPlanPlanActualActualActualTotal Cost0.00PlanPlanPlan0.000.00ActualActualActual0.00Request for Expression of InterestShortListBid ProposalsContract FinalizationTerms of ReferenceRequest forProposalBid EvaluationTechnical (T) & Financial (F) 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
Attachment 8:  
Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix 
Climate triggers 
Risk 
Mitigation/Adaptation 
Heavy/excess rainfall 
days, Drought, 
Floods, Heat wave 
Drought, 
Consecutive dry 
days, floods, Pest 
and diseases, High 
temperature 
Health, daily income loss 
(Flood), water availability 
Support from the CMRCs to the landless and destitute households under 
Ultra-Poor related interventions of component 2 of the project.  
Forest fires, soil loss, loss 
of crop leading to income 
loss, livestock fodder 
shortage, malnutrition 
Physical exhaustion, 
health hazards, loss of 
income due to flood,  
CMRCs trained to support their members to access Government schemes 
promoting water harvesting and micro-irrigation, as well as access to crop 
insurance and other safety nets provided by State Govt. Promotion of good 
agricultural practices for climate resilient agriculture and quality inputs 
provided through CMRCs or partner private sector.  
For land related activities and non-farm enterprises, sub-projects will 
promote precision machinery that improve labour productivity and reduce 
drudgery; promote drought resilient farming based on crop diversification, 
low external input sustainable agriculture. For livestock related activities, 
the sub-projects will include intensive and semi-intensive livestock 
husbandry and appropriate sheds/ feed and water troughs.  
Drudgery, health  Heat stress, drought, 
flood/malaria 
A.  Climate Risk Matrix 
Threats 
Target Groups 
Landless 
Climate shocks  
Climate shocks  
Belonging to 
small and 
marginal land 
holding category  
With special 
focus on women 
farming 
community 
including 
agriculture 
labourers and 
landless 
Livestock with 
special focus on 
Goat rearing and 
backyard poultry 
Water 
availability, 
methane 
emission 
Temperature, Co2, 
Flood, drought, High 
temperature (Early 
mature, loss of 
yield), Pests and 
diseases 
Yield loss, poor seed 
quality 
Under rainfed 
conditions 
Water 
availability, 
Consecutive wet and 
dry days, low 
Crop loss, nutrient loss, 
soil erosion 
To control methane emissions in livestock, the sub-projects will provide for 
feed mixes and livestock breeds that have better conversion of feed; 
recycling of manure into biogas and bio-slurry. To control methane 
emissions from rice cultivation, CMRCs will expand SRI (as already adopted 
by SHG members in rice producing areas). 
For water availability, the sub-projects will include water troughs for 
livestock. For crops, the sub-projects will include micro-irrigation. For non-
farm activities, the sub-projects will include machinery that is water 
efficient, and where possible, water will be recycled.  
Project will promote water efficient/ high value crop production 
enterprises; CMRCs will disseminate micro-irrigation and protective 
186 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
erratic rainfall 
distribution, 
early maturity 
seasonal rainfall, 
shifting season (1 
week to 10 days), 
extremely wet days 
irrigation through agro-service centres managed by them; CMRCs trained 
to facilitate convergence with Govt schemes and help their members 
access soil and water conservation (watershed development schemes) and 
Jalyukt Shivar (water harvesting scheme).  
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
Mitigation will be 
through convergence 
with the Jalyukt 
Shivar scheme were 
applicable. 
Means of verification  Timing / frequency 
of verification 
Annual 
MAVIM will be 
tracking the 
programs it 
converges with and 
the number of 
beneficiaries thereof. 
B.  Environmental Mitigation Plan 
Significance Rating 
Impact 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Low 
Land and soil 
degradation (incl. 
agrochemicals) 
Extent / Prevalence 
Recommended 
Mitigation Measures 
All Districts 
The Government of 
Maharashtra is 
implementing a large 
scale soil and water 
conservation 
programme called 
Jalyukt Shivar which 
aims to develop 
integrated soil and 
water conservation 
works in 5000 
villages/ year. Since 
its implementation in 
2015, it created so 
far, an irrigation 
potential of 
2,274,744 ha and a 
water storage 
capacity of 17,27,229 
TMC (thousand 
million cubic feet) 
across 16,521 villages 
in 34 districts. 
Comparative data 
shows that in 2013-
187 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
Impact 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Extent / Prevalence 
Recommended 
Mitigation Measures 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
Means of verification  Timing / frequency 
of verification 
14 when there was 
124 per cent rainfall 
the agriculture 
production was 
137.91 lakh metric 
tonnes (MT). 
However, in 2017-18, 
despite rainfall being 
84.3 per cent of its 
total capacity, there 
was an agricultural 
production of 132.83 
lakh MT. As a result 
the significance 
rating is assessed as 
low. 
Minimize use of non-
organic fertilizers and 
encourage use of 
organic (bio-
degradable) manure 
in agriculture; and 
reduce use of agro-
chemicals in 
processing and 
manufacturing 
processes.  
This is not applicable 
to the project. 
Enterprises will not 
be developed / 
expanded in such 
areas. 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
Every two years 
Periodic assessment 
on how 
environmental 
safeguards are 
mainstreamed in 
business processes 
Annual 
As above + 
Geotagging of 
enterprises to ensure 
they are not located 
in environmentally 
188 
Water pollution 
Medium 
All Districts 
Forest and wetland 
removal 
Low 
All Districts 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
Impact 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Extent / Prevalence 
Recommended 
Mitigation Measures 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
Means of verification  Timing / frequency 
of verification 
Erosion and gully 
Medium 
All Districts 
Bush burning 
Low 
Districts with tribal 
population where 
shifting cultivation is 
practised 
Loss of biodiversity 
Low 
All districts 
Waste proliferation 
Medium 
All districts 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
Please see 
description of Jalyukt 
Shivar programme of 
Govt of Maharashtra 
The project is not 
investing in bush 
burning and will be 
promoting good 
agronomic practices 
for soil nutrient 
management. 
The project will not 
be operating in 
ecologically sensitive 
areas 
Train enterprise 
owners on 
sustainable waste 
management by 
simple and effective 
technologies and 
better hygiene to 
liquidate waste, 
including livestock 
effluents; Create 
enterprises around 
waste valorization 
where market 
opportunities exist. 
fragile or protected 
areas 
MAVIM will track 
convergence with 
Jalyukt Shivar and no 
of beneficiaries 
No of beneficiaries 
adopting 
environmental and 
climate smart 
production 
techniques 
Periodic assessment 
of compliance with 
the environmental 
safeguards 
Number of sub-
projects that 
incorporate safe 
waste and effluent 
disposal.  
Annual 
Annual 
Every two years 
Annual 
189 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
Impact 
Pollution of water 
and crops due to use 
of agrochemicals 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Medium 
All districts 
Extent / Prevalence 
Recommended 
Mitigation Measures 
Flooding 
Medium 
7% of State area is 
prone to floods 
GHG emissions 
Medium 
All districts 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
MAVIM 
Minimize use of non-
organic fertilizers and 
encourage use of 
organic (bio-
degradable) manure 
in agriculture. 
Encourage regular 
and timely 
dissemination of 
hydro-meteorological 
information to agri-
entrepreneurs; Link 
target group to crop 
and other insurance 
schemes areas; 
Discourage siting of 
livestock enterprises 
in flood prone areas 
Ensure energy 
efficiency and 
recycling of waste in 
business processes 
for the enterprises 
supported by Nav 
Tejaswini 
Lack of knowledge 
and awareness 
Medium 
All districts 
MAVIM and CMRC 
Capacity building of 
MAVIM and CMRCs 
on mainstreaming 
environmental and 
Means of verification  Timing / frequency 
of verification 
Annual 
Annual 
Convergence with 
Government 
schemes for 
sustainable 
agriculture 
Convergence with 
Government 
schemes and no of 
beneficiaries 
Number of sub-
projects including 
GHG emission 
measures (such as 
SRI, improved feed 
conversion ratio for 
livestock, and use of 
renewable energy in 
farm and non farm 
enterprises) 
No of trainees from 
MAVIM and CMRCs 
Annual 
Annual 
190 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
Impact 
Significance Rating 
(likelihood x 
consequence) 
Extent / Prevalence 
Recommended 
Mitigation Measures 
Responsibility for 
implementing 
mitigation 
Means of verification  Timing / frequency 
of verification 
climate safeguards in 
the business 
processes of small 
enterprises 
191 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
C.  Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Key Requirements 
Landless households, 
marginal farmers, female 
workers 
High Temperature, 
Reduced Rainfall, 
variability, drought 
Disaster Emergency 
Response 
(cyclone/flood/forest 
fire/earthquake) 
Sediment/siltation/water 
quality 
Actions 
Mentoring, coaching and skill 
development for the Ultra-
Poor (under component 2 of 
project) and convergence 
with Government safety 
schemes 
Demonstration of Drought 
Proofing techniques / 
Conservation Agriculture 
(pilot projects) /change in 
cropping pattern/crop 
(livestock) insurance/ Identify 
existing/convergence with 
Government schemes for 
SWC, water harvesting, micro-
irrigation, insurance and 
safety nets 
CMRCs trained on disaster 
preparedness and recovery, 
under capacity building of 
CMRCs (component 1) , and 
incorporated in training on 
value chain project design and 
management.  
Sub-projects incorporate 
measures to reduce water 
pollution and improve water 
use efficiency. Convergence 
with Govt schemes for soil 
and water conservation.  
Indicator 
No of Ultra-Poor 
supported by the 
project 
Responsibility 
CMRCs 
MAVIM 
No of sub-projects 
including climate 
smart agriculture 
and allied 
activities 
Time Frame 
Year 1 to 5 for 
mentoring/ 
coaching and year 
2 to 6 for skill dev. 
In total, 50,000 
HH covered. 
Year 1 to 5 
Budget Source 
4.4 million USD 
approx 
Provisions for climate 
resilient agriculture 
and animal 
husbandry provided 
in unit cost of sub-
projects – 60,000 to 
174,000 USD/ sub-
project 
Training module 
incorporates 
awareness about 
disaster 
preparedness and 
recovery for 
enterprises 
No of sub-projects 
incorporating 
water quality and 
use efficiency 
measures  
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 3  
Total training cost is 
48,000 USD 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 5 
Unit cost of sub-
project from 80,000 
to 160,000 USD 
192 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
Key Requirements 
Feed and Fodder/Loss of 
Common grazing land 
Actions 
Sub-projects incorporate 
semi-intensive and intensive 
animal husbandry practices 
GHG Emissions 
Livestock and human 
health 
Chance finds of artefacts 
of cultural and historical 
significance 
Sub-projects to include 
renewable energy (solar, 
biogas), breeds and feed that 
improve feed conversion ratio 
and SRI (component 1).  
Support to innovation in 
renewable energy and waste 
management (component 1) 
No of sub-projects that 
promote livestock 
intensification with improved 
sheds, precision 
farming/machinery, drudgery 
reduction, protective gear for 
workers.  
MAVIM develops and trains 
the CMRCs on procedures for 
chance finds in agri- and eco-
tourism projects.  
Responsibility 
MAVIM 
Time Frame 
Year 1 to 5 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 5 
Year 2 to 5 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 5 
Indicator 
No of sub-projects 
that intensify 
livestock 
husbandry 
No of sub-projects 
that reduce GHG 
emissions 
No of innovations 
that reduce GHG 
emissions 
No of sub-projects 
incorporating 
measures for 
livestock and 
human health 
No CMRCs trained  MAVIM  
Year 1 to 5 
Effective 
implementation of ESMP 
Inclusion of ESMP indicators 
in monitoring plan ; 
Project 
monitoring plan 
MAVIM 
Year 1 to 6 
Budget Source 
Unit cost for dairy is 
174,000 USD approx.; 
and unit cost for 
goat/poultry/fisheries 
is 116,000 USD 
approx. 
See above for sub-
project budget 
Total budget for 
innovation in RE and 
waste mgt is 240,000 
USD approx 
See above for sub-
project budget 
Total training under 
cap building of CMRC 
on value chain 
planning and 
management is 
48,000 USD  
Total budget for 
project softwares is 
918,000 USD 
193 
India: Maharashtra Rural Women’s Enterprise Development Project (NAV TEJASWINI) 
NAV TEJASWINI: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Date: September 2019  
Key Requirements 
Actions 
geotagging of all enterprises/ 
sub-projects; 
Indicator 
incorporates all 
ESMP indicators 
Responsibility 
Time Frame 
Budget Source 
(includes project 
management 
software) 
Establishing an environmental 
and social management 
system within MAVIM to 
screen, manage and monitor 
environment and social risks 
and impacts of the project 
including building capacity of 
MAVIM. 
194 
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Overall Summary
Risk Category / Subcategory
1/9
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Budgeting
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Internal Controls
Accounting and financial reporting
External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Inherent
risk
Moderate
Moderate
Residual risk
Low
N/A
N/A
Low
N/A
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
N/A
High
Moderate
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
N/A
Low
Low
Low
N/A
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Moderate
High
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Moderate
High
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
N/A
N/A
Low
N/A
Risk Category / Subcategory
2/9
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Macroeconomic
Risk:
Inherent
risk
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Residual risk
Low
Low
N/A
Low
Low
Low
Low
N/A
Low
Low
Low
Low
Higher inflation & changing import-export policies will have a direct impact on prices of
commodities that might adversely impact the poor.
Mitigations:
- The project is focused on diversification of income of the poor HHs to mitigate adverse
impact of macroeconomic factors. 
- Crop insurance and other insurance solutions (for example for livestock) will be explored
by the project 
- The project will promote Government crop insurance .
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Currently Govt. schemes and programmes drive production decisions, which could risk
commercial sustainability of enterprises.
Mitigations:
(i) Improved market linkages and assurance of off-take, will encourage shift of decision
making to entirely commercial parameters; (ii) the project’s central focus will be to improve
quality of products and establishing linkages with mainstream private market.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
Extremely wet days precipitation is projected to increase for some of the project districts
under both low and high emission scenarios. Wet weather may affect standing crops,
cause floods and soil erosion, emergence of pest and diseases.
Mitigations:
- promotion of climate smart agricultural technologies, such as IPM, drip irrigation, bio-
fertilizer, compost technologies for converting cow dung into fertilizer etc; 
- GGAP will also improve environment and reduce food safety risks; 
- project will promote diversification of sources of income including income from non-farm,
service sector and wage employment;
3/9
Mitigation measures are detailed in Environment and Social Management Plan
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
High
Moderate
High
Moderate
Projected future climatic changes suggest that the project areas will experience: 
- fluctuations in temperatures and precipitation due to increased climate variability; 
- the possibility of increased dry spells, drought and delayed rains during the wet season.
Mitigations:
- controlling of methane emission 
- promotion of water efficient/ high value crop production enterprises 
Mitigation measures detailed in Environment and Social Management Plan
Project Scope
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
While MAVIM has implemented successful livelihood interventions in farm sector, the
adoption of value chain approach and experience in non-farm sector initiatives is nascent.
Market linkages capacity is limited.
Mitigations:
- To mitigate the risks, the project has planned multiple trainings for MAVIM and CRMCs
on enterprise development and value chain development; 
- The project will launch smaller and less risky value chains and after successful
completion up-scaling into larger and complex value chains; 
- substantial budget allocated for technical assistance to MAVIM and CMRCs.
Risk:
Low
Low
Non-materializing of allocation to close IFAD's financing gap will prevent the project from
being implemented as designed, and this may reduce its effectiveness.
Mitigations:
- The financing gap will be close either from IFAD12 PBAS resources or from resources
made available from restructured problem projects.
Risk:
Moderate
Low
If private sector co-financing does not materialize, financial support activities will be
affected.
Mitigations:
4/9
The project will undertake steps to mitigate risks and develop partnership with banks to: 
a) launch a pilot ME loan program with 2-3 banks to reach to 10,000 microenterprises in
two years, in order to develop a successful ME loan program; 
b) train/orient bank officers at the branch level of partner banks on ME management and
financing, and 
c) provide risk guarantee instruments in the pilot phase to reduce risks from bank’s point of
view.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
The key challenge for MAVIM relates to: 
- implementing several sub-sectoral value-chain interventions across sectors and across
agro-ecological and economic zones, which requires diverse technical expertise; 
- implementing sustainable enterprise development and charging fee for services which
requires intense networking and liaison with the government, and identifying the most
relevant private sector actors.
Mitigations:
To mitigate the risks: 
- MAVIM will have dedicated PMU and additional trained staff members in all districts; 
- MAVIM, through the project, will seek help of sectoral experts in designing value chain
subprojects. 
- the project will enhance its institutional capacity through targeted trainings and exposures.
- Management systems include microfinance, VCD project management system will be
installed.
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Staff may not be suitably qualified, staff turnover may be high, staff may be unfamiliar with
working with donor financing requirements
Mitigations:
MAVIM has implemented two IFAD-financed project previously and staff are adequately
qualified and experienced. Additional staff will be recruited to handle the extra workload of
the project. Clear job descriptions and accountability lines will be implemented with
delegations of authrority and segregation of duties. Several MAVIM staff attended a Dec
2019 IFAD financial management workshop and key staff will participate in the capacity-
building grant-funded initiative with CIPFA.The PIM will outline key procedures.
Budgeting
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
The risk that budgeted expenditures are not realistic, not prepared or revised on a timely
basis, and not executed in an orderly and predictable manner, resulting in funds not being
available when needed, ineligible costs and reallocation of project funds and slow
implementation progress.
Mitigations:
The budgeting system is well established and there are procedures for collecting
information from the districts each month, however, the data collected needs to be verified
to ensure proper process of preparation of AWPB using the bottom-up approach and
regular review of the physical and financial progress
5/9
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
High Substantial
High
Substantial
The risk that funds from multiple financiers disburse with delay due to cumbersome
treasury arrangements or inability of project cost centers and service providers to justify
prior advances, resulting in delayed implementation. In particular prior experience showed
that slow release of funds by the Government of Maharashtra led to some delay in
implementation.
Mitigations:
Ensure timely release of budget for project activities
Internal Controls
Risk:
The risk that controls over Project funds are not in place, leading to the inefficient or
inappropriate use of project resources including the risk that internal audit arrangements
are not present, independent or adequately resourced, leading to an inaccurate (or
inexistent) assessment of the effectiveness of risk management, control and governance
processes.
Mitigations:
Segregation of duties exists at MAVIM but not at the districts due to limited number of staff:
the bank reconciliations are prepared by the accounts officer who is also the person who
makes payment and is a joint signatory for issue of payments. Periodic reconciliations.
Restricting access to accounting files and documents. Periodic count of inventories and
fixed assets. Internal audit does not currently exist and needs to be introduced with
quarterly reporting.
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Accounting and financial reporting
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
The risk that accounting systems – including polices and standards – are not integrated
and reliable, leading to inaccuracies in financial records lack of informed decision-making.
Mitigations:
6/9
Tally software is used but needs customizing to include the reporting by categories and
financiers as well which is currently done in Excel. Chart of accounts existed for the earlier
project and does exist for MAVIM, for the new project will be prepared in accordance with
the AWPB of the project. Accounting standards prescribed under the Companies Act, 2013
and the rules made thereunder which are nationally accepted accounting standards in India
for accrual system of accounting are followed. MAVIM has Financial Regulations which
was framed in 2004 but they need to be updated. MAVIM has a financial regulation manual
which will be updated and included in PIM. Accountant will need to be proficient in the use
of the accounting software. Back-up of accounting records. Use of registry of fixed assets. 
Bi-annual unaudited financial statements and annual audited financial statements were
sent to IFAD for the earlier project and will be continued for the new project as well. Data is
exported from Tally into Excel for detailed reporting. Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
to detail reporting and monitoring requirements and rules. Use of financial statements
templates consistent with IFAD reporting requirements
External Audit
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that independent and competent oversight of the Project financial statements is
not in place or performed timely leading to possible misrepresentation of the financial
results and/or suspension or other remedies due to compliance breaches.
Mitigations:
A Chartered Accountant firm does the external audit of MAVIM who is appointed by the
office of the CAG. For the project a CA firm will be recruited to undertake the audit in
accordance with the Indian Standards of Auditing as prescribed by the Companies Act,
2013. Besides the Auditor General’s office (SAI) also conducts transaction audit. Ensure
reporting as required by IFAD Guidelines. Prompt implementation of auditor’s
recommendations.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
High Substantial
High
Substantial
The risk that the Borrower’s regulatory and institutional capacity and practices (including
compliance with the laws) are inadequate to conduct the procurement in a manner that
optimizes value for money with integrity.
Mitigations:
1). Project Level Procurement Manual - modeled and customised based on IFAD Project
Procurement Handbook version 2020 which would include standard bidding documents. 
2). Oversight through the review of the Procurement plan that procurement method
(competitive) is used and applied. LTB to include provision of the applicable method based
on range (value). 
3). Potentially establish or integrate procurement monitoring system within MAVIM 
4). Potentially establish or integrate public access to procurement information within
MAVIM 
Accountability and Transparency
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
The risk that accountability, transparency and oversight arrangements (including the
handling of complaints regarding, for example, SH/SEA and fraud and corruption) are
inadequate to safeguard the integrity of project procurement and contract execution,
leading to the unintended use of funds, misprocurement, SH/SEA, and/or execution of
project procurement outside of the required time, cost and quality requirements.
7/9
Mitigations:
1). Establish a mechanism and procedures and for complaints management within MAVIM
and nodal Ministry in Govt of Maharashtra 
2). Explore opportunities and potential for strengthening proposed single tier complaints
management system with a two tier system. 
3). Adopt procedures and implement the government rules on procurement sanctions 
4). Explore opportunities of strengthening independent investigation of prohibitive practises
at the at the level of Govt of Maharashtra.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that the implementing agency does not have sound processes, procedures,
systems and personnel in place for the administration, supervision and management of
contracts resulting in adverse impacts to the development outcomes of the project.
Mitigations:
1). Set up a procurement unit with at least one procurement officer 
2). Provide training and capacity building to the procurement staff, Project to develop a
clear set of objective and results matrix for the procurement staff.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that procurement processes and market structures (methods, planning, bidding,
contract award and contract management) are inefficient and/or anti-competitive, resulting
in the misuse of project funds or sub-optimal implementation of the project and
achievement of its objectives.
Mitigations:
1). Monitoring the adoption and implementation of Project Level Procurement Manual 
2). Oversight through supervision mission and other ad-hoc offsite follow up.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Chance finds of artefacts of cultural and historical significance
Mitigations:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
MAVIM develops and trains the CMRCs on procedures for chance finds in agri- and eco-
tourism projects.
Labour and Working Conditions
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
No major risk is foreseen, given the nature of the project and that no infrastructure work is
envisaged.
8/9
Mitigations:
However, MAVIM will ensure much of the income earned by the women beneficiaries is
spent on child education (we can refer to the endline surveys of Tejaswini Maharashtra).
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
With special focus on women farming community including agriculture labourers and
landless, there could be the risk that activities will result in drudgery and physical
exhaustion
Mitigations:
- For land related activities and non farm enterprises, sub-projects will promote precision
machinery that improve labour productivity and reduce drudgery; 
- promote drought resilient farming based on crop diversification, low external input
sustainable agriculture; 
- For livestock related activities, the sub-projects will include intensive and semi-intensive
livestock husbandry and appropriate sheds/ feed and water troughs.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
Methane emission
Mitigations:
Low
Low
Low
Low
- the sub-projects will provide for feed mixes and livestock breeds that have better
conversion of feed; 
- recycling of manure into biogas and bio-slurry; 
- To control methane emissions from rice cultivation, CMRCs will expand SRI (as already
adopted by SHG members in rice producing areas).
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
The target group of the area is substantially dependent on climate-sensitive natural
resources especially rainwater-fed agricultural crops such as cotton, soybean, sugarcane
and livestock production.
Mitigations:
- Crop-based insurance and early warning systems are planned for development in
collaboration with Govt of Maharashtra; 
- Minimize use of non-organic fertilizers and encourage use of organic (bio-degradable)
manure in agriculture; and 
- reduce use of agro-chemicals in processing and manufacturing processes.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
1. The key risk perceived is banks are unwilling to provide individual micro enterprise loan
of a larger size to SHG members.
9/9
2. Risk of poor performance by Technical Service Providers;
3. Risk of low mobilization of resources under convergence schemes.
Mitigations:
1. The design provides for risk sharing instrument during pilot phase;
2. The project will ensure proper due diligence before selecting partners and build risk
mitigating mechanisms (financial / performance bank guarantees) into contracts;
3. The project will jointly develop action plans with the relevant departments. Similar
programme implementation by MSRLM based on subsidies and grants is a risk that will be
mitigated by agreements with Rural Development Department for collaboration for sharing
of data, facilitating interest subvention scheme for SHG loans, implementing the skilling
initiatives and also facilitating funds flow to CMRC.
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy and Sustainability 
Sustainability of the Nav Tejaswini benefits and results can be seen at three levels: the 
enterprises being strengthened, the CMRCs already functional and producer collectives 
being formed and nurtured and ability of MAVIM and CMRCs to facilitate/provide support 
services to the enterprises and collectives. The exit strategy and its success is closely 
linked to results achieved at all these three levels. 
The exit strategy and sustainability of the project activities is presented component wise 
below;  
Component/ 
component 
Sub 
Exit strategy 
Component 1 Market led enterprise promotion 
Farm sector enterprise 
development (both cluster 
based and standalone) 
Off farm/Non-farm sector 
enterprise development 
The  component  will  enable  farm  and  non/off  farm 
producers  and  businesses  in  identified  clusters  to 
increase  sales  and  profit  through  a  combination  of 
interventions  in  marketing,  product  development 
productivity 
and 
enhancement, 
business 
relationships with other businesses thus paving way 
for sustainable enterprises. 
improvement, 
sustainable 
quality 
and 
All activities in the promotion of support services are 
based on a sustainable private sector-based, market 
led  approach with a clear plan to continue to function 
after the project support. Given the widespread lack 
of  appropriate  technical  advice  and 
follow-up 
available to many smallholders/small producers, the 
project will partner with technical agencies to provide 
technical services to farmers/producers against fees, 
without further project  support. Under  farm sector, 
the common project interventions would be training 
for farmers, introduction of improved farm practices, 
mechanization  of  production  process,  cost  reducing 
farm practices, establishing linkages with buyers etc. 
both  for  crops  as  well  as  livestock.  All  the  above 
activities  will  be  carried  out  by  CMRCs  initially  and 
once  producer  collectives  are  formed  the  market 
interface both for inputs and outputs will be carried 
out by the collectives. The others will continue with 
CMRCs.  The  project  through  CMRCs  and  village-
(Sakhis)  will 
based 
standalone 
provide/facilitate 
farm/businesses  on 
fee  basis.  Market  related 
assistance to stand alone businesses will be through 
the producer collectives. 
agricultural 
production 
assistants 
to 
Under non-farm sector initiatives, the key initiatives 
will  address  the  current  constraints  and  issues  of 
design  changes/improvement,  quality  improvement 
and  standardisation,  improve  skilling  and  identify 
188 
subcontracting  arrangement  and  establish  linkage 
with  mainstream  marketing  channels.    Skilling 
women  in  Services  sector  and  provision  of  quality 
services 
is  another  major  segment  that  Nav 
Tejaswini  will  focus  on.  For  standalone  non-farm 
enterprises  which  are  from  different  segments  and 
activities,  the  business  development  needs  vary. 
MAVIM  will 
identify  and  shortlist  the  service 
providers whose services the enterprises will access 
on fee basis. CMRCs will facilitate such linkages. All 
these  technical  services  will  continue  beyond  the 
project period.  
Thus  choosing  the  technical  service  providers, 
business development service providers, and linking 
the  enterprises  to  these  service  providers  on  fee 
basis will ensure a clear exit for the project.  
The  objective  of  producer  collectives  is  that  all 
producer  collectives  should  graduate  to  being  fully 
independent,  financially  robust  and  self-managing 
within three years of project engagement since these 
collectives  are  built  on  the  solid  social  mobilisation 
and  good  governance  built  by  Tejaswini.  Moreover, 
engaging  Samunnati  agro  solutions  and  Samunnati 
financial services for building businesses couple with 
innovative financing are expected to strengthen the 
producer  collectives  and  push  them  strongly  into 
growth  trajectories.  Therefore,  well  before  Nav 
Tejaswini exits,  the collectives would have reached 
a development level which ensures that the benefits 
gained  from  Nav  Tejaswini  support  would  continue 
after the projects closes. 
Nav  Tejaswini  will  be  transformative  for  CMRCs  as 
they  move  focus  from  livelihoods  to  enterprise 
development and market interventions. The project 
provides for intensive capacity development and also 
systems  development  for  CMRCs.  The  revenue 
earning  opportunities  widen  for  CMRCs.  CMRCs  are 
likely to emerge much stronger institutionally as well 
as financially at the end of the project.  
Innovations  funding  is  Nav  Tejaswini  specific.  The 
proposals funded after thorough vetting by an expert 
committee are likely to be sustainable as long as they 
offer  market  based  solutions.  It  is  expected  that 
more  than  80%  of  the  proposals  will  be  successful 
and scalable. 
CMRC capacity building 
Innovations 
Component 2 Enabling support services 
Facilitating Financial Linkages  The  facilitation  of  financial  services  under  Nav 
Tejaswini  is  based  on  institutional  development 
fully  sustainable  services.  The 
approach  with 
189 
capacity  building  of  CMRCs  and  FIs  is  to  support 
linking the micro enterprises to these institutions and 
assisting  the  FIs  to  modify/develop  appropriate 
products that meet the first time ME loan borrowers. 
Similarly  by  improving  the  savings  and  also  credit 
planning capacities in SHGs, FIs will be encouraged 
to lend larger loans to support livelihoods and nano 
enterprises of SHG members. FIs will forge incentive 
based  partnerships  with  CMRCs  as  business 
facilitators  for  loanee  selection  and  monitoring  of 
loan  portfolio.  Thus  these  services  would  be 
institutionalized  in  the  FIs  and  CMRCs  and  these 
services would continue after Nav Tejaswini closes. 
The  pilot  on  animal  insurance  cum  health  services 
will be scaled up based on results and the feasibility 
study  will  strongly  focus  on  sustainability  of  the 
initiative.  
Policy  dialogues  are  expected  to  continue  beyond 
project period with capacity built in MAVIM and also 
partnerships forged with research institutions. 
these 
families  with 
The aim is to graduate all ultra poor families By the 
end of the project. With sensitive support from SHGs 
and  CMRCs 
tailor  made 
interventions are expected to continue to grow their 
incomes  and  stay  above  poverty  line.  Further,  a 
majority  of  these  households  would  have  the  skills 
and confidence to grow and face fewer social barriers 
to their development. CMRCs will continue to monitor 
the performance of these households. 
The three types of training offered are with external 
partnerships and CMRCs playing a facilitation role for 
appropriate  selection  of  candidates.  As  long  as 
training  institutions  value  the  partnerships  with 
CMRCs in proper selection of candidates, vocational 
trainings  will  continue  to  be  offered  in  partnership 
with CMRCs. Village community based trainings will 
continue to be  conducted with CMRCs selecting the 
trainers  and  trainees  paying  for  the  training. 
Apprenticeships are likely to be continued if MAVIM 
and  CMRCs  raise  resources  for  the  same  through 
Government/CSR etc.,  
These  initiatives  are  embedded  in  the  sustainable 
community institutions structure of Self Help groups, 
VOs and CMRCs. CMRCs with adequate capacity built 
will  continue  these  initiatives,  which  involve  low 
budgets  and  based  on  partnerships/convergence. 
The  agenda  of  nutrition  will  be  embedded  in  each 
SHG which are likely to continue awareness raising 
and  monitoring  of  key  health  parameters.  Similarly 
190 
Evolving  new  pathways  for 
ultra-poor households 
Skill training 
Enhancing  nutritional  status 
and  gender  relations  at  HH 
and community levels 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management 
VOs  will  spearhead  the  gender  related  initiatives 
under the guidance of CMRCs.  
and 
Project 
related 
empowerment 
MAVIM’s ability to build sustainable SHG federations 
is widely   recognized.  The institutional capability  of 
MAVIM will be enhanced through various training and 
technical assistance to become an effective promoter 
of  enterprise  development  for  rural  women,  thus 
enabling  a  transition  of  MAVIM  from  livelihood 
promoter  to  enterprises  developer.  Government  of 
Maharashtra  is  keen  to  support  different  models  of 
enterprise 
community 
development. GoM is providing MAVIM’s operational 
expenses through budgetary allocations for the core 
staff. 
business 
development  staff  recruited  will  be  supported 
through  the  producer  collectives  at  various  levels. 
MAVIM 
implementing/facilitating 
GoM/GoI schemes through convergence and is likely 
to  get  a  budget  allocation  from  Planning  and 
Development  Department  for  implementing  women 
centric projects. MAVIM being a company, also has 
the opportunity to develop a platform for marketing 
of  select  products.  The  project  is  also  supporting 
MAVIM to build a center of excellence through which 
MAVIM’s  experience,  knowledge  and  learnings  can 
be  shared    within  the  country  and  also  other 
developing  countries.  The  main  challenge  is  to 
for 
led 
ensure 
sustainability of enterprises. 
implementation 
the  market 
increasingly 
additional 
is 
191 
India
Nav Tejaswini Maharashtra Rural Women's Enterprise Development Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
27 November to 8 December 2019
Document Date:
10/03/2020
Project No.
2000002980
Report No.
5309-IN
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/1
 Gender transformational
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
ECG
Remarks
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
 No social inclusion themes
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused
Finance
N/A
N/A
$0
