Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AIF
Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Bappenas
National Planning Agency
Bappeda
District Planning Unit
BPK
National Audit Agency
COSOP
Country Operating Strategy
CPE
DA
Country Programme Evaluation
Designated Account
Demplot
Demonstration Plot
Dinas
Pertanian
District Department of Agriculture
DGAIF
Directorate General, Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities
DSC
EFA
FFS
GAP
GDP
GMP
GOI
ha
ICT
IsDB
IFAD
IFR
Design Supervision Consultants
Economic and Financial Analysis
Farmer Field School
Good Agriculture Practices
Gross Domestic Product
Good Manufacturing Practice
Government of Indonesia
Hectare
Information Communication Technology
Islamic Development Bank
International Fund for Agriculture Development
Internal Finance Report
IPDMIP
Integrated Participatory Development and Management of Irrigation Sector Project
IRF
ISFD
KM
km
Integrated Risk Framework
Islamic Solidarity Fund for Development
Knowledge Management
Kilometre
KUBE
Kelompok Usaha Bersama - Joint Business Group which aims to empower poor communities
M&E
MFI
MoA
NGO
NOL
NTB
O&M
PIM
PIU
PMU
PPP
Monitoring & Evaluation
Microfinance Institution
Ministry of Agriculture
Non-Government Organization
No Objection Letter
Nusa Tengara Barat
Operations and Maintenance
Project Implementation Manual
Project Implementation Unit
Project Management Unit
Public Private Partnership
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
READ SI
Rural Empowerment and Agricultural Development Programme Scaling-up Initiative
SECAP
Social and Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures
SME
TOC
Small Medium Enterprise
Theory of Change
UPLANDs
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
Executive Summary
Strategic Context. Indonesia is a fast-growing, lower middle income country with the fourth largest population in the world. Its population of 262 million people are spread over a large archipelago
comprising 17,508 islands. The people of Indonesia comprise of over 300 ethnic groups who speak more than 600 languages.
1/22
Steady economic growth has led to significant poverty reduction, but more recently the pace of poverty reduction has slowed, remaining at around 11% since 2014. More than 25.9 million
Indonesians still live below the poverty line. Furthermore, another 29% of the population remain vulnerable of falling into poverty, as their income is only marginally above the national poverty line,
leaving them extremely vulnerable to shocks, such as illness, extreme weather events or price volatility. Out of a population of 262 million, more than 100 million Indonesians still live in or at risk of
poverty. Pronounced regional disparities exist, with the highest poverty rates in Eastern Indonesia. However densely populated Java hosts the largest numbers of poor. Poverty in Indonesia is more
pronounced in rural areas and farming households are 3.5 times more likely to be poor than non-farming households. Inequality is seen as the key threat to Indonesia's continued development.
While the overall contribution of the agricultural sector to GDP has reduced to 13% due to structural transformation, it remains the main source of income for one third of the population and employs
32% of the labour force. Limited education, declining land holding sizes, complex and insecure tenure arrangements together with low access to appropriate technologies, infrastructure, financial
services and input and output markets, result in sub-optimal use of the already small landholdings and lead to low labour productivity. Malnutrition remains stubbornly high. In fact, the prevalence of
stunting (height for age) among children under five years of age has risen slightly from 36.8% in 2007 to 37.2% in 2013. Economic losses due to stunting and malnutrition are estimated to be 2-3% of
Indonesia’s GDP. Public awareness of this issue is low and requires a renewed focus.
Rationale. The transformation of the agriculture sector is a key priority for the Government of Indonesia to meet its ambitious national development goals and to respond to a growing urban
consumer class’s increasing demand for diversified food. The need to increase agricultural productivity in order to feed a growing population increases demand for agricultural land and innovative
agricultural approaches. As competition for land increases and productivity stagnates in low-land areas, increasingly, the Government of Indonesia sees considerable potential in increasing
diversified agricultural production in uplands areas.
To date, uplands agriculture has received limited attention and investment. Indonesian agricultural development has mostly focused on low irrigated land to support food production (rice and
secondary crops) and food security (rice and palawija crops). Intensive long term investment has been afforded to irrigation and infrastructure to support the development of low land irrigated paddy.
Paradoxically, the overall dimension of agricultural upland area is larger than the available irrigated paddy land area, and has strong potential for developing commercial crops such as horticulture,
tree crops, and livestock. Utilized upland agricultural land – excluding shifting cultivation land - occupies about 11.5 million hectares, or 46.5% of total utilized agriculture land. The Ministry of
Agriculture estimates that there is an additional 24 million hectares of upland agricultural land that could be put into production if sustainable upland approaches, models and incentives were
available.
Today, many poor and marginalized smallholders in upland farming locations are challenged with sloping land and poorer quality soils contributing to low productivity. Further, a lack of knowledge of
sustainable agriculture practises, including failing to cultivate with proper contours, lack of terracing, widespread use of slash and burn agriculture, limited understanding and use of soil moisture
conservation techniques all contribute to soil erosion and high sedimentation in the waterways. Access to inputs including agriculture extension and financial services in upland areas are limited,
leaving these smallholders with very limited support to enhance their productivity. Upland areas play an important role for water conservation and ecosystem preservation. The upland and lowland
ecosystems are intricately connected, and land use problems of the former affects the latter seriously. The increased uptake of agriculture activities in upland areas in response to increasing
demand for higher value agricultural products may exacerbate issues of soil and water conservation and result in a loss of biodiversity in uplands, while in the lowlands, rivers and irrigation schemes
are being damaged due to increased run-off and siltation.
A new innovative approach is required to create synergies between uplands and lowlands as both production areas have a role in contributing to national food security, with lowlands being the major
rice production areas and the uplands producing a wider range of crops (including fruits) and livestock. Upland agricultural farming systems require modernization and investment that prevents soil
erosion, improves fertility and addresses water scarcity through water conserving techniques and technologies. Indonesia's 26 million smallholder farmers in upland areas need to be equipped with
specific knowledge to promote sustainable natural resource management practices and ensure financially sustainable livelihoods.
Theory of Change. In line with the national government priorities to reduce economic disparity, promote food and nutritional security, as well as improving farmers’ welfare, the project’s theory of
change is based on the assumption that by creating and enabling environment and by provisioning targeted support, upland smallholders will be able to increase their productivity, build sustainable
livelihoods and create stronger linkages with national and export markets, and ultimately transform rural upland areas.
Smallholder farmers in the uplands of Indonesia generally have good resource potential and a demonstrated willingness to produce marketable surpluses that would increase their incomes and
reduce poverty. There is a strong demand for diversified higher value crops, however, supply chains are underdeveloped and sustainable commercial relationships have failed to emerge.
Smallholders face a number of technical and organizational constraints that keep them from realising their potential, while off-takers face other constraints that keep them from sourcing from upland
areas. Investment in ensuring a more enabling environment for effective business relationships with better access to improved inputs, technologies, and public and private sector investment in
market infrastructure, has great potential for increasing the income levels of upland smallholder farmers.
Considering the need to expand agricultural productive land in Indonesia in order to feed a growing population, and the under-utilization of available uplands agricultural land, the development of
upland areas has large potential for economic development and closing inequality gaps. Capitalizing on these still underdeveloped areas is a high national developmental priority, but must to be
done in a sustainable manner in order to avoid a negative impact on fragile natural resources.
The UPLANDs theory of change recognizes that in order to effectively support smallholders in overcoming their constraints to improving productivity, an integrated approach will be required. The
project will invest in a range of complementary activities to address some of the most common problems encountered in upland farming in the selected commodities. UPLANDs offers an opportunity
to fostering an innovative nationally replicable approach.
Alignment and harmonization. UPLANDs aligns with key national policies related to food sovereignty, reducing poverty in urban and rural areas, reducing economic inequality, decreasing
underdeveloped villages, and key sectoral priorities related to increasing land availability and utilization, improving agricultural infrastructure and facilities, developing and expanding logistics of seed,
strengthening farmer institutions, agricultural finance, bio-industry and bio-energy, and the marketing of agricultural products. UPLANDs will directly contribute to Indonesia's pursuit of the
Sustainable Development Goals related to SGDs 1, 2; 10: 12, and 15. Furthermore, UPLANDs is closely aligned with IFAD's 2016-2025 Strategic Framework and its 2016-2019 Indonesia Country
Strategic Opportunities Programme, which both aim at promoting sustainable and inclusive rural transformation.
IFAD11 Mainstreaming Priorities. UPLANDs contributes to the following IFAD11 mainstreaming priorities: (i) climate: through integrating climate change adaptation practices and focussing on
strengthening smallholder climate resilience; (ii) gender transformation: through enhanced targeting strategies for women and men to ensure the inclusion of marginalized women, men and youth,
and the economic empowerment of women at household and community levels; (iii) mainstreaming nutrition: through pursuing an evidence-based nutrition sensitive value chain approaches and
ensuring the increased availability of nutritious foods; and, (iv) youth: through creating incentives for youth engage in the UPLANDs and by facilitating employment and entrepreneurship
opportunities specifically targeted to young women and men.
Target Area. The project will target seven provinces: Banten, West Java, Central Java, East Java, West Nusa Tenggara, North Sulawesi, and Gorontalo. Districts were selected based on criteria
that included prevalence of poverty, local demand and agricultural potential. Villages were selected based on: (i) concentration of farmers engaged in the production of selected commodities; (ii)
potential for agricultural intensification and market access; (iii) private sector engagement; and (iv) contiguity of project villages. There are approximately 61 sub-districts and 248 villages targeted in
the selected districts.
Target Groups. The main target group will be economically active smallholder farmers (men and women) in upland areas, poor and marginalized subsistence farmers, and women processors and
youth. Women and youth will be mainstreamed in project activities as producers and processors, as well as for specifically targeted activities.
Project Goal and Development Objective. The overall goal of the project is to reduce poverty and enhance food security in upland areas through remunerative, sustainable and resilient
livelihoods. The project would aim to increase agricultural productivity and farmer’s incomes in upland areas through the development of land and water infrastructure, introducing modern
agricultural cultivation techniques and sustainable integrated agricultural management systems. The development objective of the project is to increase smallholders’ agriculture productivity,
incomes, livelihoods and resilience in the targeted uplands.
The project will contribute to three specific outcomes that are in line with the strategic objectives of IFAD, IsDB and Government; (i) increase in poor rural people’s productive capacities; (ii) increase
poor rural people's benefits from market participation and (iii) increase in Government capacity for modernizing agriculture and promoting sustainable rural transformation.
Components. The Project consists of three components: (i) Infrastructure Development for Productivity Enhancement & Resilience Building; (ii) Agribusiness Development & Livelihood Facilitation;
and (iii) Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems.
Component 1: Productivity Enhancement and Resilience-Building. The expected outcome of this component is 30,000 smallholder farmers are able to increase their productive capacities,
by: (i) promoting sustained adoption of improved inputs, technologies or practices; and (ii) assisting farmers to improve soil and water conservation approaches to reduce the risk of erosion
and landslides. This component has two sub-components designed to invest in the productive potential and resilience building of smallholder farming households in upland areas: (i) Land
Development and Infrastructure; (ii) Production and Farm Management.
Component 2: Agri-business and Livelihoods Facilitation. The expected outcome of this component is increased farmer's incomes from enhanced post-harvest, marketing, and access to
financial services. It has four sub-components designed to invest in the productive potential and resilience building of farming households in upland areas: (i) Farmer Institutional
Development; (ii) Marketing Infrastructure and Equipment; (iii) Strengthening Market Linkages and Alliances; and (iv) Access to Financial Services.
Component 3: Strengthening Institutional Delivery System. The expected outcome of this component will be the enhanced delivery of UPLAND services and adaptive research. It will focus
on ensuring the provision of stronger institutional and technical capacity to deliver project outcomes. It has two sub-components: (i) capacity building for Ministry of Agriculture and
decentralized partners; and (ii) Adaptive research. The component will also benefit from additional support from the IsDB’s Reverse Linkage initiative, a south-south and triangular
cooperation approach that links an executing agency (e.g. Ministry of Agriculture) with a Centre of Excellence (CoE) from another of the IFAD/IsDB member country to support technology
transfer around post-harvest handling, value addition and market access.
Implementation Arrangements. UPLANDs will have a strong management foundation at all project institutional levels (national, provincial, district/ sub-district, village). The project will be executed
by the Directorate General of Agricultural Infrastructure and Facilities within the Ministry of Agriculture; where a Project Management Unit will be embedded within the Directorate for Agricultural
Irrigation. The PMU will be supported by participating Provincial Governments (Provincial PEMDA), who will assist with the coordination of the 14 Project Implementation Units (PIU) at the district
level. PIUs will be embedded within the respective district Dinas Pertanian (District Agricultural Agency).
Project cost and financing. The total project costs, including physical and price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at US$ 151.655 million over a five-year implementation period. The
project will be financed by: (i) Islamic Development Bank – US$ 70 million loan (46.2%) and US$0.50 million grant (0.3%) of total cost; (ii) IFAD - US$50 million (33.0%); (iii) Private sector -
US$24,000 (0.016%); (iv) Government of Indonesia – US$ 17.1 million (11.3%); and (v) Beneficiaries - US$ 14.0 million (9.3%).
2/22
Benefits. A total of 250,000 people will directly and indirectly benefit from this investment. Project value chain activities are expected to generate direct benefits for 30,000 rural households in the
project areas through engaging in value chain activities, accruing from: (i) increases in productivity and production areas in selected commodities; (ii) reduction in post-harvest losses and increase in
market share; (iii) reduced price vulnerability due to greater market access; (iv) better access to crop inputs, seasonal finance, technical support and improved on farm infrastructure; (v) improved
food and nutrition, security, resilience and enhanced farmer institutional capacity and private sector linkages; (vi) increased economies of scale for smallholders by through access to post-harvest
and logistics and distribution systems; (vii) increased agricultural enterprises accessing domestic and international export markets; and (vii) provision of local infrastructure.
Risks. A number of risks have been identified and mitigation measures integrated within the investment design. These include: (i) limited implementation capacity; (ii) geographical and logistical
challenges deriving from connectedness of uplands areas; (iii) market access and limited interest of private sector partners and financial institutions to engage in uplands areas; (iv) limited
entrepreneurs and off-takers; (v) elite capture of project benefits; (vi) access to land; (vii) limited synergies between ministries. A risk monitoring framework will be monitored during implementation
through continuous supervision and implementation support.
Social, Environmental and Climate Classification. A preliminary social, environmental and climate screening of the project interventions has been carried out incorporating the respective
requirements of IFAD, IsDB and the Government of Indonesia. The project is categorized as Category B. The Islamic Development Bank will adopt IFAD safeguards and in parallel a preliminary
screening of the project in relation to the Government environment regulations has been carried out.
Financial Management. The project’s financial management arrangements will harmonize with national systems related to budgeting, flow of funds, and auditing. The Ministry of Agriculture, through
the Directorate General of Agricultural Infrastructure and Facilities will have overall accountability for the project, including fiduciary aspects. The project will use Government's On-Granting”
mechanism to finance activities at decentralized district levels.
Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with the Government of Indonesia's National Procurement Laws
and Regulations (Perpres 54/2010, Perpres 70/12, Prepres 84/2012 and Prepres 4/2015) and their amendments, to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines.
Sustainability. In line with Government's request to develop a replicable model, and in line with the fragile social and environmental context within upland areas, project activities have been
designed to establish sustainable mechanisms to ensure continued benefits following project completion. Main features of the project approach that will contribute to this include:
Enhancing natural resource management and smallholder resilience. Uplands are fragile agro-ecological environments and vulnerable to climatic variability. Ensuring that smallholders and
project extension workers have the capacity to promote climate-smart sustainable agricultural practices will be a core project strategy to promote sustainability.
Smallholder farmer capacity. Intensive capacity building of targeted smallholder farmers will be pursued to ensure the necessary technical skills and adoption of new technologies.
Government institutional capacity. The project will ensure support to strengthen local government agencies capacity for enabling and facilitating the promotion of farmer-based agribusiness
organization and management, and the replication of farmer-based agribusiness models.
Access to finance. Access to finance is limited in rural areas. Strengthening financial literacy, access to rural financial services, and ensuring that rural enterprises have access to capital will
be a core project strategy.
Market linkages and alliances. Ensuring all elements of production, post-harvest processing and marketing are based on market demand to ensuring adequate investment returns will be a
key focus to ensure sustainable value chain development.
Scaling up. Given the importance of the agricultural sector for fostering inclusive economic growth, food and nutritional security, and reducing vulnerability and inequalities; together with the
recognized potential for replicating and scaling up a new approach to uplands agricultural development, the project is expected to benefit from a conducive political and institutional environment to
provide a framework for scaling up. Key elements to facilitate replication and scaling up will include: (i) a solid M&E and KM system allowing to track achievements, document approaches and
outcomes and disseminate them to relevant stakeholders; (ii) commitment from the national government to support the project to scale up in new geographic areas based on results;
(iii) implementation through existing organisations that will mainstream successful instruments into their regular systems and operations; (iv) involvement of key policy makers at national and
provincial levels in implementation and through evidence-based policy dialogue; (v) multi-stakeholder partnerships at the provincial and national level, which will disseminate knowledge on project
achievements and advocate central and local authorities for policy changes; and (vi) strengthened national and provincial capacities.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Indonesia is the largest archipelago-state in the world comprising 17,508 islands, of which approximately 6,000 are inhabited. Indonesia emerged as an independent sovereign state on 17th
August 1945 and its current population is estimated at 265.9 million. More than 25.9 million Indonesians still live below the poverty line and approximate 100 million Indonesians, mainly in rural
areas, remain vulnerable of falling into poverty.
Indonesia is a lower-middle income country (as per World Bank classification).The country’s GDP per capita has steadily risen, from US$857 in the year 2000 to US$3,847 in 2017.Indonesia is
classified as Medium Human Development country with Human Development Index (HDI) ranking of 116 out of 189 countries in 2017, which improved from an HDI ranking of 124 in 2011. With
regards to sectoral contribution to GDP, based on the CBS data of 2017, the Service sector contributes 57% to GDP driven mainly by Construction (11%), Large and Retail Trade (14%),
Transportation and Warehousing (6%), Information and Communication (4%), and Financial and Insurance Services (4%); the Industry sector contributes 21%, Mining sector 8%, and
Agriculture sector 14%.Major industries include (i) food and beverage industry, (ii) coal, and oil and gas refinery industry, (iii) metal goods industry; computers, electronic goods, optics; and
electrical equipment, (iv) transportation equipment industry, (v) chemical, pharmaceutical and traditional medicines industry, and textile and apparel industry. Major agricultural products include
palm oil, rice, tea, coffee, spices, and rubber. The country has a large domestic market with rich natural resources base and huge potential to improve its economic performance.
In terms of economic growth, Indonesia has achieve remarkable prosperity over the past decade, achieving over 5% economic growth per annum from 2007-2017. The current national
government has set a further ambitious plan to achieve 8% economic growth by 2019, although the country is currently facing rising fiscal and current account deficits that are expected to
improve in the coming years. The current high inflationary pressure is expected to ease in the near future.
Indonesia’s agricultural sector remains an important segment of the Indonesian economy employing 32% of the labour force contributing 13.5% of GDP. Agriculture is a priority for the newly re-
elected Government as it seeks to achieve ambitious equitable economic growth and poverty reduction targets and meet the food and nutritional security needs of a growing population. The
growth potential of the sector has historically been hindered by a low productivity, shortage of arable land, poor infrastructure and connectivity, limited access to finance, and low capture of value
addition.
Indonesia has made significant progress in poverty reduction, reducing the poverty rate by more than half since 1999, to 9.82% in 2018. In 2018, the number of poor people (population with per
capita expenditure per month below the Poverty Line) in Indonesia reached 25.95 million people (9.82%), decreasing significantly as compared to condition in 2008, at 15.42%However, poverty
and inequality are critical issues facing the country, despite declining unemployment rates. While the poverty rate declined by 1% annually from 2007 to 2011, since 2012 poverty reduction has
declined by an average of 0.3 percentage points per year. However, more than 100 million Indonesians are still just above the poverty line and remain highlight vulnerable to shocks and are at
risk of poverty.
Indonesia is classified as a Medium Human Development country with a Human Development Index (HDI) ranking of 113 out of 188 countries in 2016 (UNDP). Indonesia’s Human
Development Index of 0.689 remains below the average for the East Asia and Pacific Region. Rising inequality, with an increase in the Gini Coefficient from 0.36 in 2005 to 0.38 in 2018, is
threatening to regress poverty reduction. Inequality is seen as the key threat to Indonesia's continued development and political stability. Rural poverty remains higher across the country than
urban areas (2008: urban poverty rate 7.02%, rural poverty 13.2%).Farming households are 3.5 times more likely to be poor than non-farming households – with upland rural poverty rates even
higher. Poor education, declining land holding sizes, complex and insecure tenure arrangements together with a lack of appropriate technologies, infrastructure, rural finance and input and
output markets, result in sub-optimal use of small landholdings and lead to low labour productivity.
Upland rural areas in Indonesia have a higher incidence of poverty than the national average (12.83% vis. a vis 9.82% in 2018), as well as a higher concentration of vulnerable people.
Smallholder farmers, who constitute a significant share of the above-mentioned segments, face critical constraints that are typical of the farming system in the Uplands, which prevent them from
making a sustainable and significant improvement in their livelihoods and well-being.
The triple burden of under/mal/over-nutrition in Indonesia entails high social, human capital and economic costs. It is estimated that 37.2% of children under the age of five are stunted in the
country and that public awareness of this issue is low. Stunting and malnutrition are estimated to result in an annual 2-3% loss of GDP. Indonesia has traditionally paid more attention to the
indicator of severe underweight to determine the country’s state of nutrition. By this measure the prevalence of severe underweight is just 5.4% in children under five-years. However, the fact
that 8.4 million children (37.2%) of children under five are stunted should be of greater concern, given its enduring consequences. The causes and contributing factors of malnutrition are
complex. Traditional customs influence maternal and early child nutrition, and social norms dictate that many women marry while still very young. These dynamics contribute to the high
incidence of low-birth rates.
The Government of Indonesia recognizes the importance in its National Financial Inclusion Strategy, under which the Government aims to achieve75% financial inclusion by 2019. Currently,
only 36% of all adults have access to an account with a registered financial service provider, compared to an average 69% in the region. Currently, there is a large gap between supply and
demand of financial services in Indonesia, particularly in rural areas. The majority of rural producers remain excluded from formal financial services with most farmers are accessing credit
through informal channels it. Only 5% of lending currently is allocated to the agricultural sector that contributes 15% of GDP with large parts of that financing going to commercial plantations.
Where bank credit is available, for example through programmes such as the KUR programme, it generally requires collateral – this is often a problem for the 90% of Indonesian smallholders
who do not have formal title to their land.
10.
11.
12.
13.
As the Indonesian population increases, there is a corresponding rising demand for agricultural land that is forcing many poor, more marginalized smallholder farming families to move to upland
farming locations, resulting in loss of biodiversity in uplands while in the lowlands, rivers and irrigation schemes are being damaged due to increased run-off velocity which in turn increases
siltation in irrigation and hydro-power schemes. The upland and lowlands ecosystem are intricately connected. The lowlands are the major rice production areas while the uplands produce a
wide range of crops (including fruits) and livestock. There are opportunities to improve both upland productivity and environmental sustainability. The GOI sees considerable productive potential
in introducing upland crops with strong market potential – including food and horticulture crops and livestock.
3/22
While low land areas in Indonesia have received significant investment, particularly for irrigation, upland areas have largely been overlooked despite there being the availability of more
agricultural land. Currently, most utilized agricultural land in Indonesia is located in upland areas[1]. Agricultural uplands are distributed across the archipelago, with most available land area
located in East Java, Lampung, Central Java, North Sumatera, Central Kalimantan, and West Java. Based on the Central Bureau of Statistic of Indonesia, utilized agriculture upland area (dry
field/garden, excluding shifting cultivation land) occupies about 11.5 million hectares (2016), or 46.5% of total utilized agriculture land in Indonesia. Irrigated wetland (lowland) occupies about
19% total utilized agriculture land and non-irrigated wetland occupies 14%.
In addition to having low fertility, generally dry land has steep slopes, and shallow soil depths, which are mostly found in mountainous and hilly areas. Upland farmers generally have less access
to extension and training compared to wetland farmers - because the widespread belief is that the uplands do not support agricultural production potential as compared to low land irrigated
land. However, upland areas have considerable untapped potential for developing commercial crops such as horticulture and tree crops, and livestock. There are ready opportunities to improve
soil and water conservation by improving the understanding of contour cultivation, terracing and soil moisture conservation techniques. Increasing the production of upland horticulture and
livestock crops requires investment that prevents soil erosion, improves fertility and deals with water scarcity through water conserving techniques and technologies – thus increasing the
productive potential and incomes of upland farmers. This requires investments in farmer organizations, physical infrastructure, post-harvest facilities and linkages with markets.
The Government of Indonesia recognizes the importance in its National Financial Inclusion Strategy, under which the Government aims to achieve75% financial inclusion by 2019. Inclusive
financial systems are a key ingredient for equitable economic growth, enhanced productive capacity and poverty alleviation. Besides the Regional Development Banks (Bank Pembangunan
Daerah), the Indonesian state-owned bank, Bank Rakyat Indonesia (BRI) through its village units (unit desa) by far has the largest outreach in rural areas to more than 40 million rural micro
savers and more than 6 million rural micro borrowers. However, despite the rapid development of Indonesia’s financial sector overall and a vast range of rural finance products, service delivery
and business models, increasingly use of technology and a pretty conducive legal and regulatory environment in recent years, it is estimated that less than half of the population have access to
banking services, particularly in the rural areas. In 2014, only 5.88% of the total bank lending benefitted agriculture with most allocated to larger commercial plantations. Despite the rapid growth
of the microfinance sector, the majority of smallholder farmers do not have access to formal finance due to inappropriate financial products, outreach, financial literacy and conditionality. At the
same time, Indonesia is known for its history as "living laboratory" that has created numerous types of village savings and loan self-help groups, group lending, accumulated savings and credit
associations, cooperatives, linkage banking, rotating savings and credit associations, and hybrids of these, both in conventional and increasingly sharia-based forms.
14.
As there are currently an estimated 26 million upland farmers[2] in Indonesia and the Ministry of Agriculture, through its Center for Agricultural Land Research and Development, has identified
an additional 24 million hectares of upland that could potentially be utilized for food production in Sumatra, Kalimantan, Sulawesi and Papua. There is therefore significant potential for
replicating and scaling up nationally the UPLANDs model.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
15.
The UPLANDs aligns and mainstreams IFAD's four thematic priorities: climate, nutrition, gender, and youth.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Climate. Given the fragility of upland areas and their vulnerability to climate variability and natural disasters, UPLANDs seeks to builds on IFAD's strategic focus on climate by: (i) incorporating
climate adaptation as an integral part of the project design; (ii) promoting good agricultural practices and initiatives to strengthen climate resilience, including water conservation and ecosystem
and biodiversity preservation; (iii) the inclusion of a focus on climate adaptation in all capacity building activities that integrate farmers traditional knowledge with innovation and science; (iv)
building the skills and capacities of the farmer and government institutions to proactively support initiatives to meet the needs of climate change adaptation; (v) to develop linkages and
partnerships with the private sector and incentive creating sustainable enterprises; and (vi) increase resilience through improved access to risk management tools, in particular agricultural
insurance, (vii) supporting climate resilient and sustainable pathways to strengthening producers' organisations.
Gender. As rural people and smallholder farmers in upland areas in particular, suffer from poverty and lack of opportunity, UPLANDs will seek to promote equitable social norms and promote
individual gender-equitable behaviour. The project will exclusively target small-holder men and women farmers and processors with targeting strategies to ensure the inclusion of marginalized
women, men and youth who face increased vulnerability and that may have been side-lined from producer organizations and lack access to inputs, services and markets. The project fully
recognizes women as farmers and potential entrepreneurs and focusses on expanding women’s economic empowerment through ensuring women's access to markets, promotion of women in
business, and improving women’s access to financial services. Through a specific gender strategy the project will strengthen women's role in decision-making at the household, within producer
organizations and at community levels, also encouraging more equitable distribution of workload and access to ecosystem services.
Nutrition. Nutrition has been mainstreamed through an evidence-based strategy which will result in a nutrition-sensitive implementation of the project along the value chain of each selected
commodity and supported by measures in place to promote women’s equality and empowerment, increased availability of nutritious foods through the kitchen gardening intervention as well as
awareness-raising and social marketing events to improve food choices and preparation.
Youth. In keeping with IFAD’s policy on Youth, the project will mainstream the participation of youth and incentivize their engagement in project activities. Emphasis will be provided to ensure
youth representation in project management and producer organizations, the promotion of vocation training to generate employment opportunities along the value chain and facilitate their
access to finance, knowledge, skills and markets. The project will also seek to leverage information technology to attract and retain youth in project activities. There is a strong focus on youth as
agents of change and leaders in the innovative aspects of the project such as the market intelligence initiative and the promotion of mechanization within value chain activities. The M&E system
will be gender and youth sensitive with disaggregated indicators and data by gender and age.
Indigenous Peoples: Although not one of the four IFAD priorities, the principles of IFAD’s policy on “Engagement with Indigenous people” will be fully adhered to by the project. The project’s
approach to engaging with indigenous peoples includes the free and informed consent of all its beneficiaries and that there is a focus on the principals of community-driven development, valuing
local knowledge, access to markets, gender equality and promoting climate-resilient agriculture. There is a social mobilization process in place to ensure the inclusion of women, youth or any
other group that may have been excluded from existing farmer’s organizations.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
The transformation of the agriculture sector is a key priority for the Government of Indonesia to meet its ambitious national development goals and to respond to a growing urban consumer class
demand for diversified food. The need to increase agricultural productivity in order to feed a growing population raises demand for agricultural land and innovative agricultural approaches. As
competition for land increases and productivity stagnates in low-land areas, increasingly, the Government of Indonesia sees considerable potential in increasing diversified agricultural
production in uplands areas.
To date, upland agriculture has received limited attention and investment. Indonesian agricultural development has mostly focused on low land irrigated areas to support food production (rice
and secondary crops) and food security (rice and palawija crops). Intensive long term investment has been afforded to irrigation and infrastructure to support the development of low land
irrigated paddy. Paradoxically, the overall dimension of agricultural upland area is larger than the available irrigated paddy land area, and has strong potential for developing commercial crops
such as horticulture, tree crops, and livestock. Utilized upland agricultural land – excluding shifting cultivation land - occupies about 11.5 million hectares, or 46.5% of total utilized agriculture
land. The Ministry of Agriculture estimates that there is an additional 24 million hectares of upland agricultural land that could be put into production if sustainable upland approaches, models
and incentives were available.
Farming in the upland areas is undertaken by smallholders who have average landholdings of 0.71 hectares, ranging from 0.1ha in Java to 2ha in Sumbawa. Today, many poor and
marginalized smallholders in upland farming locations are challenged with sloping land and poorer quality soils contributing to low productivity. They face constraints that are typical of the
farming system in the uplands such as small land holdings that reduce opportunities for productivity enhancing mechanization, low productivity, limited capacity to invest in enhancing yields,
lack of access to credit, lack of certified seed, fertilizer, agriculture machinery, poor infrastructure, lack of post-harvest and processing facilities, poor links to markets and limited understanding of
the dynamic nature of market demand and information. Further, a lack of knowledge of sustainable agriculture practises, including failing to cultivate with proper contours, lack of terracing,
widespread use of slash and burn agriculture, limited understanding of climate smart agriculture including soil moisture conservation techniques all contribute to soil erosion and high
sedimentation in the waterways. Access to inputs including agriculture extension and financial services in upland areas are limited, leaving these smallholders with very limited support to
enhance their productivity. Upland farmers are on occasions organized in farmer groups but have not graduated to higher levels of organization that can enable them to take advantage of
economies of scale through aggregation. They lack the organizational capacity to form associations or cooperatives for managing post-harvest facilities and linking them in mutually beneficial
relationships with the private sector.
Upland areas play an important role for water conservation and ecosystem preservation. The upland and lowland ecosystems are intricately connected, and land use problems of the former
affects the latter seriously. The increased uptake of agriculture activities in upland areas in response to increasing demand for higher value agricultural products may exacerbate issues of soil
and water conservation and result in a loss of biodiversity in uplands, while in the lowlands, rivers and irrigation schemes are being damaged due to increased run-off and siltation.
A new and innovative approach is required to create synergies between uplands and lowlands as both production areas have an important role in contributing to national food security, with
lowlands being the major rice production areas and the uplands producing a wider range of crops (including fruits) and livestock. Upland agricultural farming systems require modernization and
investment that prevents soil erosion, improves fertility and addresses water scarcity through water conserving techniques and technologies. Indonesia's 26 million smallholder farmers in upland
areas need to be equipped with specific knowledge to promote climate smart and sustainable natural resource management practices and ensure financially sustainable livelihoods.
The Government of Indonesia has requested financial and technical support from IFAD and the Islamic Development Bank to assist in developing replicable models across a range of
commodities in diverse geographical upland areas. The UPLANDs intends to introduce approaches to empower communities to better leverage local resources and village funds; to promote
district (kabupaten) level value chain approaches; incentivize the inclusion of youth and women through innovative on and off farm employment opportunities; stimulate climate smart and good
agricultural practices; enhance private sector engagement and partnerships; and increase access to finance including value chain and Islamic financing
27.
There are four main reasons why the project was proposed by the Government of Indonesia and why IFAD and the Islamic Development Bank should consider financing it: (i) there are
approximately 26 million upland smallholder farmers in Indonesia who disproportionately suffer poverty, food and nutritional insecurity and vulnerability, they have received limited support to
improve their productivity and market access to generate improved livelihoods; (ii) many upland smallholders have demonstrated motivation and commitment to improve their economic position
and take responsibility for development initiatives; (iii) there are good economic opportunities, particularly for a range of high value upland agricultural products being produced upland
smallholders for which there is strong market potential; and (iv) the UPLANDs aligns and directly contributes to national medium term and sector strategy targets related to poverty reduction,
reducing inequality and improvements in smallholder farmer welfare through community empowerment, group strengthening and market-linked enterprise development. Furthermore, the project
would respond to the pressing need to address the issues of resource degradation and the impact of climate change by the restoring upland ecosystems, maintaining ecosystem services, and
building the awareness and capacity of upland communities to improve resilience and reduce disaster risk. Finally, as there are 24 million hectares of additional upland agricultural land
available, the project would provide government with the experience, models and lessons learned to replicate project activities in upland areas within the selected districts and to scale up to
other districts with similar resource and social/cultural profiles. Government funding allocations at district, provincial and national levels are already planned for this replication and scaling up.
4/22
B. Lessons learned
28.
29.
30.
31.
There are a host of relevant lessons from IFAD and IsDB’s long history of partnership with Indonesia. Both institutions have undertaken several independent evaluations[3] that have informed
this project design. While IFAD has not in the past specifically targeted upland areas in Indonesia, it does have a long history of engaging in rain-fed agriculture where approaches that combine
innovative, integrated support packages with social mobilization and value chain integration have proven successful. IFAD does have experience in uplands area development from within the
region, such as in Myanmar, which have also been drawn upon.
The 2014 IFAD CPE recommended that smallholder farmers are the principal beneficiaries of IFAD's engagement in Indonesia. Given IFAD's relatively scarce resources, the CPE further
recommended that IFAD should limit its role to high value crops grown by smallholders with an appropriate and increasing role of value chains. It suggested that IFAD operations should focus
on improving the access of small farmers to agricultural technology and services, and help them to develop value chain links to input and output markets. This will help small farmers raise
productivity and adapt to climate change. The success of IFAD in alleviating poor small farmer problems depends on its ability to build capacity at the village level so that small farmers interact
with key players from government departments, private sector entities and civil society.
Lessons from the implementation from some of IFAD's most recent investments includes: simple designs with a strong poverty alleviation focus; strong and motivated management at national
and district level; the combination and integration of technical expertise from different service providers, including public extension agents, NGOs and private sector; integrating empowerment
with targeted technical support increases effectiveness; diversifying extension service improves the capacities available for rural communities; involving the private sector can strengthen service
delivery, access to new technologies and markets can stimulate more market driven productivity responses from smallholder farmers; sustainability of equipment and infrastructure can be
facilitated with strong collective governance and group ownership; involving a neutral facilitator in negotiating a private public partnership can ensure mutual beneficial agreements; involving
village leadership in decision making processes ensures greater participation and smoother implementation; the phasing of activities important to promote social capital and ensure equity and
governance; decentralized management structure ensures flexible and targeted programme activities.
In terms of targeting, IFAD-supported projects have been generally effective in engaging poor households, using government indicators and poor household lists combined with participatory
selection of project beneficiaries. The fact that many IFAD-supported projects provide comparatively small financial support packages and expect considerable active participation from
participants in return, supports the self-targeting nature of interventions. This broad approach would be replicated in the targeting strategy for this Uplands project. There are also a number of
areas in which targeting strategies have proven less effective; (i) social mobilisation, inclusion and capacity building must be successfully completed before economic activities begin, particularly
those related to infrastructure; (ii) economic and livelihoods analysis, both preparatory and participatory, should support the identification of economic opportunities; (iii) capacity building should
be linked to tangible programme opportunities, whether these are economic or social and finally (iv) M&E should be simple and support the generation of knowledge on key development
challenges, such as those listed above.
32.
Additional lessons from the CPE, annual COSOP reviews, ongoing projects and consultations held in preparation of the 2016-2019 COSOP point to the following key lessons learned about
project implementation in Indonesia:
Flexibility: Project design needs to leave flexibility for adapting project interventions to the diversity of different target locations, as shown in Coastal Community Development Programme, a
project that was implemented in nine provinces with diverse socio-economic, geographic and cultural contexts. The project design provided a broad framework, which was adapted, in
collaboration with local stakeholders, maximizing engagement, synergies and impact of interventions;
Agrarian Reform: The agrarian context of agriculture is changing fast with high livelihood diversification and increasing land scarcity - given these factors, understanding smallholder's
incentives is key to sustainable agriculture systems. Farmers have an enormous capacity for innovation and investment in service delivery, as long as this is the service that they need and is
a profitable proposition - hence the importance of an explicit focus on agricultural returns;
Participation of the private sector. Experience in the cocoa (READ) and marine resources (CCDP) sub-sectors have demonstrated how private companies can contribute to enhancing the
livelihoods of rural small-scale producers, by facilitating their access to inputs, technology, advisory services and markets. Projects should facilitate and support partnerships linking private
companies and small producers, with a view to generating mutual business benefits by reducing transactions costs, sharing risks and improving efficiency and reliability for sourcing products
and services;
Access to financial services. While Indonesia has a diverse financial sector that has piloted some unique innovations to enhance outreach to rural areas, access to finance remains a major
constraint for small primary producers in rural areas. Projects should partner with bank and non-bank financial institutions to support small producers’ access to a range of financial products
meeting their needs and matching their capacities, including savings, loans, access to remittance and insurance products;
Participation of non-state actors. The lack of qualified government staff in some remote target areas has hampered the development of sustainable self-help and producers’ groups. Projects
should promote innovative models relying on a larger range of service providers, including producers’ organisations, private trading or processing SMEs and non-governmental organisations
(NGOs);
Performance-based incentives. The approach whereby annual allocation of funds is determined based on actual performance generates a focus on results, motivates project participants for
better achievements and helps in identifying areas where capacity building is required to improve performance, as demonstrated in CCDP;
Intensive Monitoring and Evaluation strategy. Weekly monitoring of performance at the local level and of progress towards meeting key project indicators is another effective tool to boost
performance. Electronic communication, the use of a web-based Management Information System and of mobile applications like WhatsApp, Facebook and Twitter facilitate the exchange of
information throughout wide project target areas.
On-granting mechanism. On-granting is a relatively new government mechanism to facilitate decentralized funding transfer and to create incentives for stronger ownership of local
government authorities. IFAD has recent experience under the implementation the READSI and IPDMIP investments. Initially, this new process has been challenging with the following key
lessons: (i) strong capacity building support needed for PMUs and PIUs that may not have dealt with projects or similar nature and need support to implement activities effectively, (ii)
importance of accurate procurement planning/packaging; (iii) strong management and supervision consultants, PMU and PIU experts, where necessary, as well as facilitators to interface and
implement at the village level; (iv) creation of special accounts given the large frequency of small payments (due to the nature of the project), and (v) close follow-up and regular/periodic
supervision and implementation support from the financiers.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
33.
Project Objectives. The overall goal of the project is to reduce poverty and enhance food security in upland areas through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods. The project would
aim to increase agricultural productivity and farmer’s income in upland areas through the development of land and water infrastructure, introducing modern agricultural cultivation techniques and
holistic integrated agricultural management systems. The development objective of the project is to increase smallholders’ agriculture productivity, incomes, livelihoods and resilience in the
targeted uplands.
34.
The project would contribute to three specific outcomes that are in line with the strategic objectives of IFAD, IsDB and the Government of Indonesia: (i) increase in poor rural people’s productive
capacities; (ii) increase poor rural people's benefits from market participation and (iii) increase in Government capacity for modernizing agriculture.
35.
36.
37.
At the output level UPLANDs would assist in establishing the following; (i) irrigation developed on about 14,000ha using physical infrastructure schemes such as irrigation systems, small weirs,
shallow wells, ponds ii) about 500kms of farm to market roads developed, (iii) training of 30,000 households in improved and more sustainable agriculture production practices, (iv) capacity
building of 800 farmer groups and helping to building the capacity to graduate to higher levels of organization for enterprise and business development for at least 60% of them; (v) increase
processing capacity for 800 farmer groups including 200 women’s groups; (vii) facilitate business mentoring and market linkages for 30,000 households; (ix) provide access to finance for 20,000
smallholders including 8000 women and 5000 youth.
Project Area. The project will be implemented in seven Provinces: Banten, West Java, Central Java, East Java, West Nusa Tenggara, North Sulawesi, and Gorontalo. Provincial selection was
based on a competitive call for proposals from respective provinces detailing their commitment to develop high value smallholder agriculture and compliance with criteria including poverty and
unemployment rates as well as agricultural and market potential.
Within the selected provinces, the project will be implemented in 14 districts 61 sub-districts identified by the district Agriculture Departments based on their potential for specific horticulture
crops and livestock. The total population within these sub-districts is 2.6 million. The selection of districts and sub-districts was driven by the identification of high potential and comparative
advantage in the selected commodity. The selection of these districts was also justified based on an assessment of the poverty and employment profile in these districts. As per the 2017 data
from the National Statistics Bureau, the average incidence of poverty in these sub-districts is 13.9% which is considerably higher than the national average of 10.12%. In terms of
unemployment, the average sub-district unemployment rate is 6.13% which is also just above the national average of 5.5%.
38.
A total of 248 villages have been selected within the identified project districts. Applicable criteria for the selection of villages included: (i) concentration of farmers engaged in the production and
marketing of the selected commodity (ii) potential for intensification and expansion of production and development of value-chain (iii) potential for engagement with private sector (iv) contiguity
to ensure that project villages are not too widely scattered across the country.
39.
The project will work with 680 farmer’s groups and 200 women’s groups in the target area. Table 1 below gives an overview of the target area with number of sub-districts, villages and farmer’s
groups in each district.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
Target groups. The project will target economically active upland smallholders (men and women), poor and marginalized subsistence farmers (men and women), women processors and youth.
The project will employ a series of targeting mechanisms (empowering, enabling and compliance measures) to ensure the effective engagement of targeted beneficiaries. The targeting strategy
will ensure the inclusion of minority and marginalized groups who meet the project selection criteria, as well as the adaptation of activities to social and cultural context of women and youth:
Women will be specially targeted as entrepreneurs and processors while youth will be specifically involved as facilitators for social mobilization and empowerment, in gathering market
intelligence and in the operation and maintenance of agricultural machinery.
5/22
In recognition of the importance of mainstreaming the inclusion of women and youth to promote sustainable rural transformation, UPLANDs will promote the economic empowerment and well-
being of poor smallholder farmers, especially women and youth, through gender, youth and nutrition sensitive value-chain interventions Women and youth will be mainstreamed in project
activities as producers and processors as well as specifically targeted for certain value chain activities. Youth will be specifically engaged in value addition enterprises along the value chain of
the selected commodities as well as facilitators for social mobilization, in the gathering of market intelligence, and in the operation of agricultural machinery. Nutrition will be mainstreamed in
selection of commodities, production and processing activities as well in addition to awareness raising of nutrition activities, social marketing events and home gardening at the village level. As
many farmers are loosely organized into groups and this mechanism is extensively used for extension training delivery and provision of inputs to the villages, the project will seek to engage with
rural producers organizations to strengthen institutional capacity, governance and inclusivity.
An effective and well-defined social mobilization process will facilitate the inclusive and effective delivery of UPLANDs activities. It will ensure that the project is able to effectively target and fully
engage it its intended beneficiaries. It will also enable project activities to be fine-tuned to respond to the local context, opportunities and the priorities of the households. The project’s social
mobilization and inclusion approach will involve selecting a village facilitator for each target village (50 percent women and 80 percent youth). These facilitators will be trained and tasked with
using PRA techniques to undertake a full social and economic mapping of their villages to identify project beneficiaries for different activities and ensure their inclusion in project activities. These
village facilitators will be key to mobilizing and incentivizing the village to participate in project activities, building the capacity of women and men farmer groups to function more effectively and
delivering empowerment and nutrition training as well as establishing an effective communication channel between the project beneficiaries and project implementers.
On the basis of current information, some of the villages identified for project intervention in Lebak, Banten include Indigenous (Masyarakat adat) communities. Following IFAD’s Policy for
Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, a FPIC implementation plan is included in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). To ensure compliance with IFAD policies, the project will only start
in those provinces where indigenous people are located only after and if appropriate FPIC is obtained. If any other indigenous peoples are identified in the project villages through the social
mobilization process, IFAD’s requirement for working with indigenous communities as specified in IFAD’s policy for Engagement with Indigenous Peoples will be fully pursued and complied
with.
Target Commodities. As detailed in Table 1, UPLANDs will invest in a limited number of commodities (one commodity per district) to reduce complexity and enhances the likelihood of success.
The commodities were selected and validated, based on the following criteria: (i) market demand and potential for expansion; productivity potential including land availability; (iii) demand from
smallholders and farmer groups and opportunities for smallholder engagement; (iv) private sector demand; (v) financial and economic feasibility; (vii) NRM and climate resilience potential; (vi)
other factors such as availability technology. The selected commodities are aligned with Government national strategic commodities consistent with the national goals to achieve self-sufficiency
of some agricultural commodities (such as rice, shallots, garlic and meat) and also in line with the national priority to expand production of horticulture for export markets. Finally, participating
local government authorities were involved in the selection process to ensure appropriate local ownership. Further detail about the potential development of specific commodities in each district
is included in Appendices 2 and 3 of the Project Implementation Manual.
Table 1: Commodity Data by Targeted Districts and Villages
No
District
Villages
Commodity
Area (ha)
Farmer Group
Estimated*)
Farmer
Groups*
Members
#Women
#Youth
Total Indirect
Beneficiaries
Value Chain
Participants
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Lebak
Tasikmalaya
Subang
Cirebon
Garut
Banjarnegara
Purbalingga
Magelang
Malang
10
Sumenep
11
Lombok Timur
12
Sumbawa
13
Minahasa Selatan
14
Gorontalo
4
4
31
21
5
31
9
31
3
3
21
26
10
1
Mangosteen
421
Organic rice
500
Mangosteen
2,000
Mango
1,500
Seed Potato
200
Goats & Coffee
385
Goats
Organic rice
2,000
Shallots
Shallots
300
160
19
8
75
32
10
25
14
97
3
80
569
1,077
199
431
3,138
1,255
568
872
1,209
237
590
174
487
45
6,336
2,158
860
1,733
233
340
Garlic
1,640
100
2,964
1,045
Shallot Seed
3,000
59
2,700
Potato
2,000
118
2,179
Banana
20
972
872
10
135
832
6,500
50
475
455
60
225
100
500
65
275
530
445
640
40
1,558
3,300
4,868
13,700
2,520
36,500
1,106
4,350
1,930
10,300
595
2,280
8,054
10,100
1,076
6,230
1,747
1,950
4,477
19,350
4,117
15,020
3,691
630
76
1,300
231
14,126
640
24,442
8,812
3,995
36,648
130,000
(*) Women’s farmers are estimated based on the women involvement in on-farm and off-farm activities as per specific commodities. The youth is estimated based on their involvement in the operation and maintenance of agriculture machineries, processing, administration and management of farmer groups, associations and KUBE/Cooperatives.
45.
Validation of targeting and intervention logic. To enhance local ownership, participating districts were invited to submit project proposals based on criteria provided by the Ministry of
Agriculture. These project proposals from each district were then assessed and and compiled by Ministry of Agriculture and validated by IsDB/IFAD. The validation was conducted through field
checks jointly conducted by the design/ validation team and local government agency, focus groups with sample farmer groups level and local government level. Criteria assessed included the
proposed farmer groups and beneficiaries demonstrating their willingness to participate and their preparedness (social feasibility), proposed commodities (crops & livestock), land availability
and status, current status of agriculture activities, environmental and technical feasibility of the proposed agriculture infrastructures, facilities and machineries; quantity and volume of activities,
unit cost, and the actual needs for developing farmer-based agribusiness concept. Focus group discussions conducted either at local government level and farmer group level also validate and
confirm the project concept of each sub-project including agribusiness models, value chain models and marketing, institutional and managerial aspects. In addition to agriculture sectoral
agencies, validation through focus group discussion at district level also engages other relevant sector agencies (e.g. Dinas of Public Work, Bappeda, extension services) and representative of
farmer groups to examine the technical and environmental feasibility of the proposed infrastructures, facilities and machineries and obtain more feasible option or alternatives which are
accepted by the farmer groups, and to make sure that the activities are conducted outside conservation or protected areas.
6/22
46.
Alignment with IFAD Indonesia Country Strategy. The overarching goal of IFAD's Indonesia country strategy (2016-2019) is to support inclusive rural transformation to enable rural people to
reduce poverty and achieve sustainable livelihoods. IFAD intends to achieve this through the provision of financing and technical support to develop innovative models that can be replicated
and scaled up by Government and other partners. IFAD maintains its focus on the empowerment of women and other marginalized groups including: (i) smallholder farmers (women and men);
(ii) smallholder fisheries producers; (iii) women and women headed households; (iv) marginal communities and ethnic minorities in the selected geographic areas; and (v) youth. Investments
made by IFAD will contribute to three interlinked strategic objectives: (i) Small-scale producers participate in remunerative agricultural markets; (ii) Small-scale producers and their families are
more resilient to risks; and (iii) Rural institutions deliver responsive services meeting the needs of small producers. UPLANDs is closely aligned with the IFAD country strategy, and will directly
contribute to results under all three defined strategic objectives.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
47.
The Project consists of four main components: (i) Infrastructure Development for Productivity Enhancement & Resilience Building; (ii) Agribusiness Development & Livelihood Facilitation;
(iii) Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems and (iv) Project Management.
Component 1: Productivity Enhancement and Resilience-Building
48.
49.
The expected outcome of this component is that 20,000 farmers increase their productive capacities, by: (i) promoting sustained adoption of improved inputs, technologies or practices
(including land terracing); and (ii) assisting farmers to improve climate adaption practices including soil and water conservation approaches to reduce the risk of erosion and landslides due to
agriculture activities.
This component has two sub-components designed to invest in the productive potential and resilience building of farming households in upland areas: (i) Land Development and Infrastructure;
(ii) Production and Farm Management. The overall implementation of the component would be undertaken by the District Project Implementation Units (DPIU) and coordinated by the Project
Management Unit (PMU) at the national level with support from design and supervision consultancy (DSC) services.
Sub-component 1.1 Land infrastructure and Development.
50.
The sub-component output is that 14,000ha of physical infrastructure will be constructed or rehabilitated on sustainable basis. All infrastructure activities will incorporate techniques and
practices that cater to climate change adaptability/ mitigation based on the specific context in each of the project locations. Specific details of roads, irrigation and land management
infrastructure to be undertaken in each project target district are presented in Annex 2 to the PIM (Appendix 8) including estimated costs for each type of infrastructure; the exact cost for each
infrastructure work will be calculated as part of the detailed engineering design during project implementation. This also includes detailed GIS mapping of specific activities to be undertaken in
each geographical area. The activities to be undertaken include; (i) terracing and contouring, use of soil bio-engineering stabilizers such as mulches, and the strategic planting of agro-forestry
trees and shrubs including perennial horticultural crops; (ii) investment in infrastructure to promote resilient and sustainable agriculture, with improved access to markets; and (iii) farmers
capacity building on irrigation management and operation maintenance of infrastructure. The agencies responsible for achievement of outputs will be the NPMU, the DPIU and the Ministry of
Public Works. The direct beneficiaries of the land activities will be participating smallholder farmers and their families. The indirect beneficiaries of other physical infrastructure will include the
broader communities from within the project targeted areas. The implementing agency will be the District Public Works Agency – who will be responsible for formation of 621 farm infrastructure
groups.
51.
Land development activities would be based on soil and water conservation approaches to reduce the risk of erosion and landslides[4] due to agriculture activities and climate variability. The
specific land development activities would be customized within each district to suit the specific environment; referencing topography, soil type, climate, any evidence of deforestation and
consideration of current and planned agricultural activity. Activities would include terracing and contouring, use of soil bio-engineering stabilizers such as mulches, and the strategic planting of
agro-forestry trees and shrubs including perennial horticultural crops. This selection will be based on the technical and feasibility of the sites selected and business plans/proposals submitted by
the farmer groups. It is expected that the project would help to develop 7,032ha benefitting around 6,017 households. The land development works will be done on selected smallholder farms
that pose a great risk for soil erosion and landslips. The land owner will implement the construction work supported by specialist from the Design and Supervision consultant, at the PIU levels.
52.
In addition to land development, the project will assist smallholder farmers in the uplands to invest in infrastructure such as irrigation systems for improving access to water and access/farm
roads that facilitate farmers' access to markets. The investments will be designed to promote resilient and sustainable agriculture, with improved access to markets, in the Upland areas.
53.
To improve climate resilience and water supply, the project will assist farmers to invest in water storage ponds, shallow wells, and small weirs. The irrigation infrastructure types will include
rehabilitation and new tertiary surface, drip and sprinkler irrigation systems, solar and electricity pumps. The Ministry of Agriculture has pre-identified a preliminary list of 198 villages in the
selected districts with about 14,000ha that will require improved water security through the water infrastructure investments. The farms are owned by about 30,000 smallholder households
organized in 680 infrastructure groups. The irrigated land under each group ranges from 2 to 67ha, with an average land holding ranging from 0.23 to 1.1 ha[5]. The average cost of irrigation
development is estimated at approximately US$2,800 per ha. These villages are growing the prioritized crops selected for the project. However, each proposed site in the selected villages
would be assessed to ensure that it meets the following criteria; (i) serve the priority commodity and promotes integrated farming; (ii) gives priority to poor smallholder farmers, and benefits
women and youth; (iii) technical feasibility; (v) economic feasibility and (vi) promotes good environmentally and social stewardship.
54.
Weirs and water ponds will be designed not to store more than 500m3 of water and have depth of less than 5 m. These small water storage structures will be designed in areas with minimum
environmental and social impacts. The farm groups or village government will secure land for the structures. To reduce costs, lined earth ponds will be used, where ever feasible. However,
concrete ponds may be the most suitable to reduce the footprint of the ponds, so as not to take large proportion of farm land and on steep slopes. The cost of the ponds and weirs is estimated at
an average of US$16,000 per pond/weir. Each pond will serve a group of an average 25 farmers, depending on the size.
55.
The project will invest in the improvement of access and farm roads in total about 406 km farm road. The roads will typically be engineered compacted gravel or concrete roads (depending on
the ground conditions), 2.5-4m wide (depending on the type of vehicles mix) to use the roads. In all cases, provision of routes for non-motorized traffic should be prioritized, where ever
necessary. The cost of road development is estimated at an average of about US$24,000 per km.
Table 2: Proposed Land Development Activities
Lebak Tasikmalaya Subang Cirebon Garut Banjarnegara Purbalingga Magelang Malang Sumenep
Lombok
Timur
Sumbawa Minsel
Gorontalo Total
Land clearing, soil
conservation/land
terracing (ha)
332
500
400
500
160
1,640
3,000
500
7,032
Irrigation (ha)
332
500
2,004
500
200
43
Farm road (km)
38
10
33
100
16
42
-
7
1,400
300
160
1,640
3,000
2,000
20
12,099
15
18
5
35
70
15
3
406
56.
Prior to final selection and construction activities, a feasibility study and detailed engineering design would be prepared for each scheme with detailed costs. In addition, an ESMP, will be
prepared for each site to ensure that all identified environmental and social impacts are adequately addressed. The feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs will be implemented in a
participatory way, led by staff at Dinas Pertanian (District Agriculture), assisted by district technical consultants. The construction works will be done through community contracting or through
private contractors, depending on the nature and scope of engineering works. The private contractors will be competitively procured following the national procurement system. The local
government or local communities would be responsible for securing the land required for the development of infrastructure. All the infrastructure investments by the project will be owned by
either village or district government or by the farmers, groups of farmers or their associations. The farmers will finance at least 20% of the cost of the on-farm irrigation costs infrastructure,
through own funds, loans from a bank or grant from the village government. The district government and the project funds will finance water infrastructure to the group farm edge.
57.
Farmers will contribute the full operations, maintenance and management for the irrigation infrastructure built by the project. This will be formalized and confirmed in district and village
ordinances, PERDES that regulates the O&M arrangements. The farmers will be trained, in their existing groups, to operate and manage the irrigation facilities for their group. In some cases,
where it is technically feasible and farmers are willing, the groups would aggregate to form water user associations, for the purpose of managing irrigation infrastructure. The village government
will pay for the maintenance of all access roads built outside the farms, and the farmers will be responsible for the maintenance of roads built within their farm boundaries.
Sub-Component 1.2 Production and Farm Management
58.
Within the context of a commodity development approach in each of 14 districts, UPLANDs will ensure around 32,600 men and women farmers receive commodity specific training and technical
support to enhance their overall agricultural production, resilience and management capacity.
7/22
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
About 1,300 farmer extension or training groups of around 25 farmers (including the poor, women and youth) will be formed and socialized by the UPLANDs village facilitators. These extension
groups will be the access point to village farmers for extension training, nutrition training, and microfinance and market information. The project will work with at least 300 women farmer
extension/training groups and demonstrations will be organized for aspects of production in which they are engaged. Similarly, training will be provided to youth for crops and activities
appropriate for them, for example, management and operation of agriculture machineries.
The project will include a suite of complementary support mechanisms suited to smallholder farming in which both the public and (where possible) private sector will be involved. These activities
will be coordinated by 235 Facilitators, and 114 Extension staff, supported by 14 teams or district level technical specialists. Training and technical support will include Farmer Field Schools with
a series of trainings throughout the crop cycle. Training will be delivered on climate smart agriculture and improved agronomic practices (including Good Agricultural Practices - GAP) relevant to
each commodity including quality genetics, soil management, crop nutrition, water management, Integrated Pest Management (IPM), sustainable use and management of farming equipment,
canopy management (for trees crops) and optimal harvest and post-harvest practices at the farm and village level.
While production inputs applicable to the commodity will be made available to eligible farmers in the first year of engagement to help initiate farmer support and improved farming practices,
UPLANDs will require a 25% contribution[6] from the farmers with the balance funded by the project. It is anticipated the farmer contribution will come from village fund support. After year 1,
farmers will be able to borrow for these inputs through UPLANDs supported microfinance. This will be delivered via local banks with credit lines from UPLANDs. These inputs include seed,
seedlings, fertilizers and pesticides.
Intensification of agricultural production requires improvement in labour productivity and efficient operations. The effective utilization of agricultural machinery suitable for smallholder agriculture
is one of the key strategies to be used to improve land and labour productivity, reduce costs in uplands agriculture production. Use of machinery is also an effective way to reduce drudgery of
agricultural labour for women, men and youth. Youth are more likely to participate in primary agricultural production if this drudgery is reduced. The type and number of machines would be
selected by commodity and utilized within the uplands taking into consideration the steepness of land, the needs of women and youth and the type of crop to be grown. There would be
appropriate machinery and powered equipment sourced for land preparation, planting, cultivation, pest and disease management, weed control and harvesting and transport. In general, the
type of equipment will include hand powered cultivators, power sprayers, hand sprayers, small powered harvesting equipment, wheel barrows among other types. Specialist machinery and
equipment would also be sourced for specific commodity production requirements. The farmers would pay 25% of the cost of purchasing the machinery based on the experience of the Ministry
of Agriculture and other IFAD financed investments such as the READ project[7]. The project will assist in linking the farmers with local financial institutions or value chain actors, to potentially
finance the farmers' payment and ensure that O&M plans established at the village level to ensure the maintenance of the infrastructure and equipment. In some village the village authorities will
formulate PERDES that regulates the O&M arrangements.
Machinery and equipment would be owned by the farmer's group or association. Assurance of the provision of training in the safe and appropriate use and maintenance of all machinery and
equipment would be a key element of these terms of partnership. Young people (both men and women) will be trained in the operation and maintenance of the equipment, so as to be able to
offer a service to farmer groups. The project will facilitate in the provision of the appropriate technical and on-the-job training and workplace supervision to the youth who take part in the
equipment support business opportunities. In some cases, the youth may be employed by Farmer’s Groups and federations to undertake and/or oversee machinery operation and also ensure
appropriate maintenance schedules and tasks are performed. Users will pay fees on a full cost recovery basis.
Training will be provided taking into consideration the workplace health and safety risk associated with operating machinery on slopes. In addition, minimum tillage approach will be promoted to
reduce risk of soil erosion. Proper terms of partnership would be signed between the district Government and the Farmer Groups or Associations on the hand over, operation, maintenance and
storage of the equipment to ensure its effective utilization.
Livestock training will be delivered in farmer field schools, covering the basics of animal nutrition, housing, health and reproduction. Annual flock management plans will be prepared including
disease prevention, fodder production, feeding regimes and planning and monitoring including vaccination and parasite treatment, livestock inventory, mating and live weights, In addition,
besides group training UPLANDs will document the training and provide goat group members with copies of training material for their future reference.
While UPLANDs will mainstream nutrition into activities, the design recognizes that there is no single solution to these problems. Yet the fact that malnutrition rates remain unchanged despite
rising incomes and food availability give some clues that some of the remaining constraints to better nutrition are driven by social norms and behaviours. UPLANDs will therefore adopt a multi-
pronged and main-streamed approach to improving nutrition. It will also encourage local innovation combined with evidence-based assessment to identify and scale-up promising innovations in
the approaches to improving nutrition. Nutrition activities will be conducted in all UPLANDs villages coordinated by the Village Facilitators.
To further ensure that the benefits of increased incomes translate into improved health outcomes for women and men small-holder farmers and their households, appropriate interventions at
each stage of the value-chain will be identified. A rapid nutrition assessment will be used to identify the key nutritional challenges and opportunities specific to the project districts and
appropriate nutrition interventions at relevant stages of the value-chain. A two-person nutrition team will work closely with the other technical specialists to mainstream nutrition in the various
projects commodity development activities. Some of the interventions for nutrition will include extension advice on nutritious crop varieties, social marketing events and nutrition awareness
sessions. Given the complexity of the nutrition challenge, UPLANDs will actively encourage and reward local innovation by teams in districts to work out what combination of factors works best
to deliver sustainable nutrition outcomes.
A major challenge for small farmers is the high-risk environment (and increasing with climate variability) in which they operate, making them traditionally highly risk averse and in turn inhibiting
their willingness to adopt new and improved farm practices. On top of everyday production risks, the risk profile for farmers is becoming more challenging due to climate change related
production risks like drought, flood, and pests. Recognizing this reality, and to create incentives for farmers’ to invest in high-value crops, UPLANDs will link with a new a new SIDA-funded,
IFAD-implemented initiative ‘Insurance for Rural Resilience & Economic Development Technical Assistance Programme’ – (INSURED) which designed to improve access for smallholders to
appropriate crop insurance.
Currently, agricultural insurance in Indonesia is only available for food crops, mainly for rice through the public sector insurer PT Asuransi Jasa Indonesia (Jasindo). During the first year, the
project will analyse the risk exposure of each value chain within UPLANDs. Based on this analysis and in discussion with potential insurance partners (either public or private); two value chains
will be selected for product development.
Agricultural insurance will not be developed as stand-alone solution but rather links to other interventions of UPLANDs in the respective value chain, for example linked to agricultural inputs or
embedded in arrangements with buyers in downstream markets. By tackling the various risks that farmers face (input, production, market, and price risks) in an integrated approach, the overall
resilience of farmers will be increased which also improves their creditworthiness with financial institutions. Therefore, strong linkages between the development of agricultural insurance and
other services such as input provision, and the extension of credit to farmers will be created. A key for the success of cash crop insurance will be raising risk management and insurance
awareness among farmers. This will happen in two ways. UPLANDs will develop training modules on risk management and insurance to raise farmers’ awareness of the issues and tools. These
can be incorporated in the Farmer Field Schools (FFS) approach within this component and the financial literacy training within component 2.4. Product-specific education will also take place
during the implementation of the insurance schemes. At meso level, UPLANDs will build the capacity of value chain actors, and insurers in cash crop insurance. At macro level, UPLANDs will
raise awareness of local government. It will also link with INSURED, which will also work directly with the Working Group on Agricultural Insurance headed by the Ministry of Agriculture to
support policy advice at the macro level.
Component 2 Agri-business Development and Livelihoods Facilitation
71.
72.
The expected outcome of this component is to increase farmer's incomes from enhanced processing to improve product quality and market participation by: (i) supports farmer to profitably
engage in post-harvest and marketing activities; (ii) develop market intelligence systems to encourage regular exchange with market; and (iii) established access to financial services to farmers
and agri-related enterprises.
This component has four sub-components designed to facilitate farm-gate to market activities which will improve product quality and marketability as well as enhance market linkages based on
improved market intelligence. The sub-components are: (i) 2.1 Farmer institutional development; (ii) 2.2 Market infrastructure and equipment; (iii) 2.3 Strengthening market linkages and
alliances; and (iv) 2.4 Access to financial services.
Sub-component 2.1 Farmer Institutional Development
73.
The sub-component output will be farmer post-harvest businesses established, equipped and supported on sustainable basis. Activities include: (i) support to the development of farmer
institutions and units/entities to ensure impact sustainability in the long run at the village level, such as (i) BUMDES or other village level enterprises which may engage in activities such as
product aggregation, provision of cultivation services, village level processing (e.g. potatoes or mangoes), and village rice drying services; (ii) approximately 100 KUBE (Farmers Business
Unit/Federation will be established in farmer association levels to manage some capital that have been invest by the project while provide service to 3-4 farmer groups, and will be responsible
to operate and manage equipment and machinery; and approximately 14 BLUD at the district level or towards the market end of the value chain and operate as a primary commodity service in
large scale to serve the KUBEs, The agencies responsible for achievement of outputs will be the NPMU, the DPIU and the Ministry of Agriculture. The direct beneficiaries will be the farmers and
their families who are members, shareholders or suppliers in the business entities. The implementing agency will be the district agriculture agency with village facilitators.
74.
Groups of farmers will be encouraged to form associations or federations (some already formed) which can evolve into KUBEs or KUBE-look like institutions. Depending on location, a KUBE
can be at village level, or involve 2-3 villages in one KUBE, or at kecamatan level as business association of farmer group. An estimated 180 KUBEs and around 14 larger BLUDs or
Cooperatives will be supported.
Table 3: Establishment of KUBE, BLUD or Cooperative
No.
District
Commodity
8/22
Land (Ha)
# Farmer Groups
# KUBE
# BLUD/Cooperative at District Level
Village
Sub-District
BLUD
Cooperative
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Lebak
Mangosteen
Tasikmalaya
Organic Rice
Subang
Cirebon
Garut
Mangosteen
Mango
Potato Seed
Banjarnegara
Coffee, Goat &Sheep
Purbalingga
Goat
421
500
2,000
1,500
200
385
Magelang
Organic Rice
2,000
Malang
Sumenep
Shallot
Shallot
Lombok Timur
Garlic
Sumbawa
Shallot Seed
300
160
1,640
3,000
23
8
75
77
10
37
18
94
11
53
92
59
Minahasa Selatan
Potato
2,000
118
Gorontalo
Banana
20
6
Total Number
14,126
681
2
1
7
3
6
30
10
59
4
7
1
34
18
11
52
1
128
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10
1
1
1
1
4
75.
In collaboration with both national and district governments, UPLANDs will work closely with individual famers, farmers group and farmers' association. Many farmers groups and association do
not currently have sufficient capacity, suitable legal basis or flexibility to deal with some required functions and responsibilities needed to support the project. To address this, UPLANDs will
provide farmer institutional development to ensure sustainable management and business unit formed and functional.
76.
Based on the local context and appropriate institutional framework, UPLANDs consider several options of entities or management/business units that can provide sufficient flexibility to ensure
sustainability of project impacts in the long run. Some of the available options include KUBE, BLUD, and BUMDES[8].
77.
78.
KUBE (Kelompok Usaha Bersama) is a Joint Business Group which aims to empower poor communities (including small holder farmers) by providing business capital to manage productive
economic activities/businesses. In general a KUBE will be established at farmer association level (to manage capital assets invested by UPLANDs) and will typically provide services to 3-4
farmer groups.
BUMDES (Badan Usaha Milik Desa) is a village-owned business entity is a village business managed by the Village Government, and incorporated where the establishment is determined by
the Village Regulation. The management of the BUMDES consists of the village government and the local village community. The capital of BUMDES can come from the Village Government,
community savings, assistance from the government, loans, or other parties' equity participation or profit sharing cooperation on the basis of mutual benefits.
79.
BLUD (Badan Layanan Umum Daerah) or Regional Public Service Agency (BLUD) is a management and service unit within the local government formed to provide services to the community in
the form of the provision of goods and / or services. While BLUD is a non-profit entity, it is still professionally managed based on principles of efficiency and productivity.
80.
The characteristics of each management/business/service unit options are provided in the table below:
Table 4: Farmer Post-Harvest Institution Summary
Management/
Business Unit
Owner / Shareholders
Management
Characteristics and Flexibility
KUBE
Community or small holders farmers
Community / Farmers
Association
BUMDES
Village owned
Appointed professional
-        Similar to cooperative / enterprise group
-        Capital: government grant and members contributions
-        Acts as a private business
-        Profit oriented
-        Profit shared as revenue to its members
-        Enterprise type
-        Profit oriented
-        Profit shared as revenue to it’s the village
-        First capital could be provided by the government or from village funds
Management/
Business Unit
Owner / Shareholders
Management
9/22
Characteristics and Flexibility
BLUD
Government institution
-        Manage government assets
Government official and
supported by professional
management
-        Non-profit
-        Service oriented
-        Allowed to collect fees to support its operational
-        Can get subsidy from the government
81.
82.
Because there is no 'one fixed solution' that fits all across the 14 districts, the selection of institution or management unit that will be established/ strengthened to support the project will be
customize based on the needs of each value chain and which is suitable to the local context. UPLANDs will not create a new entity or management/business unit where an existing institution is
functioning efficiently. In this case, the Project will empower existing KUBEs that are ready to apply for assistance, for instance, to have sorting and grading equipment and are able to certify that
they have the required beneficiary contribution. Where new institutions are required, district governments will issue a call for proposals for the establishment of processing facilities e.g. for
potatoes and mangoes, based on business viability. But, in all cases, the district government will first undertake full feasibility assessment including the applicant's business plan.
KUBEs will be responsible for operating and managing product collection vehicles (three wheeler bikes) provided to each village. A truck will be also provided to transport the commodity from
KUBE to the BLUD or other major processing, storage or marketing centre. UPLANDs will establish BLUDs at district level or at the end part of the value chain that will deal directly with the
market. The BLUD operates as a primary commodity service in large scale to serve the KUBEs. It will manage the significant capital assets invested by the project such as grading and
processing equipment and facilities.
Sub-Component 2.2 Market Infrastructure and Equipment
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
The main targeted output will be that market related equipment is supplied to the rural producer organizations detailed in Sub-component 2.1. Activities will include: (i) construction of warehouse
buildings to house storage and processing equipment; (ii) provision of processing equipment including packaging equipment; and (iii) provision transport equipment including trucks, pick-ups
and 3 wheeler vehicles. The agencies responsible for the achievement of outputs will be the NPMU, the DPIU and the Ministry of Agriculture. The direct beneficiaries will be the farmers and
their families who are members, shareholders or suppliers in the business entities. The implementing agency will be the district agriculture agency.
Marketing infrastructure, equipment and systems are based on the systematic aggregation and value adding of product to meet the demands of markets; commencing from the farmer and
Farmer Group level, farmer associations activities, then to KUBE level facilities and processes and finally to commodity processing and distribution centres operating under Cooperatives,
Federation or BLUD arrangements, as applicable to each District and commodity. Farmer Groups and rural producer organizations that demonstrate their commitment to enhancing access to
markets would be eligible to apply for marketing infrastructure and equipment support under the project. Marketing infrastructure and equipment provision will ensure the selected commodities
will be cost effectively and efficiently made market-ready in terms of agreed specifications and supply arrangements with buyers.
Infrastructure and equipment provided will include small scale collection, drying (where applicable) and pre-sorting facilities located strategically at the Farmer Group and Village levels, larger
scale post-harvest handing, packaging and aggregation facilities and equipment operating at the KUBE level and facilities and equipment for final aggregation, processing, storage and
distribution of fresh and/or processed products operating at the District level. Investments in transport equipment will allow efficient and timely movement of product from the field to
collection/aggregation points and on to processing/packing facilities. Transport investments will include three wheeler motorbikes for moving post-harvest from farms to KUBE and small trucks
for moving product from KUBE to larger scale BLUD managed facilities.
All infrastructure and equipment will be “fit for purpose” i.e. designed and fitted out to an appropriate level of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) in terms of market and regulatory compliance.
Young men and women with an interest in maintaining and operating post-harvest and processing equipment and with the required technical and personal attributes would be employed to carry
out skilled work within processing and storage facilities. These young men and women will receive appropriate technical and on-the-job training in safe equipment operation and maintenance
procedures and would also be supervised appropriately.
To qualify for UPLANDs support, Farmer Groups, Associations, KUBEs or Federations/Cooperatives will have to (a) be formally registered; (b) demonstrate their capacity to invest at least 25%
of their own equity or leverage this proportion of financing from other sources (e.g. equity from village funds or from local government contributions); demonstrate interest/ willingly participate in
project activities.
An eligibility and screening criteria will be developed during early project implementation to ensure that the equipment goes to groups who are committed and can utilize the equipment
effectively for the benefit of their members. The provision of these investments will be based on criteria including the following; (a) equity investment; (b) employment generation potential;
(c) targeting of women from poor households; and (d) the number of women and youth benefitting.
Applicants are expected to develop Business Plans to justify the project investment in infrastructure and/or equipment. UPLANDs will provide technical assistance to facilitate development of
these plans. This would result in start-up marketing groups and those in their early stage of development being able to calculate short and medium-term production based on realistic market
projections.
Sub-Component 2.3: Strengthening Market Linkages and Alliances
90.
91.
92.
The main output for the sub-component will be increased production of commodities with higher value participation in markets. UPLANDs will assist farmers to establish and further build market
linkages, by: (i) Technical assistance to farmers groups and associations operating at the KUBE and BLUD level for improving the market readiness and brand recognition of specific products in
areas such as selection of primary and secondary packaging, labelling and sales promotion; and (ii) develop regular exchange with markets, buyers and others commodity association to
understand market expectations. The direct beneficiaries will be the farmers and their families who are members, shareholders or suppliers in the business entities. The implementing agency
will be the district agriculture agency.
Under this sub-component mentoring support would be provided to establish or further build market linkages for the selected products and assist them in growing their markets. The project will
engage experienced and suitably skilled Value Chain, Business Development and Capacity Development specialists in each District so that Farmer Groups/Associations receive ongoing
support through the market development process.
The project will have a distinct focus on developing public-private-producer partnerships. This will be developed for example, through inviting buyers in downstream markets to visit Farmers
Groups and Associations operating at the KUBE and BLUD level to discuss market expectation and information, and to try to build partnership. Representatives of Farmer groups and
Associations will also undertake market visits to better understand distribution systems and downstream markets. These study visits would be facilitated by the Value Chain and Business
Development specialists in consultation with Village Coordinators.
93.
Technical assistance will be provided to Farmers Groups and Associations operating at the KUBE and BLUD level for improving the market readiness and brand recognition of specific products
in areas such as selection of primary and secondary packaging, labelling and sales promotion. This will extend to assistance with achieving compliance with certification standards where
required, for example organic rice.
94.
Systems for regular exchange of meaningful, marketing related information between buyers and sellers will be developed and introduced in the early stages of the project. This would include
specific marketing opportunities, for example, for organic and value-added products or opportunities to access new, higher value markets such as modern retail or export.
95.
96.
97.
98.
Identification and correction of harvest and post-harvest issues will involve product assessments being undertaken by Quality Assessors (particularly women and youth) trained within the project
and operating within packing and processing facilities. Consignments would be checked for compliance with buyer requirements before dispatch and these assessments would be
communicated to downstream markets using check-sheets and digital photography.
Simple technologies such as temperature recording devices would also be used to monitor cold chain performance during distribution. These consignments would be further assessed by
buyers on receipt. If quality issues were identified (such as overripe fruit) these issues would be communicated back up the Value Chain and collectively analysed so that appropriate corrective
actions could be taken.
Quality assessments for each commodity end-product would be developed by Value Chain technical specialists in concert with Farmer groups, Associations and Commodity Alliances. As part
of this process product quality specifications suited to the intended market may be agreed by chain participants and regular, scheduled quality assessments carried out at each stage of the
production, distribution and marketing system.
This collective gathering and sharing of post-harvest and market information will enhance smallholder understanding of market dynamics, particularly in larger distant markets and help build and
strengthen commercial relationships. Over the life of the project these systems will be refined and improved, best practices established, and implementation progressively extended to larger
numbers of project beneficiaries in each district.
99.
IT and Market Intelligence systems offer job opportunities for women and youth. While the approach to market intelligence systems will vary by location and commodity, generally each
commodity marketing group will employ at least one trained young person to seek out, analyse and disseminate this information to all producers. To ensure sustainability training would be
provided so that beneficiary groups take a progressively larger role in information collection, analysis and dissemination with continued technical support from Government and other support
agencies as required. These systems will act as models for enhancing smallholder capacity, productivity and incomes through commercially relevant value chain engagement.
10/22
100.
At an early stage of the project, buyers in downstream markets will be invited to visit Districts to discuss market expectations. Representatives of Farmer groups and Associations will also
undertake market visits to better understand distribution systems and downstream markets. These study visits would be facilitated by the Value Chain and Business Development specialists in
consultation with Village Coordinators. Technical assistance will be provided for improving the market readiness and brand recognition of specific products in areas such as selection of primary
and secondary packaging, labelling and sales promotion. This will extend to assistance with achieving compliance with certification standards where required, for example organic rice.
Sub-component 2.4 Access to Financial Services
101.
The main sub-component output will be the poorest 15% (or 3,750 of whom 1,700 will be women) and/or businesses with enhanced access to finance. Activities under this sub-component will
facilitate the poorest farmers to access financial services through establishment of microfinance (credit) that will be channelled by local government to local district bank (BPD's or other
microfinance institutions)[9]. This bank linkage approach and model has proven effective through efforts of IFAD and other development partners in Indonesia. It involved facilitating and creating
incentives for local microfinance providers to engage in agriculture and with the project target groups. Financial services, ranging from credit and savings to insurances and financial literacy
training are important to support upland producers in mitigating risks and enhancing productivity in the long term. Further, without access to these services, it is a challenge to start up rural
enterprises, or to invest in the future of their farms. Agriculture financing is risky and expensive and in some aspects value chain agents – traders, warehouse operators – have an advantage
over formal financial service providers, such as banks, because they know the market and often also the farmer.
102.
The principal of providing an allocation for microfinance is not only to provide access to finance for the poorest beneficiaries, but also to stimulate and capacity building to the local banks/MFIs
so that they would be capable of providing relevant and functional microfinance products beyond the life of the project. In addition, basic financial literacy training would be offered to women’s
and men’s farmer groups. The direct beneficiaries will be the poorest farmers and their families. The implementing agency will be the local district banks and village facilitators.
103.
An important constraint to improved production and post-harvest performance and development is lack of access to finance - especially microfinance to farmers and agri-related
microenterprises. The current situation is one where the individuals or groups have to either borrow from moneylenders at high mark-up/interest, or place a high collateral with banks/MFIs, or
are simply non-bankable (i.e. with no operating institutions, no suitable products or non-favourable lending criteria)
104.
UPLANDs will provide access to seasonal financial services in the selected project areas according to crop requirements. It is expected the UPLANDs will provide US$4.0m for up to 60% of the
seasonal finance requirements for a particular crop. Although the majority of the financing allocation would be for microfinance support, the project may also consider larger loans for working
capital or asset financing for individual farmers or groups, to meet the needs of the target communities and the value chains to be developed. The principal of providing an allocation for
microfinance, is not only to provide access to finance for the target beneficiaries, but also to provide stimulation and capacity building to the local banks/MFIs so that they would be incentivized
and capable of providing microfinance products beyond the life of the project. Where possible, the UPLANDs will promote Shariah Microfinance products, in line with the mandate of the Islamic
Solidarity Fund for Development (ISFD) and IsDB. The project may partner and collaborate with the IsDB-led Islamic Microfinance Program for Poverty Alleviation and Capacity Transfer
(IMPACT) initiative to benefit from the latter’s Islamic microfinance product and services toolkit, which can be ported to the participating financing institutions. 
105.
In line with the national regulations, and based on the situations in project locations, project funding for microfinance activities will be transferred to project target districts using government's on-
granting mechanisms. Each respective district would then identify a local bank (e.g. provincial bank, district bank, national bank branch in the district, etc.) or a local Microfinance Institution
(MFI). Based on mutual agreement, the Head of the district (Bupati) would then issue an official administrative instruction (Decree/SK) stating that a certain amount of funds from the district
government would be placed in the selected local bank/MFI for the purpose of providing access to finance to the local beneficiaries, with the fund to be managed the bank/MFI for a fee. The
administrative/management fee of the bank/MFI would be specified in the Decree and shall be a competitive rate based on local benchmarks. The terms and conditions of the microfinance
lending (i.e. tenure, mark-up rates, lending criteria) would also be stated in the instruction from the District head. The microfinance lending would be structured so that it would be offered to
individuals as well as groups, with or without collateral, based on necessity or local circumstances. UPLANDs microfinance specialists would work with the PMU and PIUs to develop the full set
of criteria, operating procedures, requirements, terms and conditions, monitoring guidelines, and other required mechanisms and documentation, based on the local contexts.
106.
To explore value chain financing options, the project would initiate a dialogue with the various value chain players and examine the demand for financing from both input suppliers and
wholesalers and retailers purchasing the selected commodities. There is evidence that value chain financing options can work effectively in dealing with smallholders under specific
circumstances.
107.
A financial literacy and numeracy training course would be organized for farmer groups, women and youth and will be built into the capacity development and business development curriculum.
Basic financial literacy and numeracy training would be offered to women’s and men’s farmer groups with the objective of helping to improve livelihoods through inculcating the knowledge, skills
and attitudes required to adopt good money-management practices for earning, spending, saving, borrowing and investing. This would include understanding the benefits of savings and loans,
planning of income and expenditures of households, analysing investments and understanding the role of financial institutions. The project would utilize the methodology and materials being
used in IFAD’s READ SI project and build on lessons learnt, as well as look to link to Women’s World Banking approaches to improving financial access for women. UPLANDs also aims at
increasing farmers’ understanding of risk management and what role agricultural insurance can play to mitigate risk and to improve access to credit and other financial services.
108.
There also may be further financial resources available to the relevant beneficiaries in the project, by leveraging on MFIs or branches of national banks through the IsDB’s partnership with
Women’s World Banking. The project would also seek to partner with other microfinance institutions working in the project locations, including Fintech companies, to leverage a greater pool of
financial resources being made available for the stakeholders in the project areas.
Component 3: Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems
109.
The expected outcome of Component 3 will be enhanced delivery of UPLANDs services and research. It is anticipated that 80% of households will adopt new technologies and 95% of DPIUs
will be fully engaged in on-granting processes. This component has two sub-components (i) Capacity building and institutional development of MOA and Districts; and (ii) Adaptive Research.
Sub-component 3.1 Capacity Building for Institutional development, governance and transparency
110.
The main sub-component outputs will be: (i) commodity training courses prepared & delivered; and (ii) intensive PIU capacity building support for on-granting, procurement, and transparency
and governance mentoring. Activities include; (i) improvement and strengthening of extension guidelines; (ii) focus on ensuring extension staff are adequately skilled to support the selected
commodities in specific target location; (iii) mentoring and support to district staff; (iv) support for strengthen measures for transparency, governance, and fiduciary aspects. The implementing
agency will be the NPMU with the MOA agriculture training centres.
111.
All 231 agriculture extension staff in each district will be encouraged to focus on the target commodity for their specific location. UPLANDs will fund preparation and delivery of 10 training
courses specifically written for each commodity, including guidelines. This refresher training will be delivered at MOA training centres in Manokwari and Kupang in 2019. To improve their
understanding and to ensure they can work effectively with extension staff in their respective locations, village facilitators will be invited to participate in the extension training programs (training
will be delayed until after VFs have been recruited). Extension staff will be trained to understand post-harvest and market linkages as well. Follow up refresher training may be provided by
UPLANDs crop and product specialists. Wherever feasible, this training can be delivered in partnership with private sector extension providers.
112.
As district authorities have limited experience with managing and implementing foreign funded projects, district staff (including PIU and Bappeda staff) will be supported by project capacity
building specialists who will be located at each district. This support will be designed to ensure smooth implementation of on-granting and procurement activities, and also to ensure
strengthened measures are in place for governance (demand and supply measures) and transparency (citizen engagement, consultation, availability of information). Similarly, farmer institutions
(KUBE, BLUD etc.) will be supported in business management, in particular in preparation of business plans, cash flow management, operations and maintenance of capital assets, staff
management etc.
113.
UPLANDs will support and train national and provincial seed centres. While the IFAD funded IPDMIP project is also engaged with these institutions, the range of crop varieties most relevant to
upland farming systems will still require support and capacity building from UPLANDs technical specialists. Where feasible, UPLANDs should build on the capacity building lessons learned from
on-going IFAD funded projects such as READSI and IPDMIP. In particular, the on-granting guidelines prepared by IPDMIP can be adopted for use at UPLANDs PIUs.
114.
The project is also expected to benefit from the IsDB’s Reverse Linkage initiative. Reverse Linkage is a south-south and triangular cooperation mechanism whereby IsDB member countries
serve among themselves as the primary and forefront agents in the provision of expertise, knowledge, technology and solutions. Through this mechanism, the member countries address
specific development constraints in a mutually beneficial, results-oriented and program-based arrangement. To facilitate this exchange, the IsDB will provide a grant, while the provider and
recipient countries are required to contribute to the activity budget both, in cash and in kind.
115.
In the project, the Executing Agency (Ministry. of Agriculture) will be linked with a Centre of Excellence (CoE) in another of the common member countries of IFAD and IsDB (e.g. Malaysia), so
that technical expertise or technology transfer can be supported for the benefit of the project. It is anticipated that the CoE would augment the efforts to improve the post-harvest and
downstream value-addition activities, or contribute to improving the marketing and trading linkages of some of the project commodities. As such, in addition to the grant allocation from IsDB,
there will also be an allocation from the project to cover the contribution from Indonesia, with a contribution coming from the CoE as well
Sub-component 3.2 Adaptive Research
116.
The main sub-component output will be the broad dissemination of research results. Activities will focus on three key areas of need for uplands agriculture: (i) On-farm trials of new crop
varieties and their good agronomic practices; (ii) Soil fertility including developing appropriate fertilizer recommendations based on diagnostics; and (iii) Yield and socio-economic studies. The
implementing agency will be the NPMU with the MOA agriculture extension staff and village facilitators. UPLANDs will also leverage partnerships with local research agencies and other
international research partners such as CGIAR centres (e.g. ICRAF, CIP) where IFAD has existing partnerships, and bilateral partners such as ACIAR and USAID.
11/22
117.
Adaptive research is important given that are many technologies ‘on shelf’ at the research institutes, but not extended to farmers. There is also need to continuously assess the adaption and
adoption processes of the introduced technologies, and incorporate lessons learnt into the extension programs to help their greater uptake and use by farmers and local agribusinesses. The
adaptive research will be conducted on-farm and will engage extension staff and farmers in their design, management and evaluation. It will have three key activities for which the project will
budget for:
118.
On-farm trials of new crop varieties and their good agronomic practices. Examples include: (i) high yielding coffee varieties that respond well to fertilizer application; (ii) rice; and (iii) potatoes. All
three are target crops of the project. The trials could also include intercropping that farmers traditionally practice – how this can be done well in ways that does not adversely affect the yields of
the two crops. The on-farm trials design will be determined in consultation with extension staff and farmers with budgets to support their establishment and management.
119.
Soil fertility including developing appropriate fertilizer recommendations based on diagnostics. It is important that farmers get the best advice on what fertilizers to use judiciously within the
framework of integrated soil fertility management. The program budgets will support soil sampling, rapid analysis and reporting on the key project locations. Where the data exists from previous
studies, the project will support its synthesis and fine-tuning to the needs of the farmers, the fertilizer industry and extension system in easy to understand comprehensible formats.
120.
Yield and socio-economic studies – including yield analysis and periodic assessment of farmer's adoption patterns of project innovations. This requires setting up good baselines. The project will
provide resources for national research to set a good sampling framework, collect and analyse the data, and report fast the outcomes to all stakeholders involved in the project. The frequency of
the studies could be twice a year, at least for the annual crops. For the perennial crops (e.g. mango), once a year would be adequate. Data collected will be archived well, updated and shared
with all stakeholders regularly. All data collected from the field will be geo-referenced.
E. Theory of Change
121.
The UPLANDs theory of change is presented in Annex 2. In addition, Annex 2 also provides an illustration of how the theory of change in operationalized at the district levels.
122.
In line with the national government priorities to reduce economic disparity, promote food and nutritional security, as well as improving farmers’ welfare, UPLANDs theory of change is based on
the assumption that by creating and enabling environment and by provisioning targeted support, upland smallholders will be able to increase their productivity, build sustainable livelihoods and
create stronger linkages with national and export markets, and ultimately transform rural upland areas.
123.
Smallholder farmers in the uplands of Indonesia generally have good resource potential and a demonstrated willingness to produce marketable surpluses that would increase their incomes and
reduce poverty. There is a strong demand for diversified higher value crops, however, supply chains are underdeveloped and sustainable commercial relationships have failed to emerge.
Smallholders face a number of technical and organizational constraints that keep them from realising their potential, while off-takers face other constraints that keep them from sourcing from
upland areas. Smallholder farmers in uplands areas face increased threats from climatic variations and increased risk of climate induced natural disasters. Investment in ensuring a more
enabling environment for effective business relationships with better access to improved inputs, technologies, and public and private sector investment in market infrastructure, and increased
climate and disaster resilience, has great potential for increasing the income levels of upland smallholder farmers.
124.
The upland rural areas across Indonesia, and the specific project locations, have a higher incidence of poverty than the national average (14.3% vis. a vis 10.7% in 2017), as well as a higher
concentration of vulnerable populations. Considering the need to expand agricultural productive land in Indonesia in order to feed a growing population, and the under-utilization of available
uplands agricultural land (less than 50% utilized), the development of upland areas has large potential for economic development and closing inequality gaps. Capitalizing on these still
underdeveloped areas is a high national developmental priority, but must to be done in a sustainable manner in order to avoid a negative impact on fragile natural resources.
125.
The theory of change recognizes that in order to effectively support smallholders in overcoming their constraints to improving productivity and increasing their resilience, an integrated approach
is required. The project will therefore invest in a range of complementary activities to address some of the most common problems encountered in upland farming in the selected commodities.
By investing in new and rehabilitated infrastructure, improved quality of climate resilient planting materials, training and upskilling extension staff, providing relevant and regular technical and
facilitation support for farmers, ensuring access to finance, reducing post-harvest losses and improving market access, UPLANDs can promote a new paradigm for upland agriculture that is
profitable, climate smart, sustainable. This will result in higher incomes for farm families as well as more profitable market linkages and employment opportunities for women and youth.
Therefore, by working to improve productivity, capacity and market development, the project will contribute to poverty reduction and economic development in the project areas.
126.
IFAD and IsDB would build on their considerable collective experience of strengthening and building the capacity of smallholders, farmer groups including men and women, microenterprises,
and agriculture cooperatives. The project offers an opportunity to develop a platform for fostering an approach that can be scaled up by the Government for achieving its strategic vision for
agriculture growth and development, and also to inform future policy and public expenditure.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
127.
Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Number 1, 2, 5, 10, 12 and 15: UPLANDs directly addresses [1] the SDG goal number 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere, [2]
the SDG goal number 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture; [3] the SDG goal number 5; Gender Equality; [4] 10: Reduce inequality
within and among countries; [5] the SDG goal number 12: Ensure; and [6] SDG goal number 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage
forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss.
128.
The project's goal is to reduce poverty within the 14 targeted districts. Therefore, the project is in line with the SDG targets of goal number 1.1 and 1.2, e.g. (i) By 2030, eradicate extreme
poverty for all people everywhere, currently measured as people living on less than $1.25 a day; and (ii) By 2030, reduce at least by half the proportion of men, women and children of all ages
living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions.
129.
The project activities will improve agricultural infrastructure (water retention, irrigation and farm-road), soil and water conservation practices, production practices, training to farmers, women
group and youth, and adopt value chain agribusiness to increase on-farm productivity and creating value added, which in turn it will raise farmers’ income, Farmer's Term of Trade Indices.
Therefore, in regard to the SDG goal number-2, the project will in line with the corresponded targets number 2.3 and 2.4., i.e.: (i) By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of
small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and
inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment; and (ii) By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement
resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought,
flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality.
130.
Through the project's approach towards gender transformation it will contribute to SDG 5 by ensuring women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels
of decision-making, promoting women equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to ownership, financial services, and natural resources, and to promote the empowerment and
gender equality of women and girls.
131.
Improvement to market access and developing marketing network of the processed agricultural products will be promoted in this project; which will contribute to increase farmers’ income. In this
regard, the project will be in line with the SDG goal number 10, particularly to contribute in achieving the SDG target number 10.1: By 2030, progressively achieve and sustain income growth of
the bottom 40 per cent of the population at a rate higher than the national average.
132.
Integrated farming systems in the upland agriculture – particularly integration between upstream and downstream agribusiness activities, applying soil and water conservation practices,
promotion of the use of organic fertilizers - is the soul of this project. In this regard the project is in line with the target of SDG number-12, especially target number 12.2: By 2030, achieve the
sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources. This also in line with the target of SDG goal number 15, particularly target number 15.3.: By 2030, combat desertification,
restore degraded land and soil, including land affected by desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land degradation-neutral world.
133.
Alignment with national priorities. Indonesia follows a 2005-2025 long-term development plan, which is segmented into a 5-year National Medium Term Development Plans (RPJMN). In the
4th Medium-term Development Plan (2015-2019), the government has set targets for increasing food sovereignty, reducing poverty in urban and rural areas, reducing economic inequality, and
decreasing underdeveloped villages. It sets ambitious objectives to achieve equitable growth and poverty reduction: annual GDP growth of 8%, reduction of the poverty rate from 11 to 7-8%,
access to nutritious food for 100% of the population and development of rural and remote areas, and 4.5% annual growth rate of the agricultural, fisheries and forestry sector. The Plan affirms
the importance of the agriculture sector and the development of neglected areas in Indonesia’s development. In line with the current 2015-2019 RPJMN, the Government of Indonesia seeks
innovative approaches that serve all rural poor and ensure that growth does not lead to entrenched poverty as Indonesia transitions to a modern middle-income country. A special focus has
been placed on upland development due to the existing natural resource management challenges as well as the needs of upland populations as they are recognized as particularly
disadvantaged and vulnerable.
134.
In line with the Medium-Term National Development Plan, the overall objective of the 2015-2019 Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) is to achieve food security and farmers’
welfare. The Plan aims at promoting an overall environment enabling small farmers to respond to the growing domestic demand for food production, through extensive investment in irrigation,
storage, market and transport infrastructure, strengthened extension and other support services, and adaptation to environmental risks. It also aims at increasing the value added of agricultural
products as well as employment in the agriculture sector, with a view to raise the income of farmers and of all the players directly or indirectly involved in the agriculture business.
135.
The Ministry of Agriculture has developed the Master Strategy for Agriculture Development (SIPP) 2015 - 2045 which puts forward two new paradigms (i) Agriculture for development which
focuses on downstream development of the agricultural sector and (ii) Development of bio-sustainable industrial agriculture with an emphasis on quality, adding value and enhancing
competitiveness of agricultural products. It intends to promote economies of scale, vertical integration covering upstream and downstream aspects, as well as horizontal integration that cover
various commodities and business types. The principle of sustainable bio-industrial agriculture requires an integrated management pattern, involving relevant institutions and stakeholders. The
Ministry also has a blueprint for horticultural development (2010–2025) to transform the sub-sector in Indonesia so that it can be a major supplier of fruit in Asia and the world market.
136.
Alignment with IFAD policies and corporate priorities. Under the 2016-2025 Strategic Framework, IFAD aims to invest in rural people to enable them to overcome poverty and achieve food
security through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods. IFAD will pursue three closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing strategic objectives (SOs) to achieve its goal: SO1:
Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities; SO2: Increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation; and SO3: Strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate
resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities. In order to achieve these objectives, IFAD intends to work in a way that is bigger, better and smarter: Bigger: by mobilizing substantially
more funds and resources for investment in rural areas; Better: by strengthening the quality of IFAD’s country programmes through innovation, knowledge-sharing, partnerships and policy
engagement; and Smarter: by delivering development results in a cost-effective way that best responds to partner countries’ evolving needs. UPLANDs directly feeds into the development goal
and further works particularly towards SO1, 2 and 3. Given the prominent scaling up agenda and innovation focus, the READ SI investment is aligned with the bigger, better, smarter way of
working.
12/22
137.
The Indonesia Country Strategic Opportunities Programme (COSOP) details IFAD’s three strategic objectives (SO) in Indonesia: (i) SO-1: Smallholder producers participate in remunerative
agricultural markets; (ii) SO-2: Smallholder producers and their families are more resilient to risks; (iii) SO-3: Rural institutions deliver responsive services that meet the needs of smallholder
producers. UPLANDs directly addresses the three strategic objectives and is thus consistent with IFAD’s country strategy for Indonesia.
138.
It is furthermore consistent with other relevant IFAD policies, strategies and guidelines, notably: (i) Targeting Policy: Reaching the rural poor; Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
Policy; Private-Sector Development and Partnership Strategy; Rural Finance Policy; Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption; Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support; Loan and
Grant Administration Operational Manual; Guidelines for Project Design.
139.
As detailed previously, UPLANDs also responds to the four IFAD11 corporate priorities:
Gender. UPLANDs is a gender transformative programme that puts strategies in place to ensure inclusion of women, men and youth. The project fully recognizes women as farmers and is
focussed on expanding women’s economic empowerment, strengthening their role in decision-making at the household and community level, encouraging more equitable distribution of
workload between women and men and facilitating empowering measures for men, women and youth at the village level.
Youth[10]. UPLANDs will facilitate youth representation in farmers groups, expand employment opportunities along the value chain and facilitate their access to knowledge skills and markets.
The project investment in mechanization and the use of modern technologies will specifically be the areas where youth will participate actively.
Nutrition will be mainstreamed in production and processing activities as well as in awareness raising and promotion of nutrition through women and youth. The approach is to introduce a
nutrition-sensitive value chain implementation approach for each commodity. It will encourage local innovation combined with evidence-based assessment to identify and scale-up promising
innovations in the approaches to improving nutrition. Some of the interventions for nutrition will include extension advice on nutritious crop varieties, social marketing events and nutrition
awareness.
Climate adaptation is an integral part of the project design. The project will develop a number of good climate smart agricultural practices that will strengthen existing and future climate
resilience. The climate adaptation focus will be participative and building on the traditional farmer climate skills together with the findings of climate science. It seeks to build the skills and
capacities of the farmer and government institutions to proactively support initiatives to meet the needs of climate change adaptation. The approach will provide a strong base to scale up the
UPLANDs production and climate change initiatives to wider areas. In addition, UPLANDs contributes to increasing climate change resilience by providing farmers with adequate risk transfer
mechanisms, including agricultural insurance.
140.
Country ownership. The project concept for UPLANDs was developed by Directorate of Agriculture Irrigation and Facilities (DGAIF) of the Ministry of Agriculture in consultation with other
relevant government ministries and included in Government's Blue Book, its investment plan for foreign financing. The process for developing UPLANDs involved a call for proposals from district
agriculture staff across Indonesia. After careful assessment, proposals from 14 districts covering 11 commodities were selected and presented to the UPLANDs design team for detailed
definition. This approach was endorsed by Bappenas, who guided the design firmly towards the original concept of commodity chain development. Bappenas has also ensured the UPLANDs
project is included in Government's Green Book to ensure government funding for co-financing UPLANDs is available for implementation in 2019. To ensure adequate local ownership, the
UPLANDs will adopt the on-granting mechanism, which requires all participating local government authorities to pre-finance project activities, to later be reimbursed by the central government.
The government agrees that this mechanism is better suited to meet the objectives of supporting large decentralized investment delivery, and creating and enabling higher district level
ownership.
141.
Partnerships. The Government of Indonesia has requested IFAD and the Islamic Development Bank to collaborate to improve agricultural productivity and sustainable soil and water
management in upland areas by focusing on specific high priority commodities. This partnership is expected to make an important contribution to key government priorities such as poverty
alleviation, food security, employment and economic growth, empowerment of women and youth, climate resilience, innovation, reducing regional inequality and promotion the sustainable use
of natural resources.
142.
IFAD and IsDB’s considerable experience in the country can assist Government address its key priorities. IFAD has been working in Indonesia since 1980. It has financed 17 loan projects, with
a total investment of US$ 1,692 million. IsDB has been supporting Indonesia’s since 1978, and has cumulatively provided financial resources in excess of US$ 7 billion, through over 200 public
and private sector operations, as well as financial sector support. UPLANDs is aligned with IsDB’s Member Country Partnership Strategy (MCPS) 2016-2020, and is included in the proposed
project pipeline agreed between IsDB and GOI under the MCPS.
143.
IFAD has a proven track record in empowering disadvantaged groups and raising agricultural productivity in upland areas. IFAD has also a strong reputation for strengthening rural enterprises
and developing inclusive value chains. Up until today, IFAD interventions have benefitted 13 million people throughout Indonesia, including in rain-fed, upland areas. While in previous IFAD
programmes, upland farmers have not been a dedicated target group, IFAD’s approach of strengthening the farming system, combining innovative, strengthened advisory services with access
to business development services and markets will be a highly relevant basis for the development of sustainable technology transfer approaches in upland settings which would be used as
appropriate. Along with strong footprints in education and infrastructure sectors, the IsDB has considerable experience in supporting GOI’s National Community Empowerment Program (or
PNPM-Mandiri and now renamed as the National Slum Upgrading Program), which adopts the community development approach and has community mobilization and capacity building at its
core. Through this program IsDB has contributed to the reduction of poverty and improvement of well-being of over 15 million people out of the 45 million populace living in the 4800 urban
wards of 15 provinces. IsDB’s innovative approaches for providing access to financial services would also be incorporated in the design of the UPLANDs.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
144.
The total project costs, including physical and price contingencies, duties and taxes are estimated at US$ 151.655 million over a five-year implementation period. Project costs by components
and by category are summarized in Table 5 and Table 6. The Project investments are organized into four major components: (i) Productivity Enhancement and Resilience-Building (68% of the
costs); (ii) Agribusiness Development & Livelihood Facilitation (12.7% of the costs); (iii) Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems (3.4% of the costs); and (iv) Project Management (15.9%).
145.
Project components 1. Infrastructure Development for Productivity Enhancement & Resilience Building, and 3. Strengthening Institutional Delivery System are partially counted as climate
finance. The total amount of IFAD climate finance is preliminarily calculated as US$41.297 million.
Table 5: Programme/project costs by component (and sub-components) and financier (Thousands of United States dollars)
13/22
Note: The access to financial services US$ 4 million from IsDB will be provided through Islamic Solidarity Fund for Development
Table 6: Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier (Thousands of United States dollars)
Table 7: Programme/project costs by component and year (Thousands of United States dollars)
14/22
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
146.
GOI has requested a loan of US$ 50 million or 33.0% of total project cost, from IFAD and US$ 70million or 46.2% of cost from IsDB. The GoI will contribute US$ 17.1 million (11.3%) by
financing salaries of all PMU, PIU, extension workers and by waiving taxes and duties. The project beneficiaries are expected to contribute US$ 14.0 million (9.3%) mostly to co-finance the
purchase of basic and advanced machinery, equipment, building storage and production facility under component 1 and 2 - and “private sector partners” – which are companies investing on
seed potato and potato commodities-related activities - will contribute US$ 24,000 of the total programme cost.
147.
The estimate of taxes and duties was based on the rates in effect prevailing at the time of the design. In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties will be financed out of the proceeds
of the IFAD and IsDB loan, any future changes in tax legislation will have to apply to the programme.
148.
Table 8: Project Financing Plan (in US$ Million)
Source
International Fund for Agricultural Development – Loan
Islamic Development Bank – Loan
Islamic Development Bank – Grant
Government of Indonesia
Beneficiaries
Private Sector
Total
c. Disbursement
Amount
   50.00
   70.00
    0.50
   17.1
   14.0
   0.02
Share of Total
(%)
33.0%
46.2%
0.3%
11.3%
9.3%
0.016%
151.655
100
1.  IFAD loan proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook and its detailed arrangements would be outlined in the Letter to the Borrower. Disbursements
under IsDB and ISFD financing will be made in accordance with prevailing IsDB procedures and guidelines.  Considering the activities, the project will adapt impress account arrangement,
with advance payment and then followed by replenishment to the DA.
2.  The Government will open two Designated Accounts in US$, in the name of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) at Bank Indonesia (BI). One account for the IFAD loan funds and another account
for the IsDB loan funds. Funds in these accounts will be used to pay the eligible Project expenditures incurred by PMU and PIUs. The modalities of the designated account for the IFAD
resources will be detailed in the Letter to the Borrower, which would be issued by IFAD. Details of the specific names, titles and signature(s) of the persons authorized to operate these
accounts must reach IFAD and IsDB before withdrawals are initiated. There will be strong fiduciary management and controls put in place to effectively track and report on the utilization of
funds. The Special Account limit for the IsDB is proposed to be increased to US$ 10 million and US$ 1 million for the ISFD Loan, to facilitate the multiple and frequent small payments
expected across the 14 districts under the project
3.  Although the DA will be under the name of DG Treasury MOF, the PMU at MOA will be the ones responsible to reconcile the DA and to prepare the application for withdrawal for advances
and reporting the use of the DA, duly approved by DG Treasury, before their submissions to the IFAD or IsDB. Copies of the DA’s bank statement will be provided to the PMU by DG
Treasury, MOF.
4.  Requirement for First Disbursement. The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to withdrawal: (i) The PMU shall have been duly established within MoA, and
(ii) The PIM shall have been prepared in a manner satisfactory to IFAD.
5.  The annual estimated disbursement at design is described in table below. Disbursement Plan per Year. Loan withdrawals per year for the Project until the end of 2023 are IDR
1,533,884,452,049 or US$ 108,786,131.
First year: the project will carry out PMU component activities, Project Start Up Workshop, Consulting Services, Monitoring and Evaluation with a total budget of Rp76,694,222,602.43
(5%) or USD 5,439,306.57.
Second Year: the project will carry out a continuation of PMU component activities, Consulting Services, Monitoring and Evaluation, Infrastructure, and Extension & Field Trial,
Training with a total budget of IDR 306,776,890,409.71 (20%) or USD 21,757,226.54.
Third Year: the project will carry out a continuation of PMU component activities, Consulting Services, Monitoring and Evaluation, Infrastructure, and Extension & Field Trial, Training
with a total budget of IDR 613,553,780,819.42 (40%) or USD 43,514,226.54.
Fourth Year: the project will carry out a continuation of PMU component activities, Consulting Services, Monitoring and Evaluation, Infrastructure, and Extension & Field Trial, Training
with a total budget of IDR 383,471,113,012.14(25%) or USD 27,196,532.84.
Fifth Year: overall the project will complete PMU component activities, Consulting Services, Monitoring and Evaluation, Infrastructure with a total budget of IDR 153,338,445,204.86
(10%) or USD 10,878,613.14.
15/22
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
149.
The project is expected to reduce poverty and enhance food security in upland areas through building remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods. As a result of project activities, the
poverty level of rural area in the targeted districts will reduce from in average 16.41% in 2017 to become in average 13.0% by end of 2025. This will be achieved through achievement of
outcome 1: Increase in poor rural people’s productive capacities, outcome 2: Increase poor rural people's incomes from enhanced processing and/or market participation, and outcome 3:
Enhanced delivery of UPLANDs services & research.
150.
The project will be implemented in 14 districts. Total villages covered by the project is 247 (16%) of the total 1,525 villages in the participating districts. The poverty rate on the participating
districts in 14 districts in 2017 was in average 14.295. Based on the BPS data, the ratio poverty level of rural to urban in at provincial level of the participating districts in 2012 in average was
1.37, meaning that poverty at rural area is 1.4 times compared to district poverty level. Current reduction in poverty rate is in average at 0.55% per year during 2009-2018.The project villages
are expected to able to reduce poverty rate at 1% per year starting from 2021.Based on this assumption, the project will contribute to reduce the poverty rate at rural are in the participating
districts in average to become 13% by end of 2025.
Table 9: Incremental Benefits by Commodity and Location
Average incremental benefit per unit
Commodity
Shallot
Seed shallot
Garlic
Potato
Seed Potato
Organic rise
Mangosteen
Mango
Banana
Goat
Coffee
Location
Malang
Sumenep
Sumbawa
Sumbawa
Lombok Timur
Minahasa Selatan
Garut
Tasikmalaya
Magelang
Subang
Subang
Lebak
Cirebon
Cirebon
Gorontalo
Banjarnegara
Purbalingga
Banjarnegara
Banjarnegara
AIB/unit/year
unit
Note
31,255,934
39,774,334
39,993,534
110,082,334
49,158,905
16,776,835
39,270,585
79,593,450
57,647,798
23,780,883
9,228,839
16,342,571
54,178,009
183,841,350
42,899,557
6,509,313
2,561,264
34,742,265
18,493,200
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
ha
head
head
ha
ha
New
Existing
New
Existing
New
New
Existing
151.
The main benefits expected from the project will be increases in productivity, increase in area under the selected commodities, reduction in post-harvest losses and increase in market share
and reduced price vulnerability due to greater market access. In the selected commodities current yields are between 20% to 50% below the potential yields and that there are post-harvest
losses of around 20% or more for some of the most perishable commodities, especially horticulture crops. There is considerable price volatility due to lack of access to markets and poorly
developed infrastructure. The project is designed to deal with these issues of low productivity and limited access to markets. Women are expected to benefit from increased entrepreneurship
activities by participating in increased processing of the selected commodities as well as reduction in their workload through access to improved technology and skills. Youth and women will
directly benefit as a result mainly of improved employment opportunities and access to skills and technologies for improved farming.
152.
Benefits relating to increased farm productivity include better access to crop inputs, seasonal finance, technical support and improved on farm infrastructure. Improved crop water management
will involve use of efficient irrigation systems designed to best suit the selected commodity in an uplands agricultural production system. Marketing benefits would include aggregation of
commodities by way of smallholder Farmer Groups being linked into larger farmer association/private sector alliances. Commodity aggregation via alliances would result in significant
economies of scale for smallholders by providing access to enhanced post-harvest packing, processing, and storage and distribution systems. This in turn would result in marketing benefits as
they would become active participants in an agricultural enterprise able to satisfy requirements of higher end Indonesian and export markets
153.
The project is expected to be a financially and economically viable investment for the economy as a whole. The economic net present value of the programme’s net benefit stream, discounted at
9 per cent, is Indonesian Rupiah 1.98 billion (approximately US$207.5 million).The estimated EIRR for the project is 26.4% and the NPV (at the discount rate of 9%) is Rp. An increase of project
costs or a decrease of project benefits by 10% would lead to an EIRR of 24.1% and 23.9% respectively while the two scenarios together would result in and EIRR of 21.7%
16/22
154.
Variations in the shadow wage rate factor (set at 0.8 for the base case) have negligible impact on the result: a SWRF of 0.9 results in an EIRR of 26.3% and of 0.7 in and EIRR of 26.5%.
155.
This is result indicates that the project can be expected to be economically viable, and resilient to any likely variations in key variables.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
156.
The overall likelihood of the sustainability of the UPLANDs is expected to be enhanced by the strong national and local government ownership and financial commitment, the project's focus on
strengthening where possible existing local institutions rather than creating project based structures, and the investment in viable agribusiness business plans in a selected number of focus
commodities. Other elements that will contribute to the project's overall sustainability and exit strategy are as follows.
157.
Capacity Building and Training. Training will be an important element of project sustainability and associated exit strategy, and will include: (i) farmer training to ensure the technical skills are
learned to enable uptake of new technology. In this respect the Project will specifically track the adoption rates by farmers of new technologies required to improve product outputs and quality;
(ii) 231 farmer extension workers will be re-trained to ensure they have the skills required to support farmers; (iii) farmers will be trained in financial analysis to enable them to understand gross
margins and general farm profitability; (iv) post-harvest training will be delivered to farmers and market specialists. and (v) business training will be essential to ensure UPLANDs supported
businesses (including Bumdes, KUBE and BLUD) are established and strengthened on the basis of sound business practices. All training will be supported by technical assistance personnel
with the necessary skill and experience.
158.
Strengthening Farmer Institutions: The project is expected to contribute to strengthening strong farmer-based agribusiness organizations/institutions, at the famer group level, farmer-group
federation level, and higher-level agribusiness institutions (such as Cooperative, BLUD). It is recommended that the organization team of farmer-based cooperative and BLUD (government
own) are both managed by appointed professional team. Key staff of these institutions/organization will be trained, facilitated and supported in the business operation since on-farm level, off-
farm level and might be up to out-farm level. At on-farm level that corresponds to farmer group levels or farmer-group federation levels, capacity building will be addressed to implement good
agricultural or livestock raising practices to produce high quality products which meet the quality standard and to increase on-farm productivity, managing agricultural machineries for use
collectively by farmers, managing communal cage for livestock raising. For off-farm - that in some extend correspond to famer-group federation or higher-level agribusiness institutions - capacity
building will be targeted to Gapoktan (Federation of farmer group), KUBE, BLUD, Cooperative. Capacity building will be addressed in preparation of business plan and how to implement the
business plan, business operation and management. Functioning and operationalization of the farmer-groups and their business institutions will ensure the sustainability of the program and
achieving project objectives.
159.
Strengthening Marketing and Partnership building. Market awareness for all value chain participants will also be a key aspect of sustainability and therefore a realistic exit strategy. All
elements of production, post-harvest processing and marketing will be based on a full and clear awareness of the requirements, demand levels and potential returns in the market place. While
this may be a part of any business plan, market awareness in commercial value chain development is a key sustainability and exit strategy for UPLANDs.
160.
Access to Finance (seasonal and development finance) is critical in value chain development. UPLANDs will ensure that all enterprises have access to sufficient financial support to enable
them to operate to optimal potential. Over the life of UPLANDs, businesses will be required to build sufficient resources to enable them to largely stand alone in terms of seasonal finance as well
as to build greater equity which in turn will support use of greater investment borrowing to enable continued growth. In summary, farmers and businesses will be encouraged to build both their
own seasonal finance and a strong balance sheet where equity and debt are in balance. Strong balance sheets and limited overdrafts are the hallmarks of sustainability and in UPLANDs will
also be a clear factor in the Project exit strategy.
161.
Strengthening Local Government: Capacity of staff of local government agencies will be strengthened through training and comparative studies. The agencies are expectedly active in the
programme implementation either in technical and managerial aspects, so that they could continue in providing guidance and facilitation to the farmer-based agribusiness development after the
project. To ensure the strong and sustainability of the business institutions (KUBE, BLUD and Cooperatives), the project will:
As part of capacity building of KUBE, BLUD and Cooperatives, ensure continuous facilitation and mentoring need to be provided by professional consultant operate in business or
agribusiness.
Professional business and public policy consultants to be provided to support the local government in developing and managing BLUD.
Individual consultants mastering in specific-commodity business to support the related KUBE, BLUD and Cooperatives in developing the business and marketing networks.
162.
There are risks associated with ensuring successful exit in a manner that ensures sustainability of UPLANDs beyond project closure. In addition to the elements outlined above, UPLANDs will
adopt an on-granting approach to Project implementation. This will require districts to pre-finance budgeted activities, and as such will involve considerable awareness training for District Bupati
(Mayors), and financial management training for treasurers and other finance staff. Ultimately, on-granting will provide district staff with greater authority to demand services and delivery from
national government agencies. As such, on-granting is a strategy to empower district governments, in the process building greater sustainability and self-reliance. Hence, a fully operational on-
granting mechanism is an integral part of the UPLANDs Exit Strategy.
163.
UPLANDs will monitor the successful achievement of both sustainability and therefore the exit strategy by tracking the key indicators in the logical framework analysis. This can be
supplemented by tracking supervision mission reports in respect of business development and progress in building financial resources to fund seasonal finance and debt repayment.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
164.
A total of 14 risks are identified as important for Project Management staff to address. While there are no serious risks to successful Project delivery, there are two operational risks rated as
“medium” which will require specific attention to ensure potential negative outcomes are mitigated against. These are presented in Table 10 below. In addition, there are: (i) 5 “medium-low”
risks (4 operational and 1 country); and (ii) 7 “low” risks (6 operational and 1 country). See Annex 8 – Integrated Risk Framework for further details of risks and their mitigation.
Table 10: Risks and mitigation.
Risk
Rating
Mitigation
1.
2.
3.
Operational Risk: Complexity of national management of 14 different sub-
projects.
M
Provision of consistent support to NPIU by both IFAD and IsDB in supervision and
advice, especially in establishing functional project management, supervision and
monitoring systems for all 14 value chain sub-projects.
Operational Risk: Weaknesses in financial management impede smooth flow
of funds and hamper execution of programme activities
M
Adequate provision of finance staffing to be foreseen manuals, interim financial reporting
and enhanced internal audit to be put in place. With introduction of on-granting
processes in financial implementation, there will be urgent need to focus on awareness
raising of Bupati, and provide budget training to district treasurers and other financial
staff.
Operational Risk: Extension staff lack capacity to respond to farmer needs
and to deliver relevant support.
L-M
Activities will focus on strengthening demand-driven support of the extension system,
combined with an upgrading of extension staff capacities and training facilities.
Specialist TA recruited to mitigate major staffing skill deficiencies.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Operational Risk: Procurement weaknesses; delayed contracting of specialist
service providers for social mobilization
L-M
17/22
Good planning, training and support for the procurement processes. Procurement
initiatives will include; (i) strengthening of procurement planning and strengthening of e-
procurement, e-monitoring systems; (ii) setting performance targets to improve
procurement planning; (iii) implementing measures to increase competition, such as
better procurement and capacity development; (iv) providing technical support for
documentation quality especially for terms of reference prior to tendering;(vi) ensure
access to the highest quality consultants including international experts; and
(vii) conducting a procurement audits.
Operational Risk: First time introduction of BLUD institutional structures into
agriculture sector
L-M
Provision of Institutional Specialist TA support to help establishment of proposed 6
BLUDs.
Operational Risk: Lack of capacity and resources for the effective O&M of
equipment and infrastructure.
L-M
Country Risk: Impact of climate changes will affect crop productivity and
viability. Risk of earthquakes and volcanic activity.
L-M
Plans and responsibilities are defined and put into place for O&M of investments from
the start including; (i) ensuring farmer ownership of equipment and equipment through
around 25% cost recovery; (ii) training and develop of the institutional framework for
O&M including putting aside funds to meet the needs of depreciation and replacement.
Climate change adaptation will be carefully planned and implemented including;
(i) implementing a climate change analysis and preparing viable and effective programs
of climate adaptation; (ii) developing plans and climate resilient designs for soil and
water conservation and irrigation; (iii) improving access to appropriate seed to meet
climate impacts; (iv improving access to climate information including weather and el
Nino forecasts.
Most district schemes are in areas of seismic and volcanic risks; impacts to small scale
infrastructure and agriculture would however be minimal.
165.
Public Financial Management
166.
The inherent risk is deemed to be medium. Indonesia was ranked 89th out of 180 countries in the 2018 TI Corruption Perception Index, with a medium score of 38.
167.
The latest PEFA report for Indonesia was published in 2017. It described a reasonably well-functioning PFM system, with significant improvements from 2011 to 2016. The assessment over
time shows significant improvements in the quality of PFM including: (i) Aligning the legislative and regulatory framework to the latest international budget, accounting and reporting standards
with the adoption of the COFOG classification and accrual accounting standards; (2) Establishing a multi-year budgeting framework and a robust macroeconomic fiscal framework to optimize
expenditure management in line with revenue mobilization; (iii) Rolling out the FMIS SPAN as a platform for the integration of the Treasury system and the consolidation of cash management
operations at the central government level; and (iv) Strengthening the effectiveness of the oversight function by the internal audit and external audit institutions. in PFM systems linked to
predictability and control over budget execution, particularly PEFA performance scores are slightly below B, which is above the basic level of performance broadly consistent with good
international practices.
168.
The Indonesia portfolio consists of six investment projects, with a disbursement ratio of 5.1% in 2018 (USD 8.19 Million out of USD 162 Million). Three projects are in completion or closing
stage (CCDP, VDP &SOLID). Three projects are on the second year of implementation (IPDMIP, co-financed with ADB, READSI and SMPEI) and one project in preparation stage of
implementation (YESS). The disbursement performance of IPDMIP & READSI are unsatisfactory.
I. Environment and Social category
169.
The Project will have significant positive impacts on the quality of life and environment for the project communities such as strengthening farmer-based organization and management,
improving agribusiness, soil and water conservation, maintaining genetic resources, improving the waste-water management, recycling of livestock dung to produce organic fertilizers for use in
crop fertilization, improving access/farm road, increasing farmers’ income sustainably, participation of women group and the youth, etc. Potential negative impacts associated with the design,
construction and operation of the proposed project activities will be temporary, minor, and localized in extent and can be mitigated to acceptable levels. Such impacts include: (i) site specific
impacts including excavation of construction materials for farm road and irrigation infrastructure development; (ii) water availability and quality; (iii) construction impacts; and (iv) operation
impacts.
170.
A preliminary screening of the project interventions has been carried and is described in the Social and Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures review note (SECAP) which is
presented in Annex 3. The environmental screening has incorporated the requirements of IFAD, IsDB and Government. The IsDB environmental procedures follow the IFAD safeguards; in
parallel a preliminary screening of the projects in relation to the Government environment regulations has been carried out.
171.
Based on the IFAD Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP), the project is categorized as Category B; anyhow, monitoring for early detection of investments which
could correspond to category A will deserve high attention during implementation and the supervision missions will include specific focus on this monitoring. The proposed project is spread over
fourteen districts and; (i) would not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss natural habit and biodiversity, all of the agricultural development would be located on existing cultivated lands;
(ii) the projects would be located in areas at high risk of geophysical hazards, notably earthquakes, however the risks to agriculture and small-scale infrastructure are considered to be minimal;
(iii) the project design is directed at environmentally sound and sustainable agriculture, the project will invest in rehabilitation and new irrigation with a high emphasis on sustainable water use
efficiency and strong water management, some increased use of pesticides is envisaged however these be supported by guidance and training in the safe and environmentally sound practices
for pesticide use, waste from agriculture and processing will be small scale and will include measures to ensure safe disposal, and where viable include recycling; (iii) infrastructure will be small
scale including farm roads and small scale irrigation schemes less than 100ha including rehabilitation and new schemes, dams would be small (less than 5m); (iv) the projects would require
only limited land acquisition mainly for farm roads, land requirements would small and dispersed and would require only a small percentage (less than 10%) of individual owner’s land; and (v)
the project design will be participative and will be aimed at ensuring vulnerable and socially disadvantaged groups are actively engaged in the project activities.
172.
The SECAP including the environmental and social management plan will be fully reviewed and updated as part of the detailed design process during year the first year of the project
implementation; the approach for preparing the final project screening including the preparation of assessment to meet the environmental requirements of the UKL/UPL are described in the
SECAP.
173.
Prior to implementation all proposed physical and construction activities are also subject for environmental assessment, according to the Government regulations, i.e. (i) Government Regulation
No. 27/2012 on Environmental Permit; (ii) Decree of Minister of Environment No. 05/2012 on Screening Criteria (type/scale/magnitude of activities requiring AMDAL/EIA); (iii) Regulation of
Minister of Environment, Republic of Indonesia No. 16/2012 on Guideline on Preparation of Environmental Document;(iv) Decree of Ministry of Environment No. 17/2012 on Community
Participation and Information Disclosure in Environmental Impact Assessment;(v) Regulation of Minister of Public Works, Permen PU No. 10/PRT/M/2008 on the Environmental Management
Measure (UKL) and Environmental Monitoring Measure(UPL) Criteria; and (vi) Regulation of Ministry of Environment (Permen LH) No. 07/2010 on Competence Certification of AMDAL
Preparation and Training Requirements for AMDAL Preparation.
174.
In relation to the Government environmental requirements, preliminary screening indicates that the projects would be small with limited environmental impact and as such, would meet the
criteria for a simpler UKL/UPL environmental permit rather than a full AMDAL assessment.
J. Climate Risk classification
175.
Based on information on historic climate changes and projections using climate change models it is estimated that the project will be ‘highly sensitive’ to climate change. This classification is
based on existing studies prepared by development partners acting in Indonesia[11]; the project climate risk management will benefit from these studies.
176.
Climate change estimates have been prepared relative to the 1986-2005 values. For Indonesia by 210, 0 temperature is projected to increase by 0.9-2.20C and rainfall by between -1% to +5%.
For the UPLANDs projects there will be significant local climatic differences due to the altitude and complex topography. In the seven provinces where the UPLANDs will be located the
estimated climate change impacts include: (i) by 2060s the estimated average temperatures will increase between 1.0-1.50C; (ii) by 2060s in Banten, West, Central and East Java and Nusa
Tenggara Barat, the wet season rainfall is estimated to increase (by 0 to +10%), dry season rainfall will however reduce (by 0 to -10%); (iii) a small increase in wet and dry season precipitation
(by 0 to +10%) is estimated for Gorontalo and North Sulawesi; (iv) variation in the rainfall patterns due to the ENSO effects will continue, these will be over and above climate impacts, it is
estimated that with climate change that there will be uncertainty an increase in the frequency of drought due to the El Niño events; (v) potential evapotranspiration is estimated to increase by
about 5%, which will result in higher crop water requirements; (vi) extreme rainfall events are likely to increase risk of soil erosion; and (vii) the number of consecutive days without rainfall will
increase.
177.
Changes in climate will have an impact on crop growing conditions; affect agricultural productivity and the suitability of crops in different agroecological zones. High temperatures can lead to; (i)
negative impact including heat stress; (ii) upland crops grown at niche altitudes may over time become less suitable for specific crops and varieties; and (iii) will increase evapotranspiration and
178.
179.
180.
may trigger the proliferation of weeds, pests, and diseases, Changes in precipitation can result in a reduction of water availability for rainfed crops, and alterations of discharge in small upland
river systems may lower reliability of irrigation water supply.
The collective impact of reductions in dry season rainfall, increased evapotranspiration as well as the increase in frequency of the cyclical El Nino droughts poses significant challenges to the
UPLANDs in Java and NTB; climate impacts will be less in Gorontalo and North Sulawesi.
18/22
As a ‘high climate risk project’ an in-depth climate risk analysis will be carried out to help to examine the nature of climate and disaster hazards of the various projects; the analysis will examine
the exposure and sensitivity of the project and associated communities. Based on the climate change risk analysis a detailed climate change adaptation plan and programme will be prepared
for the project. The in-depth climate risk analysis also forms the basis for the development of adequate risk transfer mechanisms such as agricultural insurance.
A major challenge for small farmers is the high-risk environment in which they operate, making them traditionally highly risk averse and in turn inhibiting their willingness to adopt new and
improved farm practices. On top of everyday production risks, the risk profile for farmers is becoming more challenging due to climate change related production risks like drought, flood, and
pests. Recognizing this reality, UPLANDs will link with a new IFAD initiative (‘Insurance for Rural Resilience & Economic Development Technical Assistance Programme’) which designed to
improve access for smallholders to appropriate crop insurance.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
181.
Project Structure and Coordination. The UPLANDs implementation structure will have strong management foundations both at National and District levels. The project, including all activities
funded by IFAD and IsDB, will be executed by Directorate General of Agricultural Infrastructure and Facilities (DGAIF) in the Ministry of Agriculture. DGAIF will establish a National Project
Management Unit (NPMU), embedded within the Directorate for Agricultural Irrigation, to manage and supervise the overall IFAD-IsDB co-funded project. The NPMU will coordinate the 14
District Project Implementation Units (PIU) which will be embedded at Dinas Pertanian (District Agricultural Agency). Main project implementation activities will be undertaken at district levels.
The NPMU and PIUs will be staffed by dedicated full time staff and supported by technical and administrative staff to ensure timely project delivery. Under the existing Framework Agreement
(FA) signed by IFAD and IsDB in 1979, and the Framework Co-Financing Agreement (FCA) dated 2010, IFAD will enter into a specific agreement with IsDB to establish the concrete
arrangements for the project implementation.
182.
The NPMU has overall responsibility for project implementation and will be led by a Project Manager supported by a Planning Assistants to provide overall coordination and oversight of all
project activities within a number of districts and ensure adequate presence and support of the project management out in the districts level. In addition, the Project Manager will be supported
by Financial Management team, Procurement Officer and Monitoring and Evaluation officer that will oversee financial management, procurement and programme administration issues,
including planning, M&E and reporting.
183.
The PIU will be housed under the Dinas Pertanian (District Agricultural Office) in each district. With similar structure to NPMU, PIU will be led by a District Project Manager and supported by the
relevant support staff to provide implementation support and managing all project activities within number of villages. Similar to NPMU, the PIU will be equipped with staff that will oversee
financial management, procurement and programme administration issues, including planning, M&E and reporting.
184.
While there will be no dedicated structure established at Provincial level, provinces will focus on coordination and monitoring support and as such will not lead any activities nor manage
activities in districts. They are considered necessary to provide closer support and backstopping to the District PIU during implementation.
185.
The NPMU and PIU will be supported by a Project Management Consultant (PMC) team, for day to day management and coordination; a Design and Supervision Consultant (DSC) team that
will specifically verify the engineering design of the infrastructure works and will supervise the construction works in the project area; and Technical Experts that will be highly focused teams in
each district according to commodity needs. These experts will explicitly focus on advising and providing professional support in specific areas, such as value chain, water management,
business development, microfinance, gender and other relevant technical areas. There will be a small number of individually recruited national and international technical experts, primarily at
the PMU level and weighted towards the start of the programme to help establish the new programme systems and approaches.
186.
While the PMU has overall responsibility for project delivery, each of the Components will have specific implementation arrangements:
Component 1: District Agricultural Agencies (DINAS Pertanian) will have prime responsibility for project delivery within their district area. BAPPEDA will act as coordinator during the planning
process while Dinas Pertanian will act as Programme Implementation Unit (PIUs) supported with other relevant technical agencies. PIU will be supported by technical specialists and DSC
implementing the physical infrastructure work assigned to each district and will work as an integrated part of the district implementation teams and be based in the Dinas Pertanian. The
district teams will be provided with technical backstopping and monitoring by PMU team as well as the corresponding provincial agencies, especially the provincial Dinas Pertanian.
Component 2: The project will include a suite of complementary support mechanisms suited to smallholder farming in which both the public and (where possible) private sector will be
involved. These activities will be coordinated by 231 Village based facilitators who will work closely with the provider of extension services to ensure the village facilitation and social
mobilization process within the village is efficiently implemented. Village facilitators will ensure that all intended UPLANDs beneficiaries, including women and youth, fully understand
UPLANDs opportunities as well as the obligations and responsibilities. A village facilitation and social mobilization team will be recruited. It will comprise: (i) National Village Facilitation Team
Manager will be recruited to work in the NPMU; (ii) In some districts where the target area covers more than one sub-district, 20 Village Facilitator coordinator will be hired at district level.
While the social mobilisation and facilitation process under sub component 2.1 will be the responsibility of PIU, PMU will have primary responsibility for delivery of activities under 2 sub-
components. The implementation of sub-component 2.4 on microfinance, will be under on-granting mechanism where District Government will appoint a regional development bank/ district
level bank (BPDs/BPRs) to administer the revolving fund to be extended to farmer groups and its members.
Component 3: Training of GoI staff will be led and implemented by the PMU while adaptive research will be undertaken in consultation with relevant research institutes and district extension
staff in the case of on-farm research.
187.
Advisory Group and Technical Group. UPLANDs will be overseen by an Advisory Group to provide overall policy guidance and oversight to the Project Management Unit. The Advisory Group
will be composed of senior government officials (Echelon 1) from relevant Directorate General (DG) within MoA. Their advice will be important given the strong linkages that the project
envisages with other sectors such as horticulture or agricultural extension and agri-business. For daily technical advice, there will be a national technical group that will provide technical
guidance for implementation purposes. At each district, a District Working Group (POKJA) will be established with membership from BAPPEDA and other relevant technical agencies, including
the procurement committee. District working groups are an effective way of keeping district government officials informed of the project progress and challenges as well as of seeking the active
support of the Bupati (District Mayor), and any potential private sector players working in the project area. It will also identify opportunities for leveraging funds available from other sources e.g.
Village Funds and District Governments, supporting the BLUD set up and, most importantly, ensure that on-granting funds are properly provisioned in district budgets. Private sector partners
working in the relevant commodity value chain in each district may also provide support to the small holders in extension activities, and identifying markets and building commodity alliances.
19/22
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
1.  Financial Management. The project’s financial management arrangements follow the government system, especially on budgeting, flow of funds, and the auditing mechanism. Overall, the
financial management risk is rated as ‘substantial’ and ‘moderate’ before and after mitigation respectively. The project faces a major risk in staff capacity to manage project implementation,
especially in managing the on-granting mechanism. To minimize the risks, financial management consultants will be hired to assist PMU/PIUs in financial management and conduct FM
training for project staff at district level in particular.
2.  The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), through the Directorate General of Agricultural Infrastructure and Facilities (DG AIF) will have overall accountability for the project, including fiduciary
aspects. The project will use On-Granting” mechanisms to finance activities at the district level. DG AIF has extensive experience in managing similar programs using this particular fund flow
mechanism (e.g. World Bank WISMP-2). Some of the selected districts are currently implementing IPDMIP or READSI projects (IFAD funded) which also apply the On-Granting mechanism.
The government agrees that this mechanism is better suited to meet the objectives of supporting large decentralized investment delivery, and creating and enabling higher district level
ownership.
3.  Designated - Account. After loan entry into force, the Government will open two Designated Accounts in US$, in the name of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) at Bank Indonesia (BI). One
account for the IFAD loan funds and another account for the IsDB loan funds. Funds in these accounts will be used to pay the eligible project expenditures incurred by PMU and PIUs. The
modalities of the designated account for the IFAD resources will be detailed in the Letter to the Borrower, which would be issued by IFAD. Details of the specific names, titles and signature(s)
of the persons authorized to operate these accounts must reach IFAD and IsDB before withdrawals are initiated. The flow of fund is described in Figure 2 below:
4.  Figure 2. Flow of funds:
1.  “On-Granting” Mechanism. In conformance with the Minister of Finance’s Regulation (PERMEN KEU No. 188/PMK.07/2012), fund proceeds of sub-national levels will be
made available through “On-Granting Agreements” (OGA) or Perjanjian Hibah between the Ministry of Finance and the head of the relevant district administration. For
UPLANDs, these OGAs will cover the funding of the majority of the activities at the district level. There would be separate OGAs based on the funding sources, one for the
IFAD-funded activities, and one for the IsDB funded activities. Under this mechanism, the district will have to pre-finance the project activities using their own financial
resources and through PMU. Systematic requests for reimbursement will be made to MoF.
2.  Special Considerations for Financing Arrangements. For a selected number of activities, alternative/optional financing arrangements other than the OGAs may be applied:
(i) for infrastructure work where specific knowledge/technology is required; and/or those requiring multi-year contracts and/or those requiring large amounts of financial
resources. These activities may be implemented by using APBN funds instead of “On-Granting” funds; (ii) for “soft” activities including training and several activities during the
initial planning year, certain activities may be implemented using central budget (APBN) with Tugas Pembantuan (TP) procedures.
5.  Disbursement. In general, there will be three types of disbursement mechanisms for the programme which consist of (i) Advance Withdrawal; (ii) Direct Payment; (iii) Reimbursement. The
IFAD loan will be disbursed in accordance with IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook. Considering the activities, the project will adapt imprest account arrangement, with advance payment
and then followed by replenishment to the DA.
6. 
1.  Requirement for First Disbursement. The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to withdrawal: (i) The PMU shall have been duly established
within the Ministry of Agriculture[1], and (ii) The PIM shall have been prepared in a manner satisfactory to IFAD
2.  Accounting and Reporting. All financial transactions will be recorded in the computerized government accounting system and included in government accountability reports.
PMU/PIUs will prepare a separate set of project financial reports that are suitable for project monitoring purposes. PMU will be responsible to prepare the aggregate Interim
Financial Reports (IFR) and submit them to IFAD and IsDB biannually on an agreed format within 45 days after the period end. The Project will also submit annual financial
statement for each fiscal year that states all project operation, resources and expenditures. All financing resources (IFAD, IsDB, GOI contribution, beneficiary contribution)
shall be accounted in the report.
3.  Audit Arrangements. The audit for the financial statement of this Project will be carried out by an independent auditor acceptable to IFAD and IsDB. The audit will include the
assertion on the reliability of the Project financial statement, review and reconciliation of DA and examination of aspects of compliance and governance, internal control, and
detection of fraud and corruption. The audit will cover the entire Project, covering all sources and application of the fund. The auditor will visit the various implementation units
as considered necessary for the audit. The audit coverage will consider the risk of material misstatement as a result of fraud or error.
7.  Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with the GoI’s National
Procurement Laws and Regulations (Perpres 54/2010, Perpres 70/12, Prepres 84/2012 and Prepres 4/2015) and their amendments, consistent with IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines.
The National Public Procurement Agency (LKPP) is currently working on a major revision to the National Public Procurement Law and Regulations to simplify procedures and shorten
processing times. This is expected to introduce e-procurement and would also become applicable to UPLANDs procurement of goods and materials.
8. 
1.  The NPMU will initially prepare an 18-month Procurement Plan, with support from a Project Expeditor. The 18-month Procurement Plan will updated annually or as required as per
implementation needs. Procurement will be undertaken as per the consolidated Procurement Plan submitted by the NPMU approved by the Project Steering Committee, in
accordance with IFAD and IsDB procurement guidelines. Procurement arrangements are detailed in Appendix 7
2.  The PMU shall consists Project Coordinator, Deputy Project Coordinator, Finance Officer, and Accountant. This is the minimum structure needed to be established prior to
disbursement and the Project will need to present the decree letter of the PMU formation.
20/22
188.
Overall, all IFAD-funded projects in Indonesia are fully mainstreamed through national public financial management systems (budget, treasury, accounting, asset management, audit). Based on
lessons from ongoing projects, strong management and effective coordination systems will be essential to ensure efficient financial reporting and fund-flows, which will be key to successful
project implementation. 
189.
Due to a change in Government policy, there has been a rapid deterioration in country disbursement performance and project implementation . The current mechanism allows the national level
to reimburse only based on output delivery. However, the local government is often not sufficiently confident to pre- finance the project activities thereby creating a bottleneck. Implementation
progress and disbursement could be improved by providing advance payments based on some key indicators. To speed up the project implementation progress, the project design mission
needs to agree on eligibility criteria showing certain activities have been completed prior to main activities. The mechanism for providing advance should be clearly described in the PIM, that
should be properly translated and distributed to DPIUs and local government.
190.
Delay in disbursement due to on granting agreement process • Delay in disbursement due to delay in submitting withdrawal application mitigation : Financial management consultants recruited
to assist day today project financial management at national and district level PMU work with MoF provides on granting mechanism training IFAD to provide training on financial management
procedures, including disbursement requirements
191.
Sufficient internal control system should be set up . Risk identification and risk analysis needed to be conducted in a structured, formal, and comprehensive manner for the new project.
192.
The project will be audited by BPK (SAI), in contrast to the situation to date as IFAD-funded projects have always been audited by BPKP (GoI Internal Audit) except READSI. Adopting a
 harmonised approach with other IFIs, BPK (SAI) as a  member of  INTOSAI, should be the external auditors for IFAD Projects and it should be.
193.
Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with the GoI’s National Procurement
Laws and Regulations (Perpres 54/2010, Perpres 70/12, Prepres 84/2012 and Prepres 4/2015) and their amendments, consistent with IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines. The National
Public Procurement Agency (LKPP) is currently working on a major revision to the National Public Procurement Law and Regulations to simplify procedures and shorten processing times. This
is expected to introduce e-procurement and would also become applicable to UPLANDs procurement of goods and materials.
194.
The NPMU will initially prepare an 18-month Procurement Plan, with support from a Project Expeditor. The 18-month Procurement Plan will updated annually or as required as per
implementation needs. Procurement will be undertaken as per the consolidated Procurement Plan submitted by the NPMU approved by the Project Steering Committee, in accordance with
IFAD and IsDB procurement guidelines. Procurement arrangements are detailed in Annex 7
195.
Procedures: Presidential regulation Number 16 Year 2018 regulates how procurement is carried out by self-management and / or providers of goods / services. The budget owner in terms of
preparing a procurement plan prioritizes procurement through self-management and provider involvement. Other assessment subjects are regarding the stages of procurement planning,
procurement preparation, procurement evaluation and implementation and contract administration. Based on the results of the interview, it was obtained information that not all procurement
processes run optimally to achieve procurement objectives because the level of implementation is still limited to the fulfilment of procedures.
196.
Human resources: The procurement assessment checked the ability of personnel procurement to comply with the requirements of the national regulatory framework. For the time being, the
procurement officers in PIU are the government employees who have basic certification in GoI procurement system.
197.
Procurement Risk and Mitigation. Most procurements are for a value of between IDR200 million and Rp5 billion will be carried out by district PIUs. Procurement planning is categorized with
moderate to high risk, development of human resources is categorized with medium risk and governance and institutions are categorized with moderate to low risk. UPLANDs will therefore
integrate clear strategies are needed to mitigate the main risks including strengthening preparation of procurement planning and increasing the capacity and competence of key procurement
staff – including budget owners, procurement commitment officer, evaluation working group, and self-management organizer. Similar perspectives and understanding among all stakeholders is
necessary for successful procurement.
198.
Considering these potential risk levels, strengthening of PIU and involvement of stakeholders in each stage of project procurement will be undertaken. National and district staff will: (a)
implement standard operating procedures and conduct socialization events regarding the matrix of the responsibilities of each stakeholder in the procurement process; (b) be assisted by
procurement professional who have experience with Government of Indonesia's Procurement System (certified by LKPP) to provide technical assistance and advice. This procurement
professional or consultant will be involved in preparing procurement plans, preparation of bid documents and technical specifications for key procurement packages, including but not limited to
providing guidance to project staff on issues related to procurement.
199.
Governance. Indonesia has a 2017 Corruption Perception Index (CPI) score of 37/100 and is ranked 96 out of 180 countries. This index indicates a lack of transparency in certain government
institutions. IFAD and IsDB will apply a zero-tolerance policy on appearances of corruption. The PMU will, with assistance from the financial management consultants, prepare a programme
framework for transparency and issue public notices including annual financial audits, with a random sample of community and farmer-group grants. This will be performed in accordance with
International Standards of Auditing by a professional external independent auditor; (ii) IFAD and IsDB’s direct supervision process will specifically address fiduciary compliance and the
implementation of the Project framework for transparency and public notice; (iii) Project stakeholders (especially farmers and their organizations) will be directly involved in programming,
implementing and M&E of the project activities; and (iv) evaluation and impact assessment will be outsourced to professional independent institutions.
200.
The provisions contained in the Guidelines for the Use of Consultants under IsDB Financing and the Guidelines for the Procurement of Goods and Works under IsDB Financing will apply in the
procurement of goods and services for components under IsDB and ISFD financing.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
201.
The UPLANDs monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM) system will be developed with three main objectives:
guide programme implementation: it should provide programme stakeholders at the three levels of intervention with information and analysis required to: measure programme outcomes;
assess programme effects on the livelihoods and skills of target groups; assess the relevance of the project strategy, methodologies and implementation processes; detect difficulties and
successes; and support decision-making to improve programme performance;
support economic decisions and policymaking: it should provide project stakeholders with the information and analysis they need to assess the return brought by innovation, to develop
profitable and sustainable activities and to adapt their strategies accordingly;
Share knowledge and upscale good practices: it should develop lessons learnt, capture good practices and successful innovation, and share knowledge, with a view to support project
performance, policy development and policy dialogue.
202.
The M&E and KM system will be:
open and easily accessible information and knowledge should be available to all stakeholders and not restricted to project staff and consultants;
participatory associate project stakeholders in the definition of indicators, data collection, analysis and dissemination of results;
focused on analysis, learning and sharing in support of decision-making, knowledge sharing and policy dialogue, and not merely on data production;
harmonized with Government relevant information systems;
accountable not just upward (to IFAD, IsDB GoI,) but also downward (to programme stakeholders and target groups);
Phased, thus simple and small initially, concentrating on key indicators, and expanding progressively as needs and capacities develop, particularly at district level.
21/22
203.
Annual Workplans and Budgets. Using logframe indicators, AWPBs will be the primary basis for project monitoring. The PMU will prepare a consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget
(AWPB) and corresponding 18 month procurement plan for the project. Although each District will prepare its own AWPB on the basis with the On-Granting requirements to ensure the
allocation of funds to be made available in their annual budget process (APBD). The AWPB would be used as a tool for specifying implementation priorities, identifying the financial and
procurement requirements and establishing a work plan with specific targets at the district, provincial and national level. The AWPB would constitute the basis for release of funds and for
financial management. Together with the quantified results-based indicators (Logframe), AWPBs would be the primary basis for monitoring the project.
204.
The AWPB will be prepared by consolidating (i) the plans from each district, primarily covering Component 1; (ii) plans associated with each of the sub-components under Component 2 both at
National and District level (iii) plans for overall management of UPLANDs; (iv) for Component 3 will be included in the PMU AWPB.
205.
M&E System. The programme monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM) system will draw on the experiences of two IFAD funded projects (Coastal Community
Development Project (CCDP) and SOLID) to learn about effective monitoring of key, specific performance indicators without collecting excessive data that can never be effectively analysed.
The M&E and KM will be developed in line with IFAD, IsDB and GoI requirements. The system will be setup and managed by the PMU and be connected and inter-linked at all levels. It will
consider the effects/impacts of project investments on all project beneficiaries and key stakeholders. The system will use the UPLANDs logframe as the key document for establishing the
monitoring and reporting system. A monthly dashboard will be established to report progress on the key outputs and objectives, disaggregated by gender and integrating physical progress and
financial progress including procurement processes. AWPB-based progress monitoring will be used as a starting point to monitor progress at activity level. The project will hire M&E specialist
who will be part of the NPMU. This person will draw on the M&E experiences of other IFAD and IsDB funded projects e.g. CCDP and SOLID. The project will also support to increased
transparency and beneficiary engagement in planning and monitoring implementation of project intervention
206.
Learning and knowledge management. The project will prepare a knowledge management plan that is linked to the M&E and MIS system. The objective of knowledge management is to
ensure the project units are able to generate and document that knowledge that are useful to build practical knowledge and know-how that leads to improve project performance and results.
The knowledge generated within the project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared, and should be used to: (i) improve project performance and delivery; (ii) allow
flexibility to changing circumstances; (iii) document and share innovations, best practices, including project's successes and failures to improve project intervention (iv) support innovations and
up-scaling; and (v) support country level policy engagement. Particular attention will be given to documenting innovative models that are being tested through the project. The concept of
“Reverse Linkage” which is a technical cooperation mechanism enabled by the IsDB whereby the Bank’s Member Countries exchange their knowledge, expertise, technology and resources to
develop capacities and devise solutions for the sake of their development in a mutually beneficial arrangement would also be used where required.
207.
The MIS system will be gender-disaggregated on all outcomes, outputs and indicators related to individuals or households. The project will establish a tablet-based electronic data collection
system from which field data would be directly input into a centrally maintained MIS system. This will reduce the time burden of M&E data collection and also improve timeliness and reliability of
data, making the M&E system more robust and useful as a management tool. The project will produce one annual consolidated report for IFAD, the IsDB and Government. This report will
highlight the key achievements of the project. The baseline survey to be completed early in the first year will provide the foundation for subsequent evaluations and for the Mid-Term Review and
Project Completion Review. Thematic studies would be conducted on a needs basis to support programme activities, policy dialogue and scaling up. The project will conduct an annual outcome
survey to show progress.
208.
Policy. Indonesia’s agricultural policies recognize the environmental, social and economic imperative of sustainable productive agriculture. An enabling policy and regulatory environment is
critical to promote the development of upland areas and livelihoods. Knowledge and learning generated during project implementation will be captured through the project M&E system and used
to inform policy and public investment. Key areas of policy interest will include determining how existing policies impact land use decisions and the socio-economic and the environmental
consequences, how to improve household welfare in Indonesia’s upland areas, how to enhance long-term agricultural productivity, and how to reduce negative environmental externalities of
increasing agricultural productivity in upland areas.
b. Innovation and scaling up
209.
The UPLANDs design is directed to effectively support upland smallholders in overcoming their constraints to improving productivity and quality of output of 10 commodities across 14 locations.
In addition to on farm support, the project will provide support to downstream post-harvest processing, aggregation and marketing initiatives.
210.
The project will introduce a number of innovative approaches and activities to farming practices including water conserving irrigation (e.g. drip and sprinkler), organic approaches, mechanization,
specifically trained extension staff and para-vets, farmer extension groups, demonstration plots, access to affordable microfinance, activities for improving the livelihoods of poor women (e.g.
goats), and facilitation services in every village. UPLANDs will introduce post-harvest and market related innovations as well. Farmers will be mentored and mobilized into KUBEs to facilitate
improved post-harvest processing, grading and storage. Larger commercial enterprises will further aggregate products to ensure more cohesive marketing approaches. To enhance prospects
for sustainability, all business models will be required to prepare a comprehensive business plan. Further, farmers will be systematically exposed to market feedback – relating to quality, pricing,
grading and reliability of supply.
211.
UPLANDs will be piloting a number of innovations, including (i) a focus on public-private partnership along the value chain using the BLUD system; (ii) a clear focus on selected key crops that
were supported with a comprehensive, well-resourced input package; (iii) working capital finance by promoting inclusive microfinance in partnership with regional development banks; (iv)
agricultural insurance that is bundled with other services in the value chain (e.g. inputs, credit) and that makes use of technological advances (e.g. yield measurement based on satellite
technology, index-based insurance); (v)innovative approaches to social mobilization leading to community empowerment with capacity to leverage local resources and village funds; (vi)
adopting a district (kabupaten) sub-project approach to the development of commodity value chains; and (vii) initiating a Gender Action Learning System (GALS) which is expected to promote
gender equality, improve livelihood choices and increase participation.
212.
The project will also explore possibilities to take advantage of IT technologies for project management purposes and to provide services to it beneficiaries:
213.
214.
215.
216.
a. It will be explored the integration of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) into the M&E system; this would entail using geographical coordinates of the targeted villages/groups and the
interventions they receive, which would allow to visualize their geographical locations in interactive maps. The data collection can be done by providing cheap tablets/smart phones to
facilitators, who would then input the data every time they visit the groups/villages.
b. Digital soil testing and extension services will be sought, benefiting from the experience developed through an IFAD partnership with Grameen Intel Social Business (GISB), to roll-out a
digital soil testing and extension service developed by GISB. This technology has been used in other APR projects and UPLANDs could benefit from their experience.
d. Fintech (financial technology) services. As UPLANDs will include rural finance interventions, partnerships will be sought with existing Fintech companies in Indonesia that provide digital
financial services, some of which are targeted to small-holder farmers.
UPLANDs will target the poor. Recognizing the multi-dimensional nature of poverty, including engaging gender and youth, the project will promote the economic empowerment and well-being of
small farmers, including young men and women. This will be achieved through gender, youth and nutrition sensitive mainstreamed into the identified value chains. There will be a focus on
social inclusion through a social mobilization process that makes existing farmer’s groups more inclusive with a focus on inclusion of women, women-headed households and youth. UPLANDs
will empower women by recognizing them as farmers in their own right with representation in formal farmer’s groups for production and in post-harvest and processing activities. Women will
receive targeted nutrition awareness training while interested youth will be prioritised for investment opportunities in all aspect of the production and marketing. Youth will also be trained as
Village Facilitators (80 per cent up to the age of 30).
217.
After the 5 year implementation of UPLANDs, and after a thorough review of successes and failures, strengths and weaknesses, the GoI will decide whether to scale up the UPLANDs approach
to other districts. Where market response to a particular commodity is strong, other districts may be encouraged to join with existing suppliers to ensure consistency of supply to meet demand.
218.
Scaling up. Scaling-up and replication is at the heart of UPLANDs, and includes dimensions of replication into new geographical locations, evolution and adaptation of field activities so they are
suited to a wider range of contexts, and building a programmatic and management platform for even wider scaling up and mainstreaming of the UPLANDs approach.
219.
Considering the high priority, potential and need for increased attention and investment in upland agriculture, the project is expected to meet conducive political and institutional spaces and
supportive drivers ranging from government to private sector to, most importantly, from smallholder farmers themselves. Key elements to facilitate scaling up will include: (i) a solid M&E and
knowledge management system allowing to track achievements, document approaches and outcomes and disseminate them to relevant stakeholders; (ii) implementation through existing
institutions and structures that will mainstream successful instruments into their regular systems and operations; (iii) involvement of key policy makers at national and provincial levels in
implementation and through evidence-based policy dialogue; (iv) facilitation of multi-stakeholder partnerships that will disseminate knowledge on programme achievements and advocate for
policy changes; (v) strengthening national and district capacities; and (vi) building uplands smallholder farmers as champions for scaling up.
M. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
220.
Start up support. To facilitate start up and expedite early implementation, the Ministry of Agriculture will ensure the early formal appointment of the project management team (already engaged
in project design process) and recruit a project expeditor to support establishing the project management structure and system. In the first year, a Start-up Workshop will be organized to
sensitize all project stakeholders, including NPMU, PIU and BAPPEDA about the approach of the project and its key components and implementation arrangements. The tools and procedures
for financial management, procurement, selection of beneficiaries for different components, strategies for M&E and KM will also be introduced to key staff undertaking these key functions.
Inception workshops would subsequently be organized in every participating district to sensitize local partners about the project.
221.
A start-up meeting will also be planned in each of the selected villages. Commodity forums will be established for each commodity at the national level for an initial start-up briefing on the
project approach and scope and incorporate the key stakeholders views on the key aspects of the project.
222.
UPLANDs is adopting a district (kabupaten) sub-project approach to the development of commodity value chains. An effective and well-defined social mobilization process will facilitate the
inclusive, effective delivery of UPLANDs activities. The delivery of mobilization and empowerment will involve facilitator, including assisting the community planning process. Collective
empowerment of farmers will take place at three levels: (i) Participatory community planning of productive infrastructure; (ii) bulk purchases of inputs and services; and (iii) economies of scale
for sale of commodities. The process will involve participatory decision making in the selection and planning of the works, community planning for sustainable O&M arrangements, community
supervision of construction and public community audit of works and expenditures after completion. Village facilitators will be trained to facilitate all steps of this process. Disbursement of funds
will be via the Village Account, under the supervision of the Village Head. It is anticipated that the participatory planning and decision making process used for this will demonstrate to the Village
Head and other village stakeholders an effective and efficient local participatory planning process that may be relevant to other similar plans, particularly those for the Village Fund provided for
under the Village Law.
22/22
Footnotes
[1] Upland area is associated with the upstream part of a watershed (upstream) as upland or land found in dry areas (lack of water) that depend on rainwater as source water.
[2] Assuming each farming household cultivates on average 0.45 ha dry field/garden, currently there are about 25.6 farmer households utilizing the dry field/garden (upland area).
[3] IFAD’s most recent Country Programme Evaluation (CPE) was undertaken in February 2014
[4] Landslides are the most frequent form of natural disaster in Indonesia causing wide scale loss of life and assets, and reduction in productivity.
[5] This is an initial estimate based on initial technical scoping/ validation conducted during the feasibility phase of design. Detailed engineering design will be undertaken during implementation,
which will determine the specific costs. Further details of the types of infrastructure to be financed per district are included in Appendix 2 Theory of Change and Appendix 8 PIM Value Chain by
Commodity. Further details of estimates costs of infrastructure are included in Annex2 of Appendix 8 PIM.
[6] This builds of the experience of the Ministry of Agriculture in promoting stronger local ownership and contributions. The 25% contribution requirement will be assessed on an individual
intervention basis to ensure the inclusion of the UPLANDs primary target groups.
[7] The Ministry of Agriculture and IFAD have experience with facilitating group management of equipment and machinery. This includes establishing a user fees schedule that accounts for O&M and
replacement funds (depreciation), provision of sound security and storage at all times, Establishing transparent schedules of service for members (rotating by crop cycle) to ensure fairness,
establishing transparent rules for non-group member usage (if relevant), establishing an agreed and transparent dispute resolution process, establishing transparent rules for any wilful damage to
machinery by members or non-members, reporting to the wider group on a quarterly basis, establishing a machinery replacement fund with dual signing by Group Treasurer and MMSC Leader.
[8] BUMDES: is a village-owned business entity is a village business managed by the Village Government, and incorporated where the establishment is determined by the Village Regulation
[9] A number of first, second and third tier financial service provider operate in the project target areas. Despite compliance targets for engaging in agriculture and with smallholders, limited financing
currently is available to smallholders and the UPLANDs target group in particular.
[10] According to Indonesian national policy, youth is defined and 18 -30 years.
[11] These studies are the Climate Risk & Adaptation Country Profile for Indonesia prepared by the World Bank, the Climate Risk Profile for Indonesia prepared by USAID, and the Climate Change
Profile for Indonesia prepared by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands. These documents are available in IFAD IT systems and are part of the set of the project documents.
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
1/6
Name
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
PMU
reports
Annual
PMU & PIUs
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households
15000
30000
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
PMU
reports
Annual
PMU & PIUs
Household members
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
PMU
reports
Annual
PMU & PIUs
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Indigenous people
Non-Indigenous people
Total number of persons
receiving services
5000
15000
5000
7500
250000
Project Goal 
Reduce poverty and enhance food security in upland
areas through remunerative, sustainable and resilient
livelihoods.
Population below the poverty line in the 14 project districts
People
13.9
Indonesia
Bureau of
Statistics
13
Mid-term review
& project
closing
PMU
Continued GoI
commitment to
promote uplands
agriculture
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Development Objective 
Assist rural households to increase smallholders’
agriculture productivity, incomes, livelihoods and resilience
in the targeted uplands
Households that have increased their asset ownership
Households
Households
5000
20000
UPLANDs HHs receiving project investments, technical
support and/or services (including nutrition)
Households
Women
Youth
10000
30000
5000
15000
5000
7500
Third Party
Survey by
the Project
Mid-term review
& Project
Completion
survey
Third Party
Survey by
the Project
MId-term review
& Project
Completion
survey
PMU
PMU
Outcome 
1. Increase in poor rural people’s productive capacities
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs,
technologies or practices
Project
survey
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
Households
8000
20000
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Households
6000
22000
Project
survey
Semi-annual
NPMU &
project
partners
Local and
international
demand for key
crops does not
suffered prolonged
collapse in prices or
demand volumes.
Farmers do not
suffer from
prolonged or
repeated draughts
or other adverse
climate conditions
or natural disasters.
Sufficient numbers
of upland
smallholder are
interested in
improving their
production rather
than leaving farming
or switching to other
production systems
entirely. Good
quality genetics and
other critical are
available in
sufficient quantities
to allow widespread
adoption.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
1.1 Physical Infrastructure schemes constructed or
rehabilitated
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Hectares of land
5000
14000
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or
technologies
Men trained in crop
Women trained in crop
2800 12000
Young people trained in crop
Men trained in livestock
Women trained in livestock
Young people trained in
livestock
Men trained in forestry
Women trained in forestry
Young people trained in forestry
Total persons trained in crop
7000 30000
Total persons trained in livestock
Total persons trained in forestry
Project
reports
Project
reports
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
Sufficient numbers
of upland
smallholder are
interested in
improving their
production rather
than leaving farming
or switching to other
production systems
entirely. Good
quality genetics and
other critical are
available in
sufficient quantities
to allow widespread
adoption.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
1.2 Production technical support and machinery provided
on sustainable basis
Farmer groups operating & maintaining machinery &
equipment
Farmer groups
200
600
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Outcome 
2. Increase poor rural people's incomes from enhanced
processing and/or market participation
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Total persons accessing
financial services - credit
Enterprises
Active Borrowers (Enterprises)
1200
4000
3000
10000
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to
markets, processing and storage facilities
50
80
Households reporting improved
physical access to markets
Households reporting improved
physical access to processing
facilities
Households reporting improved
physical access to storage
facilities
Project
reports
Project
reports
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
Sufficient numbers
of upland
smallholder are
interested in
improving their
production rather
than leaving farming
or switching to other
production systems
entirely. Good
quality genetics and
other critical are
available in
sufficient quantities
to allow widespread
adoption.
Project
survey and
M&E data
MTR and
project
Completion
surveys
PMU
Agribusiness
interested in
expanding market
links with upland
smallholders
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in
sales
Percentage of rural POs
40
70
Project
survey and
M&E data
MTR and
project
Completion
surveys
PMU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
2.1 Farmer post-harvest business established, equipped
and supported on sustainable basis
5/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
HHs reporting improved incomes from improved
processing/market linkages
Households
Female
5000
22000
2000
4000
Project
survey and
M&E data
MTR and
project
Completion
surveys
PMU
2.1.6 Market, processing or storage facilities constructed or
rehabilitated
Project
reports
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
30
180
Market facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Processing facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Storage facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Output 
2.2 Business management and technical training delivered
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or
business management
Project
reports
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
Females
Persons trained in IGAs or BM
(total)
50
250
200
600
Private
entrepreneurs and
businesses are
interested to run
service businesses
in programme
districts
development.
Willingness of key
parts of MoA to
have genuine PPP
with private firms.
Private
entrepreneurs and
businesses are
interested to run
service businesses
in programme
districts
development.
Willingness of key
parts of MoA to
have genuine PPP
with private firms.
Output 
2.3 Commodities with higher value participation in markets
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
2.4 Famer/businesses with enhanced access to finance
Project
reports
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Total persons accessing
financial services - credit
Enterprises
Active Borrowers (Enterprises)
2000
8000
6000
18000
Outcome 
3. Enhanced delivery of UPLANDs services and research
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs,
technologies or practices
Households
33
80
PIUs on schedule with on-granting, procurement targets
PIUs on schedule
50
95
Output 
3.1 Commodity training courses prepared and delivered
Extension receiving commodity specific training
Extension
231
231
Output 
3.2 Intensive PIU on-granting and procurement mentoring
PIU staff trained in on-granting and procurement
PIU staff trained
28
28
Project
survey and
M&E data
Project
survey and
M&E data
MTR and
Project
Completion
surveys
MTR and
Project
Completion
surveys
PMU
PMU
Project
reports
Project
reports
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
Semi-annual
PMU & project
partners
Private
entrepreneurs and
businesses are
interested to run
service businesses
in programme
districts
development.
Willingness of key
parts of MoA to
have genuine PPP
with private firms.
Smallholders
wiliness to engage
in commercialization
of target
commodities
Capacity building
and technical
support timely and
of adequate quality
Capacity building
and technical
support timely and
of adequate quality
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
Annex 2: Theory of Change 
Theory of Change. The project’s theory of change is based on the assumption that by creating 
and  enabling  environment  and  provisioning  targeted  support  upland  smallholders  will  be  able  to 
increase their productivity, build sustainable livelihoods and create stronger linkages with national and 
export markets, ultimately transforming rural upland areas. 
Upland  farmers  in  Indonesia  who  are  at  a  disadvantage  economically  due  to  their  remote 
locations  have  agro-ecological  conditions  that  offer  potential  for  growth  and  improvement.  Yet,  their 
supply  response  to  growing  demand  for  domestic  produce  has  been  weak.  High  costs  and  dis-
economies of small-scale production partly explain those weak supply responses. But other factors play 
a part such as weak local institutional capacity, lack of access to inputs, technology and finance. Small-
scale remote farmers and many other actors along agricultural value chains face structural constraints 
in  marketing,  transport,  handling  and  processing.  These  are  exacerbated  by  weak  and  mistrustful 
relationships amongst market players. As a result, the agricultural sector has failed to expand and costly 
import of produce that could and should be grown by uplands farmers has increased. 
Smallholder farmers in the uplands of Indonesia generally have good resource potential and a 
demonstrated  willingness  to  produce  marketable  surpluses  that  would  increase  their  incomes  and 
reduce poverty. There is a strong demand for diversified higher value crops and other agricultural-based 
55 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
products from traders, processors, other market operators. However, in the current environment, value 
chains  are  underdeveloped  and  sustainable  commercial  relationships  have  failed  to  emerge. 
Smallholders face a number of technical and organizational constraints that keep them from realising 
their  potential, while  buyers face  other constraints that  keep them  from sourcing from  upland  areas. 
Investment in building more enabling environment for effective business relationships with better access 
to  improved  inputs,  technologies,  and  public  and  private  sector  investment  in  market  infrastructure, 
holds great potential for increasing the income levels of upland smallholder farmers. 
Considering  the  need  to  expand  agricultural  productive  land  in  Indonesia  in  order  to  feed  the 
growing  population, the  development  of  upland  areas  has  large  potential for  economic  development 
and closing inequality gaps. Capitalizing on these still underdeveloped areas is a high developmental 
priority for the GoI, but has to be done in a sustainable manner in order to avoid negative impact on 
natural resources and lowland agriculture systems. 
The theory of change recognizes that in order to effectively support smallholders in overcoming 
their constraints to improving productivity, an integrated approach will be required. The project will invest 
in a range of complementary activities to address some of the most common problems encountered in 
upland farming in the selected commodities. There is strong evidence that agriculture in the country is 
significantly more efficient in reducing poverty when compared to other major economic sectors.13 IFAD 
and  IsDB  would  build  on  their  considerable  collective  experience  of  strengthening  and  building  the 
capacity of smallholders, farmer groups including men and women, microenterprises, and agriculture 
cooperatives. The project offers an opportunity to develop a platform for fostering an approach that can 
be  scaled  up  by  the  Government  for  achieving  its  strategic  vision  for  agriculture  growth  and 
development, and also to inform future policy and public expenditure decision making. 
Illustrations of the application of the theory of change at the district levels are presented below. 
13 World Bank, 2008; Agriculture for Development, World Development Report, Washington 
56 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
57 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
58 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
59 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
60 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
61 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
62 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 2: 
Theory of Change 
63 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Annex 3: Project costs and financing: detailed cost tables 
A. 
Project Costs 
Introduction.  This  annex  describes  the  assumptions  underlying  the  derivation  of  costs, 
estimated costs and financing plan for the programme. Total programme costs are based on November 
2017 prices. 
Project Period. The programme will be financed over a five-year period starting from end 2019. 
Inflation. The base rate of inflation has been set at 4 percent up to programme start-up, reaching 
3.6 per cent for the last years of the programme. 
Exchange Rate. The exchange rate was fixed at 1 US$ = 13,541 IDR as per average situation 
in 2019. Programme costs are presented in both IDR and US$ currency.  
Physical and price contingencies. Both types of contingencies have been taken into account 
and included in the costing of programme.  
Taxes and Duties. There is VAT of 10% levied on all imported and locally procured goods and 
services. The Government would finance the cost of all taxes on goods and services procured under 
the Programme. Most items procured under the project would be purchased locally.  
Expenditure  Accounts.  Project  expenditure  accounts  will  be  the  following:  (i)  Technical 
Assistance  and  Consultancies;  (ii)  Grants  and  Subsidies;  (iii)  Goods,  and  Services;  (iv)  Training, 
Workshops and Meetings; (v) Microcredit; (vi) vehicles; (vii) equipment; (viii) Salaries and Allowances; 
(ix) Operating costs. 
Project Structure. The Programme has four components and eight subcomponents distributed 
as follows: 
Total  cost  and  financing.  UPLANDs  total  costs,  including  physical  and  price  contingencies, 
duties and taxes are estimated at US$ 151.655 million over a five-year implementation period. An IFAD 
loan will cover US$ 50 million, or 33.3%, of the total project cost. The Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) 
will be the main international co-financier which will cover US$ 70 million loan (46.2%) out of the total 
project cost and US$ 500,000 grant to support reverse linkage activity. The Government of Indonesia 
will  contribute  US$  17.1  million  (11.3%)  by  financing  salaries  of  all  PMO,  and  districts  staff  and  by 
waiving taxes and duties. The project beneficiaries are expected to contribute US$ 14.0 million (9.3%) 
of the project cost) - mostly to co-finance the purchase of basic and advanced agriculture mechanization 
and  equipment.  The  Project  will  explore  partnership  with  private  sector  especially  around  seed 
technology  development.  It  is  estimated  the  minimum  contribution  from  private  sector  is  US$  24 
thousand, or 0.02%, of the total programme cost. 
64 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 3: 
Project Costs and Financing 
  Project costs by components and by category are summarized below. The Project investments 
are organized into four major components: (i) Productivity Enhancement and Resilience-Building (68% 
of  the  costs);  (ii)  Agribusiness  Development  &  Livelihood  Facilitation  (12.7%  of  the  costs); 
(iii) Strengthening  Institutional  Delivery  Systems  (3.4%  of  the  costs);  and  (iv)  Project  Management 
(15.9%). 
65 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Table 1: Programme cost by component (‘000 USD) 
Components Project Cost Summary 
Component 
Amount  %  Amount 
%  Amount 
%  Cash 
In-kind 
%  Cash 
In-kind  %  Amount  Amount 
IFAD loan 
IsDB loan 
IsDB grant 
Beneficiaries 
Government of 
Indonesia 
Private 
sector 
Total 
1. Productivity enhancement and resilience-building 
  1.1. Land and infrastructure development 
  1.2. Production and farm management 
Subtotal 
2. Agribusiness development and livelihood facilitation 
  2.1. Development of farmer institutions 
  2.2. Market infrastructure and equipment 
  2.3. Strengthening market linkages and alliances 
  2.4. Access to financial services 
Subtotal 
3. Strengthening institutional delivery systems 
2 959  5.0  40 499  67.8 
33 091  76.5 
3 017 
7.0 
36 050  35.0  43 516  42.3 
1 207  90.9 
- 
- 
1 664  13.7 
7 139  59.0 
1 645  89.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4 001  100.0 
4 516  23.4  11 140  57.8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
  3.1. Capacity-building for institutional development, governance and transparency 
2 733  77.3 
- 
- 
500 
14.1 
  3.2. Adaptive research 
Subtotal 
4. Project management 
  4.1. Technical assistance 
  4.2. Operating cost 
Subtotal 
Total 
-  10 858  18.2  5 432 
- 
975 
2.3  6 103 
-  11 833  11.5  11 535 
- 
9.1 
-  14.1 
-  11.2 
- 
- 
59 748 
43 186 
-  102 934 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
121 
2 201  18.2  1 100 
- 
- 
- 
- 
167 
- 
2 201  11.4  1 388 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
301 
161 
462 
-  1 416 
-  2 297 
-  3 713 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
- 
7.2 
8.5 
9.1 
8.7 
- 
9.1 
-  26.8 
-  15.4 
-  11.3 
- 
- 
24 
- 
1 328 
12 105 
1 836 
4 001 
24 
19 269 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 534 
1 769 
5 303 
15 571 
8 577 
24 149 
24  151 655 
- 
- 
1 608 
90.9 
- 
- 
2 733  51.5 
1 608 
30.3 
500 
9.4 
619 
4.0  13 537 
86.9 
6 081  70.9 
199 
2.3 
6 700  27.7  13 736 
56.9 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
50 000  33.0  70 000 
46.2 
500 
0.3 
-  14 034 
9.3  17 097 
66 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 3: 
Project Costs and Financing 
Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
Table 2: Programme Costs by Expenditure Account (‘000 USD) 
Expenditure category 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
%  Cash 
In-kind 
% 
Cash 
In-kind 
% 
Amount 
IFAD loan 
IsDB loan 
IsDB grant (ISFB) 
Private sector 
Beneficiaries 
Government of Indonesia 
Total 
Investment costs 
A. Technical assistance and 
consultancies 
B. Works 
C. Grants and subsidies 
D. Goods and services 
E. Training, workshop and meeting 
F.  Micro-credit 
G. Vehicle 
H. Equipment 
I.  Operating cost 
Total Investment cost 
Recurrent costs 
A. Salaries 
Total recurrent costs 
Total 
401 
19 
5 399 
31 791 
9 171 
- 
77 
106 
3 036 
50 000 
- 
- 
2.6 
0.1 
10.3 
86.2 
85.1 
- 
90.9 
8.1 
90.8 
34.0 
- 
- 
13 609 
88.3 
17 077 
32 715 
1 608 
127 
 4 001 
- 
863 
- 
70 000 
- 
- 
72.7 
62.6 
4.4 
1.2 
100.0 
- 
66.2 
- 
47.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
500 
- 
- 
- 
- 
500 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
24 
- 
- 
- 
- 
24 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.0 
- 
- 
50 000 
33.0 
70 000 
46.2 
500 
0.3 
24 
0.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 401 
4 273 
9 415 
130 
- 
- 
- 
 216 
- 
14 034 
- 
- 
18.2 
18.0 
0.4 
- 
- 
- 
16.6 
- 
9.5 
- 
- 
2 137 
4 753 
3 353 
960 
- 
8 
119 
304 
13 034 
4 064 
4 064 
14 034 
9.3 
17 098 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
100.0 
100.0 
11.3 
15 441 
23 505 
52 282 
36 882 
10 782 
4 001 
85 
1 304 
3 340 
147591 
4 064 
4 064 
151 655 
67 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Table 3: Expenditure Accounts by Financiers 
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers 
1. Productivity enhancement and resilience-building 
  1.1. Land and infrastructure development 
  1.2. Production and farm management 
Subtotal 
2. Agribusiness development and livelihood facilitation 
  2.1. Development of farmer institutions 
  2.2. Market infrastructure and equipment 
  2.3. Strengthening market linkages and alliances 
  2.4. Access to financial services 
Subtotal 
3. Strengthening institution delivery systems 
  3.1. Capacity-building for institutional development, governance and  transparency 
  3.2. Adaptive research 
Subtotal 
4. Project management 
  4.1. Technical assistance 
  4.2  Operating cost 
Subtotal 
Total 
PY*1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
Total 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount  % 
Amount 
- 
490 
490 
- 
83 
- 
58 
- 
17 679 
29.59 
26 152 
43.77 
15 917 
26.64 
1.14 
18 743 
43.40 
21 389 
49.53 
1 951 
4.52 
0.48 
36 422 
35.38 
47 541 
46.19 
17 868 
17.36 
- 
613 
613 
-  59 748 
1.42  43 186 
0.60  102 934 
- 
360 
27.10 
366 
27.59 
320 
24.12 
281  21.19 
1 328 
0.69 
8 863 
73.22 
3 158 
26.09 
- 
- 
- 
-  12 105 
- 
449 
24.45 
1.44 
3 459 
86.46 
457 
484 
24.89 
12.10 
465 
25.34 
465  25.31 
1 836 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4 001 
141 
0.73 
13 131 
68.15 
4 465 
23.17 
786 
4.08 
746 
3.87  19 269 
1 129 
31.95 
729 
20.63 
- 
- 
- 
- 
742 
579 
21.00 
32.74 
716 
20.26 
220 
6.2 
3 534 
590 
33.33 
600  33.93 
1 769 
1 129 
21.29 
729 
13.75 
1 321 
24.91 
1 305 
24.61 
820  15.46 
5 303 
1 524 
9.79 
3 725 
23.93 
4 242 
27.24 
3 263 
20.96 
2 816  18.09  15 571 
1 242 
14.48 
2 238 
26.09 
1 761 
20.53 
1 701 
19.83 
1 636  19.07 
8 577 
2 766 
11.45 
5 963 
24.69 
6 003 
24.86 
4 964 
20.56 
4 452  18.44  24 149 
4 526 
2.98 
56 245 
37.09 
59 331 
39.12 
24 923 
16.43 
6 631 
4.37  151 655 
68 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 3: 
Project Costs and Financing 
Expenditure Accounts by Components – Base Cost 
Table 4 Expenditure Accounts by Components (US$) 
Productivity Enhancement &
Resilience Building
Land &
infrastructure
Development Management
Production Development
and Farm
of Farmer
Institutions
Agribusiness & livelihood Facilitation
Strengthening
Market
Linkages & Financial government Adaptive Technical Operating
Alliances
Research Assistant
Services
Cost
staff
Physical
Contingencies
%
Amount
Total
Strengthening
Institution Delivery
System
Capacity
Access to Building for
Program Management
 I. Investment Costs
A. Technical Assistance and Consultancies
B. Works
C. Grants and Subsidies
D. Goods, and Services
E. Training, Workshop and Meeting
F. Micro-credit
G. Vehicle
H. Equipment
I. Operating Cost
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Inflation
Local
Foreign
Subtotal Inflation
Devaluation
Subtotal Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
-
15 179
38 918
-
-
-
-
-
-
54 097
-
-
54 097
3 246
5 588
433
6 021
-3 617
2 404
59 748
5 432
10 744
112
166
4 211
31 342
847
-
-
407
104
37 189
2 295
2 295
39 485
2 225
3 934
119
4 053
-2 576
1 477
43 186
3 926
3 725
-
-
-
-
1 194
-
-
-
-
1 194
-
-
1 194
72
179
-
179
-117
63
1 328
121
-
-
-
-
-
1 646
-
-
-
-
1 646
-
-
1 646
99
258
0
258
-167
91
1 836
167
1
-
-
-
-
-
4 001
-
-
-
4 001
-
-
4 001
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 001
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 228
-
-
-
-
3 228
-
-
3 228
194
324
2
326
-212
114
3 535
321
37
-
-
-
1 572
-
-
-
-
-
1 572
-
-
1 572
94
261
9
270
-168
102
1 769
161
161
14 391
-
-
28
625
-
-
-
-
15 045
-
-
15 045
13
1 468
-
1 468
-955
514
15 571
1 416
-
369
-
-
645
2 259
-
78
-
2 928
6 279
1 658
1 658
7 937
350
831
1
832
-541
291
8 577
14 873
21 310
47 471
33 587
9 799
4 001
78
1 200
3 032
135 351
3 953
3 953
139 304
6 958
13 680
618
14 299
-8 905
5 394
151 656
780
36
13 423
16 643
0.1
6.0
6.0
6.0
5.7
-
6.0
6.0
5.2
5.1
0.2
0.2
5.0
-
-
-
-
-
5.0
4.8
4.9
5.7
15
1 279
2 848
2 013
563
-
5
72
157
6 951
7
7
6 958
-
-
-
-
-
269
7 227
657
942
Marketing
Infrastructure
& Equipment
-
5 965
4 342
-
-
-
-
793
-
11 100
-
-
11 100
666
837
54
891
-553
338
12 105
1 100
1 938
69 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Table 5 Expenditure Account by Year 
Expenditure Accounts by Years – Totals Including Contingencies 
 I. Investment Costs 
  A. Technical Assistance and Consultancies 
  B. Works 
  C. Grants and Subsidies 
  D. Goods, and Services 
  E. Training, Workshop and Meeting 
  F. Micro-credit 
  G. Vehicle 
  H. Equipment 
I. Operating Cost 
  Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
  A. Salaries 
  Total Recurrent Costs 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
Totals 
Including 
Contingencies 
2021 
2022 
2023 
Total 
4 140 
9 920 
21 560 
18 961 
2 563 
484 
- 
148 
742 
58 518 
813 
813 
59 331 
3 346 
5 599 
10 484 
1 686 
2 234 
- 
- 
- 
754 
24 102 
821 
821 
24 923 
2 989 
- 
- 
661 
1 383 
- 
- 
- 
768 
5 801 
830 
830 
6 631 
15 411 
23 505 
52 282 
36 882 
10 782 
4 001 
85 
1 304 
3 340 
147 592 
4 064 
4 064 
151 656 
2019 
2020 
1 323 
- 
- 
377 
1 541 
58 
- 
83 
347 
3 730 
796 
796 
4 526 
3 612 
7 987 
20 238 
15 197 
3 061 
3 459 
85 
1 072 
729 
55 441 
804 
804 
56 245 
70 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis 
Introduction and Background 
  The  agriculture  sector  in  Indonesia  is  a  core  area  of  the  Government’s  national  development 
programme. Within the agriculture sector, a sharper focus is now being given to development of upland 
areas which were neglected in the past. The government now has plans to make significant investments 
in upland agriculture. The upland areas are highly diverse and fragile but play a very important role in 
the production of horticulture crops and serve  as  watersheds in the  conservation of water  resources 
and the maintenance of a stable ecosystem. Traditional agricultural and water management techniques 
are generally poor in conserving soil and water in Indonesia’s tropical environment, where precipitation 
ranges from 1500 to more than 3000 mm/year, often falling within a few months of the year. The project 
will  assist  in  developing  an  integrated,  and  more  sustainable,  approach  to  farming  for  the  uplands. 
Proper management of upland areas is being increasingly recognized as a key issue in the successful 
utilization of land resources in the country as a whole. Government recognizes that there is need for a 
new approach in developing high economic value commodities to improve land productivity, enabling 
farmers to achieve greater value-added and selecting  appropriate technologies  compatible with land 
and local socio economy conditions. 
Farming in the upland areas is undertaken by smallholders who have average landholdings of 
0.71 hectares. These smallholders face some constraints that are typical of the farming system in the 
uplands. These include low productivity, limited capacity to invest in enhancing yields, lack of access to 
credit, lack of certified seed, fertilizer,  agriculture machinery,  poor  infrastructure, lack of  post-harvest 
and  processing  facilities,  poor  links  to  markets  and  limited  understanding  of  the  dynamic  nature  of 
market demand and information. The farmers are organized in farmer groups but have not graduated 
to  higher  levels  of  organization  that  can  enable  them  to  take  advantage  of  economies  of  scale  by 
aggregating their produce. They lack the organizational and technical capacity to form associations or 
cooperatives for managing post-harvest facilities and linking them in mutually beneficial relationships 
with others in the private sector. An integrated farming systems  approach is a solution for improving 
agricultural  crop  productivity  as  well  as  enhancing  farm  management  systems  leading  to  greater 
competitiveness and improvement of farmers’ income. 
The overall goal of the project will be to reduce poverty in upland areas through remunerative, 
sustainable  and  resilient  livelihoods.  The  project  would  aim  to  increase  agricultural  productivity  and 
farmer’s income in upland areas through the development of land and water infrastructure, introducing 
modern agricultural cultivation techniques and holistic integrated agricultural management systems.  
The  development  objective  of  the  project  would  be  to  assist  rural  households  to  increase 
smallholders’ agriculture productivity, incomes, livelihoods and resilience in the targeted uplands.  
The  project  would  contribute  to  three  specific  outcomes  that  are  in  line  with  the  strategic 
objectives  of  IFAD,  IsDB  and  Government;  (i)  increase  in  poor  rural  people’s  productive  capacities; 
(ii) increase  poor  rural  people's  benefits  from  market  participation  and  (iii)  increase  in  Government 
capacity for modernizing agriculture.  
At the output level the project would assist in establishing the following; (i) irrigation developed 
on  about  12000  ha  through  small  irrigation  systems,  small  weirs,  shallow  wells  and  ponds  ii)  about 
500kms of farm to market roads developed, (iii) training of about 25,000 households in improved and 
more  sustainable  agriculture  production  practices,  (iv)  capacity  building  of  about  800  farmer  groups 
including  developing  the  capacity  to  graduate  to  higher  levels  of  organization  for  enterprise  and 
business development for at least 60% of them, (v) increase processing capacity for 800 farmer groups, 
(vii) facilitate business mentoring and market linkages for 25,000 households, and (ix) provide improved 
access to microfinance for 20,000 smallholders.  
71 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Approach, Assumptions and Data 
This economic analysis is based on crop and livestock production data provided by the relevant 
agencies in each of the 14 project districts. There has been no independent verification of data and may 
aspects remain to be clarified during final project design.  
Numeraire  and prices. The  analysis  uses  the  domestic  price  level  numeraire,  expressed in 
local  currency  (i.e.  Indonesian  rupiah).  The  financial  prices  used  are  current  prices  in  mid-2018.  To 
convert financial prices and costs to economic prices and costs when using the domestic price level 
numeraire, the foreign component of the price  of traded  goods is adjusted by the shadow exchange 
rate  factor  (SERF),  scarce  labour  is  adjusted  by  the  shadow  wage  rate  factor  (SWRF),  taxes  are 
removed from prices and domestic resources are multiplied by a factor of 1 (i.e. the financial prices of 
domestic resources are equal to the economic prices). 
Taxes  and duties. Indonesia applies a value added tax (consumption tax) of 10% on goods 
and services, but there are a number of both goods and services that are exempted from VAT or are 
zero rated. Import duties also apply on some imported equipment and other goods. Taxes and duties 
are removed from financial prices in the process of deriving economic prices.  
Conversion factors and exchange rate. The standard conversion factor (SCF) for the project 
has been estimated, as shown in Table , using import and export data for four years. This method for 
calculating  the  SCF  is  used  by  the Asian  Development  Bank  and  other  agencies  and  provides  an 
acceptable approximation for this analysis.14 Since the 4 year average of the estimated values is not 
significantly different from 1.0, this value for the SCF has been used in the analysis. (SERF is therefore 
also equal to 1.0). 
The exchange rate used throughout the analysis is USD1 = Rp13,700  
Table 1: Estimate of Standard Conversion Factor 
Imports (M)  (USD million) 
Exports (X)  (USD million) 
Taxes on imports (TM) (USD million)  
Taxes on exports (TX) (USD million) 
Standard Conversion Factor 
Shadow Exchange Rate Factor (1/SCF) 
Average exchange rate (Rp/USD) 
2014 
178,178.8 
175,980.0 
2,665.1 
1,334.6 
0.996 
1.004 
11,865 
2015 
142,694.8 
150,366.3 
2,361.7 
1,182.7 
0.996 
1.004 
13,389 
2016 
135,652.9 
145,186.2 
2156.9  
1,149.0 
0.992 
1.008 
13,308 
2017 
156,925.2 
168,810.7 
2,495.1 
1,335.9 
0.992 
1.008 
13,381 
Notes: 1) Standard conversion factor = (M + X)/(M + TM + X - TX) 
               2) Taxes on imports and exports for 2016 and 2017 estimated by applying average tax rates calculated for 2013 to 2015 
data 
  Sources: Import and export data from Statistics Indonesia (Badan Pusat Statistik). Import and export tax data for 2013 - 2015 
and average exchange rates from OECD website. 
The daily wage for agricultural labour varies according to province and district. Values verified 
during  final  design  and  used  in  the  analysis  vary  from  IDR30,000  per  day  (for  goat  rearing  in 
Purbalingga) to IDR150,000 per day (for potato production in Minahasa Selatan). 
The project life is taken as 20 years and project investments are assumed to have no residual 
value at the end of this period. 
Opportunity cost of capital. The opportunity cost of capital used in the analysis is 9%. This 
value will be reviewed during final design and may be revised, if appropriate.  
14 ADB, 2004. ERD Technical Note No. 11, Shadow Exchange Rates for Project Economic Analysis: Toward Improving Practice 
at the Asian Development Bank. Manila. 
72 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Project Interventions 
(i)  Beneficiaries  
The total estimate number of beneficiaries is 250,000. The project's value chain activities are 
expected to directly  benefit approximately 30,000 households or 120,000 beneficiaries in 14 districts 
located in 7 provinces of Banten, West Java, Central Java, East Java, West Nusa Tenggara, Gorontal 
and North Sulawesi, and Gorontalo.  
(ii)  Project Interventions 
The project will  have  3 components  plus Project  Management. The  operational components 
are  (i)  Productivity  Enhancement  and  Resilience  Management;  (ii)  Agribusiness  Development  and 
Livelihood Facilitation; (iii) Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems 
Component  1  has  two sub-components which  are;  (i)  Land  and  Infrastructure  Development, 
and (ii) Production and Farm Management. Land development will include a range of activities such as 
terracing and contouring, drainage, the use of soil stabilisers such as mulches and the strategic planting 
of  trees  including  perennial  horticultural  crops.  It  is  expected  that  the  project  would  help  to  develop 
5,000 hectares benefitting around 7,000 households. Infrastructure development will include protection 
works, rehabilitation of existing and construction of new tertiary irrigation schemes, drip and sprinkler 
irrigation  systems,  water  storage  ponds,  shallow  wells,  small  weirs  and  farm-to-market  and  farm-to-
regional roads. Production and Farm Management will provide training and technical support to farmers 
to  enhance  their  agricultural  knowledge  and  management  capacity  and  will  support  the  adoption  of 
appropriate farm machinery to increase on-farm efficiency and productivity and will also train interested 
young people in machinery maintenance.  
The  Agribusiness  Development  and  Livelihood  Facilitation  component  has  four  sub-
components;  (i)  Farmer  Institutional  Development;  (ii)  Marketing  Infrastructure  &  Equipment 
(iii) Strengthening Market Linkages & Alliances and (iv) Access to Financial Services. The first of these 
will provide training in organization, business management and institutional strengthening for the farmer 
groups wanting improved access to markets. Under sub-component 2.2, Marketing Infrastructure and 
Equipment, farmer  groups  who  demonstrate  their  commitment to  enhancing their  access to  markets 
would be eligible to apply for infrastructure and equipment support under the project. This could range 
from  small  scale  collection  and  presorting  facilities,  small  and  larger  scale  post-harvest  handing 
packaging  facilities  for  fresh  commodities  and  secondary  processing  facilities  and  equipment. 
Warehouse and cool storage facilities could also be established where viable and necessary to meet 
market requirements. Sub-component 2.3 will help farmer groups to development strengthen linkages 
to markets and value chains for their products. Under Subcomponent 2.4, Access to Financial Services, 
the  project  will  provide  access to financial  services through facilitating  links with  banks  and financial 
institutions and will specifically explore the potential of Islamic micro-financing programs as well as other 
modalities to meet the needs of the target communities and the value chains to be developed. 
The  subcomponents  of  Component  3,  Strengthening  Institutional  Delivery  Systems  are 
(i) Capacity building of Government Staff and (ii) Adaptive Research. Sub-component 3.1 will provide 
training for extension staff and district and sub-district level. The Adaptive Research sub-component will 
support relevant adaptive research in national agricultural research institutions.  
Component 4 is Project Management. 
(iii)  Estimating Project Benefits 
The project activities are intended to increase the productivity of farming in upland areas and 
increase  farm  household  incomes  through  increasing  the  quantity  and  quality  of  farm  outputs  and 
enhancing connections to markets and product value chains. The direct  benefits from expected with 
project crop and livestock production have been estimated. Each project district will focus on just one 
product – except for Banjarnegara which will have two.  
73 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Benefit estimates have been based on data provided by the respective district offices together 
with data collected in the field by the team during the project design phase. As far as possible data was 
verified during project design and any inconsistencies or uncertainties addressed. 
The  project  will  affect  household  production  in  several  ways:  firstly  by  helping  farmers  to 
increase crop yields, secondly by helping farmers to improve the quality of their production, and thirdly 
by improving knowledge of and links to markets and marketing. The quality and marketing benefits are 
difficult to quantify. For the present analysis all these benefits have been approximated by assuming 
yield increases of about 20% - i.e. the assumed increases are intended to be  in part a proxy for the 
benefits accruing from all sources. Yield increases are shown in Table 2 below. 
Table 2: Products and Yields 
Province / District 
Product 
Area (ha) / 
number 
Yield / Output (kg/ha) 
Present 
With Project 
Banten 
Lebak 1) 
West Java 
Tasikmalaya 
Subang 1)  
Cirebon 2) 
Garut 
Central Java 
Banjarnegara 
Purbalingga 
Magelang 
East Java 
Malang 
Sumenep 
mangosteen 
450 
470 
3,000 
organic rice 
mangosteen – 
existing 
mangosteen - 
new 
mango - exist  
mango - new 
seed potato 
coffee – exist. 
coffee 3) – new 
goats 
goats 
500 
500 
1,504 
485 
1,000 
200 
300 
200 
6,670 
2,500 
470 
7,700 
1,500 
7,760 
3,000 
3,000 
9,240 
8,400 
10,000 
12,500 
1,500 
500 
1,800 
1,800 
816 units 
6 kids/unit/yr 
9 kids/unit/yr 
237 units 
6 kids/unit/yr 
9 kids/unit/yr 
organic rice 
2,000 
5,250 
6,038 
shallots  
shallots  
Nusa Tenggara Barat 
Lombok Timur 
Garlic 
Sumbawa 
North Sulawesi 
shallots – prod.  
shallots - seed 
300 
150 
1,440 
1,500 
500 
8,000 
8,000 
20,000 
9,600 
8,000 
10,000 
10,000 
24,000 
10,000 
10,000 
Minahasa Selatan 
Potato 
2,000 
12,000 
15,000 
Gorontalo 
Gorontalo 
   Total area 
Banana 
20 
1,200 bunches 
1,440 bunches 
12,285 
Notes: 1) First yield from 5th year for new mangosteen 
   2) First yield from 3rd year for new mango 
     3) First yield from 3rd year 
Field  crops.  The  field  crops  included  in  the  project  are  shallots  in  3  districts,  garlic  in  one 
district,  organic rice  in 2 districts and potatoes in  2 districts. Most of the  project households in these 
districts are already growing the concerned crops. For all these crops (as well as for tree crops) the 
74 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
present yields used are the averages for the most recent 3 years of data provided by the respective 
district offices. For these crops the present  scenario is that  described by the crop financial analyses 
provided. Yields are assumed to increase by about 20% for each crop, with increases beginning in the 
third project year and continuing for 4 years – i.e. yields continue to increase slightly after the project 
has terminated.  
Tree crops. Tree crops included in the project are mangosteen, mango,  banana and  coffee. 
These crops are already grown by some households in the districts, but there will also be some new 
plantations  involving  new  households.  The  areas  of  existing  and  new  plantations  for  the  concerned 
crops and districts are shown in Table 2 above. Yields, quantities and prices are those provided by the 
district offices and yields are assumed to increase by about 20% compared with the present situation. 
For existing plantations these increases are assumed to occur during the 3rd to 6th project years. For 
new  plantations  they  are  assumed  from  the  2nd  to  5th  years  of  production,  compared  to  what  yields 
would be for these crops during that period without the project. 
Goats.  Improving  goat  production  will  be  the  project  focus  in  Purbalingga  district  and  in 
Banjarnegara  there  will  be  both  goats  as  well  as  coffee.  In  Banjarnegara  there  will  be  618  goat 
production  units  and  in  Purbalingga  and  estimated  237.  Each  production  unit  equates  to  one  farm 
household and will have six breeding does. Each family unit produces on average 7 kids at present and 
it is anticipated that with improved fodder and health, the survival rate for kids will increase to an average 
of 9 per year per unit. Income comes from the sale of surplus kids and culled does.  
(iv)  Prices 
In  the  crop  and  livestock  budgets  all  prices  used  are  those  provided  by  the  district  offices 
together with crop and livestock financial analyses. There is considerable variation in prices between 
districts for some common inputs and the prices provided from each district have been applied in the 
crop  and  livestock  budgets  for  that  district  except  that  for  the  prices  of  traded  goods,  the  estimated 
economic prices have been applied uniformly for all districts. 
Since  the  domestic  price  numeraire  is  being  used,  financial  prices  for  domestic  goods  are 
converted to  economic  prices  only  by the  removal  of  any  tax component. This  adjustment  has  been 
made  for  equipment  and  machinery  and  some  inputs  (e.g.  herbicides  and  pesticides).15  For  traded 
goods (urea, potash and phosphates) economic prices based on average international prices for the 
second quarter  of 2018 have  been estimated. Organic rice is treated as a  domestic  product  and the 
economic price is the same as the domestic price. Domestic retail prices for organic rice in Indonesia 
can vary from about IDR 18,000 per kg to about IDR 40,000 per kg, compared with about IDR 10,000 
to IDR 12,000 for regular rice. 
The prices of labour, which also vary considerably by district, are converted to economic values 
by adjusting with the shadow wage rate factor of 0.8. 
(v)  Non-Quantified Benefits 
 The  project  may  generate  significant  benefits,  resulting  from  training  and  institutional 
strengthening activities that it will not be possible or practicable to quantify, except in so far as they have 
a  direct  impact  on  what farmers  produce.  Some  activities  such  as Access  to Financial  Services,  the 
training of young people to undertake machinery maintenance and repairs, collaborative research and 
support for technical units may have benefits independent of farmers’ production but which may still be 
difficult to quantify. Investments in infrastructure are expected to benefit a large number of community 
members. 
15 Whether VAT applies to any or all agricultural inputs needs to be clarified. 
75 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
(i)  Project Costs 
The project costs in rupiah (in financial prices) are shown in Table 3 below with totals also given 
in economic prices.16  
Table 3: Project Costs (Rp. million) 
Totals Including Contingencies  
Financial Prices 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
Total 
Productivity Enhancement & Resilience Building 
Land Development 
Physical Infrastructure 
16,690 
22,809 
29,224 
29,955 
18,422 
117,100 
59,274 
81,008 
103,791 
106,386 
65,428 
415,887 
Farm Management & Advisory Services 
52,883 
72,273 
92,600 
94,915 
58,373 
371,042 
Agricultural Machinery 
Subtotal 
Agribusiness Development & Livelihood 
Facilitation 
32,429 
44,320 
56,785 
58,205 
35,796 
227,535 
161,276 
220,410 
282,400 
289,460 
178,018 
1,131,565 
Farmer Institutional Development 
11,603 
15,858 
20,318 
20,826 
12,808 
81,412 
Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
56,864 
77,715 
99,572 
102,061 
62,768 
398,980 
Strengthening Marketing Linkages & Alliances 
4,629 
6,326 
8,105 
8,307 
5,109 
32,475 
Access to Financial Services 
Subtotal 
15,077 
20,605 
26,400 
27,060 
16,642 
105,785 
88,173 
120,503 
154,395 
158,254 
97,327 
618,652 
Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems 
Capacity Building for Government Staff 
Market Intelligence Systems Development 
Collaboration of Adaptive Research 
Support to Technical Units 
Subtotal 
Project Management 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
Economic Prices 
8,846 
3,316 
3,300 
12,090 
15,490 
15,877 
4,532 
4,511 
5,807 
5,779 
5,952 
5,924 
9,765 
3,661 
3,643 
62,068 
23,269 
23,157 
20,154 
27,544 
35,291 
36,173 
22,246 
141,408 
35,617 
48,677 
62,367 
63,926 
39,315 
249,901 
41,141 
56,226 
72,040 
73,841 
45,412 
288,660 
326,207 
445,816 
571,202 
585,482 
360,071 
2,288,777 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
304,565 
406,087 
507,609 
507,609 
304,565 
2,030,436 
(ii)  Result and Sensitivity Analysis 
The estimated EIRR for the project is 26.4% and the NPV (at the discount rate of 9%) is Rp 
1.98 billion. An increase of project costs or a decrease of project benefits by 10% would lead to an EIRR 
of 24.1% and 23.9% respectively while the two scenarios together would result in and EIRR of 21.7% 
 Variations in the shadow wage rate factor (set at 0.8 for the base case) have negligible impact 
on the result: a SWRF of 0.9 results in an EIRR of 26.3% and of 0.7 in and EIRR of 26.5%.  
This is result indicates that the project can be expected to be economically viable, and resilient 
to any likely variations in key variables. 
16 Detailed project cost analysis is in Annex 2. 
76 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 4: Results of the Economic Analysis 
Base 
Project costs +10% 
      +20% 
All benefits -10% 
      -20% 
Costs +10% & benefits -10% 
Benefits: 
 tree crops -10% 
      -20% 
 livestock  -10% 
      -20% 
EIRR 
26.4 
24.1 
22.1 
23.9 
21.2 
21.7 
24.5 
22.6 
25.8 
25.2 
26.4 
26.4 
NPV 
(Rp million) 
1,976.4 
Switching Values 
+153% 
-61% 
1,847.6 
1,718.9 
1,650.0 
1,323.6 
1,521.2 
1,753.5 
1,530.6 
1,874.8 
1,773.3 
1,974.4 
1,972.4 
77 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Supplementary Tables 
Table 5: Prices Used in the Analysis 
District 
Unit 
Prices 
Financial 
Economic 
Item 
Outputs  
Shallots 
Garlic 
Organic rice 
Potato 
Mangosteen 
Mango 
Coffee 
Banana 
Goats - years 1&2 
Goats – culls 
Inputs 
Seed – shallot 
Seed – garlic 
Seed - organic rice 
Seed – potato 
Saplings – mangosteen 
Saplings – mango 
Saplings – durian 
rhizomes – banana 
coffee plants 
shade trees 
Fertiliser NPK (sumenep, gorontalo) 
Fertiliser NPK (banjarnegara, sumbawa,  
lebak) 
Fertiliser NPK (magelang, malang) 
Fertiliser NPK (garut, minsel) 
Potash (KCl) 
Urea 
Organic fertiliser (liquid)  
Organic fertiliser (liquid)  
Organic fertiliser  
Compost 
Manure 
78 
Malang 
  Sumenep 
  Sumbawa 
Lombok Timur 
Tasikmalaya 
  Magelang 
Garut G0 
  Garut G1 
  Garut G2 
  Minahasa Sel. 
Subang 
Cirebon 
Banjarnegara 
Gorontalo 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
head 
head 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
tree 
tree 
tree 
plant 
tree 
tree 
kg 
18,000 
25,000 
12,000 
12,833 
17,000 
15,000 
2,500 
45,000 
25,000 
7,000 
10,000 
5,000 
50,000 
35,000 
18,000 
25,000 
12,000 
12,833 
17,000 
15,000 
2,500 
45,000 
25,000 
7,000 
10,000 
5,000 
50,000 
35,000 
800,000 
800,000 
800,000 
800,000 
45,000 
60,000 
15,000 
16,000 
56,000 
50,000 
45,000 
60,000 
15,000 
16,000 
56,000 
50,000 
100,000 
100,000 
15000 
6,000 
3,000 
   20,000  
15,000 
6,000 
3,000 
4,842 
  kg 
  12,000  
 4,842 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
litre 
litre 
kg 
kg 
sack 
   10,000  
   15,000  
   7,920  
   7,000  
4,842 
4,842 
4,170 
4,452 
  145,000  
145,000 
   85,000  
85,000 
   1,500  
    900  
   7,000  
1,500 
900 
7,000 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Item 
District 
Unit 
Prices 
Organic pesticides 
Organic pesticides - rice, coffee 
Biofertiliser - rice 
SP-36 (double superphosphate) 
Ponska 
ZA 
POC 
Fungicide 
Fungicide - seed potato 
Fungicide – tree 
Insecticide 
Insecticide 
Insecticide (sidametrin) 
Herbicide 
Herbicide - seed potato 
Herbicide (roundup) 
PPC 
Bamboo stakes 
Rope 
Goat house 
Water supply upgrade 
Concentrate for goats 
Veterinary medicines 
Legume seed (for forage) 
Labour costs 
Equipment 
Hoes 
Tank sprayers 
Sickles 
Harvesting baskets 
Water pump (3 inch) 
Hand tractor (2 wheel) 
Buckets 
Pruners 
Financial 
Economic 
packet 
  UPLANDs   UPLANDs 
litre 
litre 
kg 
kg 
kg 
litre 
kg 
litre 
kg 
kg 
litre 
litre 
litre 
litre 
litre 
litre 
stake 
roll 
pen 
unit 
kg 
head 
unit 
day 
day 
day 
day 
day 
day 
day 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
  100,000  
100,000 
   90,000  
90,000 
   7,000  
   10,000  
   6,000  
5,905 
7,200 
4,200 
   75,000  
75,000 
150,000 
136,500 
435,000 
395,850 
60,000 
30,000 
85000 
54,600 
27,300 
77,350 
200,000 
182,000 
70000 
63,700 
310000 
282,100 
110,000 
100,100 
100,000 
100,000 
300 
300 
35,000 
31,850 
3,285,000 
2,989,350 
1,460,000 
1,328,600 
2,000 
20,000 
73,000 
1,820 
18,200 
73,000 
50,000 
40,000 
100,000 
75,000 
80,000 
60,000 
150,000 
120,000 
80,000 
60,000 
64,000 
48,000 
30,000 
24,000 
90,000 
81,900 
650,000 
591,500 
65,000 
59,150 
150,000 
136,500 
4,000,000 
3,640,000 
27,000,000 
24,570,000 
25,000 
75,000 
22,750 
68,250 
garut, magelang, 
banjarnegara 
tasikmalaya, 
sumenep, 
gorontalo 
lebak 
  minahasa 
  malang 
  sumbawa 
purbalingga 
(goats) 
79 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Economic Assessment 
economic prices 
Rp. '000 
Table 6: UPLANDs - Economic Assessment (Rp. ‘000) 
 Economic prices 
Project Costs 1) 
Project Benefits: 
Organic rice 
Organic rice 
Shallots 
Shallots 
Shallots 
Shallot seed 
Garlic 
Potato 
Potato - seed 
Mangosteen 
Mango  
Mangosteen 
Banana 
Goats 
Goats 
Coffee 
District 
ha/No. 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
55,878,929 
725,338,415 
654,687,823 
120,526,178 
53,614,754 
Tasikmalaya 
Magelang 
Malang 
Sumenep 
Sumbawa 
Sumbawa 
Lombok Timur 
Minahasa Sel. 
Garut 
Subang 
Cirebon 
Lebak 
Gorontalo 
Purbalingga 
Banjarnegara 
Banjarnegara 
500 
2000 
150 
150 
1500 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
500 
77,500,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5,117,188 
10,699,250 
16,650,188 
21,444,250 
21,444,250 
16,135,650 
33,583,800 
52,344,450 
67,438,200 
67,438,200 
2,174,619 
4,378,037 
5,450,947 
5,450,947 
5,450,947 
3,127,419 
6,290,837 
7,836,547 
7,836,547 
7,836,547 
1,440,000 
17,978,187 
33,292,373 
40,733,466 
40,733,466 
40,733,466 
0 
0 
0 
0 
17,344,729 
34,689,458 
43,361,822 
135,861,822 
43,361,822 
17,455,770 
35,049,779 
52,505,549 
52,296,358 
52,296,358 
17,586,097 
35,532,194 
63,972,194 
63,972,194 
63,972,194 
4,601,210 
5,242,419 
9,202,419 
9,202,419 
9,202,419 
-10,529,949 
-11,262,383 
-13,261,079 
-4,353,216 
-1,964,216 
2,141,984 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-4,653,122 
-6,896,244 
22,351,720 
54,432,559 
92,265,523 
130,038,486 
136,731,614 
20 
-6,426,115 
-2,721,327 
-2,721,327 
-2,068,827 
-364,452 
1,278,048 
-378,451 
-68,517 
640,868 
-299,805 
-1,047,297 
-781,770 
-2,730,927 
11,240 
29,309 
682,868 
881,877 
724,868 
554,868 
575,868 
1,017,299 
1,000,567 
1,017,868 
2,299,578 
2,652,703 
2,609,072 
2,654,186 
-1,372,570 
-1,415,878 
-1,649,161 
-458,494 
1,905,768 
3,196,106 
4,666,106 
1440 
2000 
200 
2004 
1585 
450 
20 
237 
618 
500 
Total incremental benefits 
70,014,302 
-27,674,927 
108,921,132 
240,614,130 
384,201,699 
539,306,634 
460,801,878 
Net benefits 
IRR 
NPV @ 9% 
26.4% 
1,976,368,496 
14,135,373 
-753,013,342 
-545,766,691 
120,087,952 
330,586,945 
539,306,634 
460,801,878 
80 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 7: Economic Assessment 
81 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Review Note 
Major landscape characteristics and Issues (Social, natural resources, and climate) 
a)  Socio-cultural context 
The Project would target up to fourteen districts within the seven provinces of Banten, West Java, 
Central  Java,  East  Java,  West  Nusa  Tenggara,  Gorontal  and  North  Sulawesi,  and  Gorontalo.  The 
districts were selected based on their proposals to develop specific high value crops in the upland areas 
and  are  well  aligned  with  the  strategic  plan  for  agriculture.  Those  districts  are  Lebak,  Tasikmalaya, 
Subang,  Cirebon,  Garut,  Banjarnegara,  Purbalingga,  Magelang,  Malang,  Sumenep,  Lombok  Timur, 
Sumbawa, Minahasa Selatan, and Gorontalo. In addition to 188 villages from 13 districts that have been 
selected during preparation, the villages in Lebak district remain to be assessed and nominated to be 
included as project target area. Overall, the project would target the development of integrated farming 
system in at least 12,200 Ha across the seven provinces and directly benefit about 23,500 households 
(See main project document). 
Population. Indonesia is the world’s fourth most populous country with a current population of 
262 million projected to exceed 300 million by 2030. The number of youth in Indonesia, those productive 
ones aged between 16 to 30 according to UNFPA, has been recorded at around 62 million in 2016. The 
growth in the youth population, and the general overall population annual growth rate of 1.12%
 are 
supposedly  the  generators  of  the  country’s  development  as  they  are  what  is  considered  as  the 
demographic bonus. The people of Indonesia comprise of around 300 ethnic groups who speak more 
than  600  languages.  The  World  Bank  estimates  that  by  2025  Indonesia  will  have  68  percent  of  its 
population  living  in  cities  or  urban  communities. As  such,  Indonesia’s  cities  are  among  the  fastest 
growing cities in the world. 
17
 According to UN, between 1990 and 2015, Indonesia’s HDI value increased from 0.528 to 0.689, 
an increase of 30.5 percent. Indonesia is classified as a Medium Human Development country with a 
Human  Development  Index  (HDI)  ranking  of  113  out  of  188  countries  in  2016  (UNDP).  Indonesia’s 
Human Development Index of 0.689 remains below the average for the East Asia and Pacific Region. 
Youth  unemployment (age of  15 to 24  years) in Indonesia also recorded remains above the regional 
average, compared to of Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam. According to the Ministry of Manpower and 
Transmigration in 2013, although rates of open unemployment decreased, more than 5,16 million is still 
unemployed (14,35% unemployment rate). The reason behind to this is reported as the limited access 
to employment opportunities due to lack of skills, training, and experience. 
Gender.  Indonesia  has  made  significant  progress  in  promoting  gender  equality  and  reducing 
gender  gaps,  and  in  improving  women’s  participation  in  economic  and  political  activities
  . 
Nonetheless, challenges remain in terms of low female labour force participation rate (50.3% against 
84.4% for men), and a higher level of low-paid and low-skilled informal jobs for women. The 2014 Global 
Gender Gap Report shows that the female unemployment rate is at 9% which is higher than those of 
male (5.8%). The average income for males is double than that of females. Women’s participation in 
public decision making also remains low, including at the village level. Indonesian women fare worse in 
all indicators of human development. Indonesia’s Gender Development Index (GDI), which is a ratio of 
the female to the male HDI, is 0.927 in 2014, lower than the regional average of 0.948. 
18
  Women  are  actively  engaged  in  agricultural  production.  Their  roles  in  crop  production  are 
particularly  important  for  weeding,  harvesting,  threshing  and  storage,  although  there  may  be  wide 
variations  across  regions,  crops,  communities  and  households.  Formal  laws  provide  equal  rights  of 
women  to  properties,  including  land,  but  customary  practices  often  work  against  women’s  claiming 
17 http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/indonesia-population/ 
18 ADB, Summary of Indonesia’s Gender Analysis, October 2015. 
82 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
these  rights.  Variations  across  regions  and  communities  are,  however,  significant:  for  example, 
Javanese women can own land, and land is sometimes registered in the woman’s name on Java Island. 
Involvement  of  women  in  farmers  group  is  still  very  limited  as  is  mostly  dominated  by  men  (male 
farmers). Only woman led households that are actively participated in the farmers group, otherwise they 
are represented by the husband. 
Economy.  Indonesia  is  a  lower-middle  income  country.  Its  per  capita  income  has  increased 
steadily  in  recent  years,  growing  from  USD  560  in  2000  to  $  3,374  in  2015,  and  $  3,859  in  2017. 
Indonesian economy has grown steadily over the past 10 years at 5–6 percent annually (World Bank 
2016). The agricultural and marine sectors remain the main source of income for over one third of the 
population  and for 59 per  cent of the poor. However, issues surrounding the agriculture sector often 
arise, including the conflicting interests of agricultural (including estate crop) expansion and resource 
extraction, local communities, and environmental objectives; the illegal extraction of resources and the 
use of toxic chemicals in agricultural cultivation and mining; productivity and technological change, and 
the  valuation  and  taxation  of  resources;  and  issues  regarding  trade  and  protectionism,  foreign 
investment, and financing for action on climate change (Australian National University, 2015)
19 . 
Poverty. The recent national economic growth has contributed to significant poverty reduction, 
with the number of poor people decreasing from 24 per cent in 1999 to 11 per cent in 2014. The poverty 
line during 2013 to 2017 has also been reported to improve from US$ 21.41 to US$ 28.56 and from 
US$  18.76  to  US$  26.78,  in  urban  and  rural  areas,  respectively  (Bappenas,  2017)20.  However 
approximately 40% of the population’s income is only marginally above the national poverty line (IDR 
330,776/person/month). According to the World Bank, this group remains vulnerable to falling back into 
poverty as a result of “shocks”, such as illness, extreme weather events or price volatility. Hence, more 
than 100 million Indonesians still live in or at risk of poverty and vulnerability. Malnutrition also remains 
a serious concern with one out of every three children under the age of 5 suffering from stunting. Poverty 
remains concentrated in rural areas, reportedly around 17.28 million. Whereas, the poor in urban areas 
21. Despite being concentrated in 
is reportedly to be around 10.67 million by March 2017 (BPS, 2017)
the  eastern  provinces,  however,  the  largest  aggregate  numbers  of  poor  households  are  located  in 
densely populated Java. 
As per the  2017 data from the National Statistics Bureau, the average incidence of  poverty in 
these  sub-districts  is  13.9%  which  is  higher  than  the  national  average  of  10.12%.  In  terms  of 
unemployment,  the  average  sub-district  unemployment  rate  is  6.13%  which  is  also  just  above  the 
national average of 5.5%. Rising inequality, with an increase in the Gini Coefficient from 0.36 in 2005 
to 0.41 in 2014, is threatening to roll back and further entrench progress in poverty reduction. Inequality 
is seen as the key threat to Indonesia's continued development and stability. Farming households are 
3.5 times more likely to be poor than non-farming households – with upland rural poverty rates even 
higher.  Poor  education,  declining  land  holding  sizes,  complex  and  insecure  tenure  arrangements 
together  with  a  lack  of  appropriate  technologies,  infrastructure,  rural  finance  and  input  and  output 
markets, result in sub-optimal use of the already small landholdings and lead to low labour productivity. 
Nutrition. The double burden of malnutrition in Indonesia entails high social and costs: Stunting 
can  reduce  an  individual’s  productivity  at  a  young  age,  and  increases  risks  of  developing  non-
communicable diseases when older – this is the double burden of malnutrition. It is estimated that out 
of the 24.5 million children under 5 years of age in Indonesia, approximately 9.2 million (37 percent) are 
stunted.22 People do not only feel the effects of the double burden of malnutrition, they are also felt by 
19  Australian  National  University.  (2015,  March  4).  Indonesia  Project:  Agriculture,  resources,  and  the  environment.  Retrieved 
October 20, 2017, from Australian National University: https://crawford.anu.edu.au/acde/ip/research/agriculture/ 
20  Kementrian  PPN  /  Bappenas.  (2017).  Garis  Kemiskinan  Menurut  Provinsi  Tahun  2013-2017.  Jakarta:  Kementrian  PPN  / 
Bappenas.  Retrieved  October  12,  2017, 
from  https://www.bappenas.go.id/id/data-dan-informasi-utama/data-dan-
statistik1/kemiskinan-ketenagakerjaan-dan-usaha-kecil-menengah/ 
21 Badan Pusat Statistik. (2017). Laporan Bulanan Data Sosial Ekonomi Edisi 89 Oktober 2017. Jakarta: Badan Pusat Statistik. 
Retrieved October 12, 2017, from https://www.bps.go.id/website/pdf_publikasi/Laporan-Bulanan-Data-Sosial-Ekonomi-Oktober-
2017.pdf 
22  USAID  and  FANTA  (2014);  Indonesia  Nutrition  Profile;  https://www.fantaproject.org/sites/default/files/download/Indonesia-
Nutrition-Profile-Apr2014.pdf  
83 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
the economy. Losses due to stunting and malnutrition are estimated to be 2-3 percent of Indonesia’s 
GDP. Traditionally, Indonesia has paid more attention to severe underweight as a way to determine the 
country’s state  of  nutrition. By  this  measure  alone,  nutritional  issues  appear largely  resolved,  as the 
prevalence of severe underweight is just 5.4 percent in children under five-years. However, the fact that 
37.2 percent of children under five are stunted and 12 percent are wasted should be of greater concern, 
given the lifelong consequences.  
Indonesia exemplifies a country experiencing the “double burden of malnutrition” as overweight 
among women, men, and children have been steadily increasing in recent years. As of 2013, a third of 
women  over  18  years  of  age  and  a  fifth  of  children  5–12  years  of  age  were  overweight  or  obese. 
Increase  in  national  wealth  has  been  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  food  availability,  which  has 
doubled the amount of fat consumed per capita. Processed foods are also being consumed in higher 
rates, particularly in urban areas. Many cities and towns are not pedestrian friendly, do not encourage 
physical  activity, and  lack  outlets  offering healthy foods. Those  traveling to  and  from  school or  work 
have few options other than ready-made foods outside of the home.
23
  While the causes of the double burden of malnutrition are complex, traditional customs influence 
maternal and early child nutrition, and social norms dictate that many women marry still very young. 
These factors contribute to the high incidence of low-birth rates. The mortality rate for children under 5 
is 40 per 1,000 live births—nearly 45 percent of these child deaths are attributable to various forms of 
under nutrition (World Bank, 2015).  
  Youth. With around 255 million people, Indonesia is the fourth most populous country in the world 
and has a substantial young population, as around half of the total population is below the age of 30 
years. Combined, these two features imply that Indonesia currently contains a large labour force; one 
that will grow larger in the foreseeable future, stressing the need for job creation in Southeast Asia's 
largest  economy.  Policy-makers  in  Indonesia  have  been  cheering  over  a  “demographic  bonus”,  a 
condition  where  people  of  productive  age  (15-64)  outnumber  children  and  older  people,  but  unless 
absorbed  appropriately  could  become  a  potential  disaster.  The  share  of  youth  (pemuda) not  in 
education, employment or training (NEET), total (% of youth population) in Indonesia was 22.50 percent 
as of 2016. This is a sizable group that the Chamber of Commerce of the country perceives could be 
threat,  as  the  situation  can  multiply  the  violence  and  lead  to  an  erosion  of  values. The  limited  work 
experience of adolescent youth is one factor that accounts for the high rates of unemployment of youth 
and  teenage  youth in particular. 
 Low levels  of  education  and  skills  are other major factors for not 
being gainfully employed.  
24
  Yet, latest research survey with 13-18 year olds found that a majority of young Indonesians are 
optimistic about their future, and are drawn to study abroad out of an interest in pursuing a high quality 
education  overseas  and  at a  reputable institution. The longer-term  goal  of  such students  is to  boost 
their academic profile with a study experience abroad, and, eventually, to open the door to better career 
prospects. Unfortunately, nearly half (45 percent) also indicated that they would not be able to pursue 
study abroad without scholarship support. 
  Natural resources and Management. Major landscape characteristics and Issues. Indonesia is 
the largest archipelago-state in the world comprising of 17,508 islands, of which about 6,000 of which 
are  inhabited  and  approximately  990  are  permanently  inhabited.  The  archipelago  covers  8  million 
square km  of  the  earth’s surface  with  the total land  area  of  about two  million  km2. It is  home to the 
world’s  third-largest  tropical  forest,  with  an  estimated  91.1  million  hectares  in  2015  of  natural  and 
25.  It  has  a  unique  geographic  landscape 
planted  forests,  covering  48  percent  of  its  total  land  area
23 World Bank (2015); Featured Story - The Double Burden of Malnutrition in Indonesia 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/04/23/the-double-burden-of-malnutrition-in-indonesia  
24 UNFPA Indonesia (2015); Youth in Indonesia; https://indonesia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-
pdf/BUKU_Monograph_No2_Youth_in_Indonesia_ENG_05_Low-res.pdf  
25 FAOSTAT, 2016. http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#country/101 
84 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
characteristics  and  broad  range  of  diversity  between  one  region  to  another  that  shape  different 
challenges in each districts.  
26
  Agricultural land.  Since the  enactment  of the  UU  41/2009, the  availability  of  agriculture land 
throughout  Indonesia  has  not  been  changed  significantly  as  seen  in  the  Agriculture  Ministry  data 
below
. A negative growth rate of 0.25% per annum is shown in the overall agriculture land availability, 
this is to some extent compensated by a significant growth rate of 9.10% per annum for the irrigated 
land. There are now however growing constraints on irrigation development due to the lack of potential 
new sites and water availability. 
Figure 1: Area of Irrigated Rice Land 
b)  Climate 
  Climate  Change  Mitigation.  Indonesia  is  committed  to  reducing  its  greenhouse  gas  (GHG) 
emissions by 29 % (or 41% with international financial support) by 2030 compared to business as usual, 
as  noted  in  its  Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  to  climate  change.  The  Indonesia 
agriculture emissions are summarized in Figure 2: Indonesia Agriculture Emissions. 
Figure 2: Indonesia Agriculture Emissions 
26 http://www.pertanian.go.id/file/Statistik_Lahan_2014.pdf 
85 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
  Water resources. Widely spread around the equator, Indonesia has varied rainfall distribution 
from the  wettest  of  4000  mm/year  to the  driest  800  mm/year27. The rainfall  are  mostly  concentrated 
within 5 (five) months whereas the other 7 (seven) months faces dry season. Therefore, it has potential 
to the drought disaster due to very limited water availability for long period. During the wet season there 
is some places suffering from flood inundation.  
  Although given abundance water resources, Indonesia has already experienced water shortage 
in some areas during dry season, and flood events during rainy season. 80% of its rain falls during rainy 
season within five months while the remaining 20% occur within seven months or even shorter because 
of rainfall pattern variation due to climate change. As addition, there is a large variation in the rainfall all 
over the country. It range from very arid areas of Nusa Tenggara, Maluku and some parts of Sulawesi 
Islands (less than 1,000 mm), to very wet areas in parts of Irian Jaya, Java and Sumatra (more than 
4,000 mm).  
  Water scarcity issues will become a significant problem throughout Indonesia, especially in urban 
areas.  Northern  Java,  Bali,  East  and  West  Nusa  Tenggara,  North  and  South  Sulawesi,  Gorontalo, 
27 Sugiyanto and Samekto, C. 2008. The Status and Challenges of Water Infrastructure Development in Indonesia 
86 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Lampung and South Sumatra are expected to be exposed to long periods of water deficits. Decreased 
rainfall during critical times of the year may translate into high drought risk, uncertain water availability, 
and consequently, uncertain ability to produce agricultural goods, economic instability, and higher level 
of  undernourishment.  Farm  labourers  and  the  urban  poor  are  expected  to  be  disproportionately 
impacted, as are rice farmers. 
Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks 
  SECAP Project Assessments is conducted at project proposal development stage to assess the 
effect of a proposed development on the environment and socio-economic conditions and assess the 
vulnerability/sensitivity of the proposed development to climate risks. The assessment is directly related 
to  the  Project  development  and  should  enable  the  identification  of  project-specific  impacts  and/or 
measures to manage climate risks. It has a well-defined beginning and end and focuses on informing a 
specific decision at a particular point in time is focused on the minimization of negative impacts and the 
enhancement of positive impacts. The SECAP Project Assessment should have a narrow perspective 
and includes a high level of detail.  
Figure 3: UPLANDs PROJECT COMPONENTS 
87 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Table 1: Social, Environmental and Climate Risk Factors and Mitigating Measures  
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Outcome 1. Productivity Enhancement & Resilience Building 
Social:  
Social:  
  Awareness  campaign,  capacity  building 
for  government  and 
community 
and 
community 
participation and inclusiveness. 
facilitation 
leaders 
for 
  A participatory approach will be adopted 
to ensure consent of participants through 
village  meetings,  formation  of  inclusive 
farmer  groups  and  building  government 
capacity 
facilitate  and  enhance 
to 
community participation 
  Ownership of assets, farmer contribution 
and  long  term  O&M  responsibilities  will 
be clearly defined.  
  Village  facilitators  based  in  the  villages 
will support empowerment and training of 
farmers and community groups.  
  A  proper  diagnostic  analysis  will  be 
conducted  to  assess  current  land  use 
and  ownership  rights  and  ensure  that 
existing  arrangements  are  not  infringed 
and proposed investments are made with 
community consent. 
  The  selection  criteria  will  specify  that 
project  investments  will  not  displace 
current livelihood activities.  
  Clear 
and  workable  mechanisms 
including  support  for  finance  for  farmer 
contribution. 
  Development 
independent 
an 
of 
grievance redress mechanism.  
 
Environment and Climate:  
  Awareness and stakeholder engagement 
and 
in 
environmentally appropriate and climate 
resilient farming systems.  
sustainable 
relation 
  Capacity  building  and  technical  support 
for  government  and  farmers  on  best 
practices of farm management and land 
development and management, and how 
to reduce impact to the environment 
  Promote  water  efficient  irrigation  and 
water management. 
  Promote  efficient  and  environmentally 
sound management systems of fertilizers 
and  pesticides.  Where  appropriate 
develop  organic 
farming  and  non-
chemical fertilizer and pesticides. 
  Develop  processing  and  other  waste 
management  
1.1 Land and 
Infrastructur
e 
Developmen
t 
  Lack  of  mechanisms  for  participative  planning 
involving communities low disadvantage groups 
and women. 
  Lack of clarity on local land and water resource 
access rights  
  New land and infrastructure development could 
impact on current livelihood activities. 
  Responsibilities  for  O&M  of  infrastructure  not 
clearly defined. 
  Requirements 
contribution 
towards costs of on farm investments not clearly 
explained. 
for  beneficiary 
  Mechanisms for farmer contribution and access 
to finance not understood. 
Environmental/Climate:  
  Lack  of  or  weak  awareness  of  environmental 
risks  in  project  areas  including  climate,  land, 
water and seismic risks. 
  Poor technical capacity to plan and design 
 
 Environmentally  sound  and  climate  resilient 
infrastructure.  
  Planning  and  design  consultants  fail  to  consult 
with beneficiaries. 
  Failure  to  adequately  assess  water  availability 
under climate uncertainty and ensure the rights 
of existing water users.  
Social:  
1.2 
Production 
and Farm 
Management 
  Farmers 
continue 
“business-as-usual” 
agricultural practices and fail to achieve targeted 
benefits. 
  Government 
“business-as-usual” 
approach 
and 
equipment  without  any  proper  training  and 
handover mechanism. 
Inadequate  opportunities  for  participation  of 
women, youth and disadvantaged groups. 
handout  machineries 
continues 
to 
 
  Lack of understanding of the ownership and OM 
responsibilities  of  agriculture  infrastructure  and 
equipment  provided  by  the  project  and  lack  of 
clear  mechanisms  for  beneficiary  contribution 
and handover. 
  Lack  of  community  participation/engagement 
and empowerment that will ensure the operation 
and maintenance of the machineries 
Inadequate  opportunities  for  participation  of 
women  
 
Environmental/Climate:  
  Lack of understanding of environmental impacts 
and  climate  change  impacts  risk  in  farming 
activities.  (changed  and  more  uncertain  rainfall 
erosion,  land  degradation,  contamination  from 
fertilizer and pesticides.  
Increased  use  of  fertilizer  and  pesticides  and 
increased use of pumped irrigation. 
 
  Change  to  more  intensive  agriculture  results  in 
higher  risk  of  climate  change  and  water 
uncertainty  
  Environmental impacts due to improper handling 
of processing waste and oil from equipment. 
89 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Outcome 2. Agribusiness Development & Livelihood Facilitation 
Social:  
Social:  
2.1  Farmer 
Institutional 
Developmen
t 
  Reluctance to change from traditional to modern 
farming systems. 
  Farmers  are  reluctant  to  take  on  risk  of  more 
intensive farming.  
  Perspectives  of  vulnerable,  youth  and  women 
into  project 
incorporated 
not  adequately 
planning and management. 
2.2  Market 
Infrastructur
e 
Equipment 
& 
2.3 
Strengthenin
g 
Market 
Linkages  & 
Alliances 
2.4  Access 
to  Financial 
Services 
Social:  
  Weak community 
participation/engagement and 
empowerment that are needed to ensure 
business sustainability – more top down 
business model approach 
Limited small holders' capacity on 
business development 
Inadequate opportunities for participation 
of women  
 
 
Environmental/Climate:  
 
Environmental impacts due to improper 
handling of agricultural waste. 
Social:  
 
Lack of knowledge of potential agricultural 
entrepreneurship initiatives.  
  Continuation government “business-as-
usual” approach that focus on supply side 
and without proper assessment of the full 
market chain. 
Farmers with larger holdings dominate the 
marketing of selected commodities. 
  Women & vulnerable households lack 
 
capacities to take up full potential on their 
own.  
Environmental/Climate:  
 
Stand-alone small holder agriculture is 
exposed to potential environmental and 
climate impacts.  
Social:  
  Lack of viable and sustainable best practices of 
financial  service  in  agriculture  sector  at  village 
level. 
  Lack  of  micro  financial  institutions  that  are 
accessible  for  small  holder  farmers  down  to 
village level. 
  The  inability  of  MSEs  to  finance  growth  in  the 
agriculture sector  
  Exclusion  of  disadvantage  people,  women  and 
financial 
in  accessing 
indigenous  people 
services. 
  Capacity  building  for  government  and 
stakeholders 
and 
on 
opportunities for community participation 
and modernized agriculture following the 
value chain approach. 
challenges 
farmers 
small-holder 
  The  formation  of  farmer  groups  to  help 
enable 
to 
aggregate their produce and have easier 
access to markets  
Improved  assessment  of  potential  risks 
of  climate  change  and  natural  disaster 
impacts. 
 
  Promote business mentoring systems. 
  Facilitation of village/community leaders’ 
in  project  planning  and 
through  a 
participation 
implementation  processes 
mentoring system. 
  Village  Facilitators 
to  build 
capacities  of  farmers  to  manage  their 
groups more effectively and facilitate the 
inclusion of women and youth in groups.  
  Facilitators  liaise  regularly  with  Village 
Head  and  Community  Leaders  to  keep 
them informed and involved with project 
activities 
trained 
  GALS  methodology  used 
to  build 
teamwork  in  groups  through  developing 
common vision and roadmap to achieve 
their goals. 
  The  project  will  provide  business 
development training to facilitate bottom-
up business model approach. 
  Where women are principally involved in 
post-processing activities, then women’s 
groups will have ownership of the assets 
given by the project.  
• 
Environmental/Climate: 
  Strengthen  the assessment  on potential 
risk of climate and natural disaster events 
and apply these to the business models. 
Improve 
waste 
management.  
capacities 
for 
 
.  
Environmental/Climate:  
 
Lack of awareness of potential 
environmental and climate risks of more 
intensive agriculture systems 
Outcome 3. Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems 
3.1  Capacity 
Building 
of 
Government 
Staff 
Social:  
  Capacity building not suitable to the government 
needs and capacities.  
  Lack of interest from government personnel and 
lack  of  capacity  and  interest  to  take  up  new 
approaches.  
  Lack of sustainability after project completion. 
90 
  Social:  
  Conduct a participatory capacity building 
need assessments incorporating farmers 
(women, men and youth) on their needs; 
incorporate their feedback to the design. 
the 
capacity  building  training  and  events. 
  Mainstream  gender 
issues 
into 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
any 
and 
challenges 
addressing 
expanding the opportunities for women 
  Make  sure  applicable  content  that  are 
relevant  to  the  context  –  for  research, 
technical support and capacity building 
  Understand the local context and ensure 
participation of local people/small holder 
farmers  including  women,  indigenous 
people and disadvantage group. 
  Establish  clear  hand  over  mechanism 
including  operation  manuals,  roles  and 
responsibility  and  ensure  operation  and 
maintenance 
  Environmental/Climate:  
  Capacity  development  on 
technical 
knowledge  of  potential  environmental 
and  climate 
in 
risks  and 
agriculture  sector  particularly  in  upland 
areas. 
impacts 
  Adaptive  research  must  be  carefully 
targeted to meet key technical, social and 
environmental requirements.  
  Research priority should be given to the 
relevance  to  the  needs  and  priorities  of 
women  and  men  small-holder  farmers; 
and 
incorporation 
feedback 
farmers 
from  small-holder 
should be an integral part of the adaptive 
research process.  
consultation 
of 
Environmental/Climate: 
  Lack  of  awareness and  technical knowledge  of 
modern  agriculture,  environmental  and  climate 
issues  
Social:  
  Lack  of  interest  from  government  and  other 
upland 
centers/universities 
in 
research 
agriculture 
3.2  Adaptive 
Research 
  Lack of applicability of the research with limited 
value. 
  Lack  of  participation 
the 
selection  of 
farmers  does  not 
contribute to the research and  decision making 
process. 
research, 
farmers 
from 
in 
  Voices  &  perspectives  of 
rural/affected 
households,  especially  women  &  vulnerable 
households, lacking  
  Applicability  of  the  research  for  small-holder 
farmers. 
 
Environmental/Climate:  
  Weak  technical  knowledge  and  solutions  of 
environmental and climate risks and impacts in 
agriculture sector particularly in upland areas  
Environmental and social category  
(i)  Environmental and Social Overview 
  Overall the project is expected to contribute positively in addressing the vulnerability of farming 
households  in  the  upland  areas  by  strengthening  capacity  for  sustainable  and  integrated  farming 
practices. The project is expected to enhance crop productivity in a way that enhances natural resource 
management and improves the capacity for soil nutrient management and reduce erosion through soil 
and  water  conservation.  The  project  would  promote  rehabilitation  of  abandoned  and  unproductive 
upland areas which would also involve natural resource management and conservation activities. The 
project  would  invest  in  technologies  for  preventing  soil  erosion,  reduce  water  run-off,  promote  the 
development  of  high  efficiency  irrigation  introduce  integrated  pest  management  practices,  etc.  The 
overall approach of the project would be based on promoting social cohesion by working with farmer 
groups and help them realize economies of scale.  
  The  project  would  focus  on  sustainable  agriculture  in  existing  areas  of  agriculture  land  in  the 
upland areas and would not involve any large infrastructure schemes, land acquisitions, resettlements, 
or conversion of forest or other environmentally sensitive lands. It will not involve any involuntary taking 
or restriction on the use of land that may result in physical or economic displacement not damaging or 
destroy any physical resources of historic, religious or cultural significance. 
91 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
(ii)  Environmental Requirements 
  The  UPLANDs  project will  incorporate modern  and  rigorous  assessment  of  the  environmental 
and social issues and will ensure compliance with the requirements of IFAD, IsDB and Government of 
Indonesia; as described below: 
(iii)  Comparison of Requirements 
Indonesia  regulation  provides  quite  rigid  quantitative  criteria,  based  on  specific  magnitude 
(length,  depth,  width,  size,  or  other  physical  dimensions),  and  whereas  IFADs  categorizes  projects 
based on the “significance of impacts”. Comparisons of the environmental requirements are described 
in Table 2 below. A preliminary screening of the environmental requirements requirement is shown in  
92 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Table 2: IFAD and Government Environmental Requirements  
IFAD Categories 
GoI Environment (AMDAL) Categories 
Category A: The programme and project may 
have significant adverse environmental and/or 
social implications that: (i) are sensitive, 
irreversible or unprecedented; (ii) affect an area 
broader than the sites or facilities subject to 
physical interventions; and (iii) are not readily 
remedied by preventive actions or mitigation 
measures. 
Category B: The programme and project may 
have some adverse environmental and/or social 
impacts on human populations or environmentally 
significant areas, but the impacts: (i) are less 
adverse than those for category A; (ii) are site 
specific and few are irreversible in nature; and (iii) 
can be readily remedied by appropriate preventive 
actions and/or mitigation measures  
Category C: The programme and project will have 
negligible or no environmental or social 
implications4 – no further environmental and social 
Category:AMDAL: Larger projects that according to law 
requires an Environmental Impact Assessment (AMDAL).  
According to the Government Regulation a AMDAL is 
mandatory for any business and/or activity of which boundary 
overlaps with a protected area and/or potential impacts of the 
business and/or activity are predicted to affect nearby 
protected areas.  
Proected Areas: Annex III of the Decree of the Minister of 
Environment No. 05/2012 on Type of Business and/or 
Activities Requiring Environmental Impact Assessment, 
identifies 20 classifications of protected areas under 
regulations of Ministry of Forestry, Ministry of Public Work 
and others as follows:  
1) Protected forest area;  
2) Peat area;  
3) Watershed (catchment) area.  
4) Coast demarcation (corridor);  
5) River demarcation (corridor);  
6) Area around lake or reservoir;  
7) Flora sanctuary and marine sanctuary;  
8) Natural reserve and marine reserve;  
9) Mangrove forested coast area;  
10) National park and national marine park;  
11) Forest park;  
12) Natural tourism park and marine tourism park;  
13) Cultural and knowledge heritage area;  
14) Natural geology reserve area;  
15) Groundwater recharge area;  
16) Spring demarcation;  
17) Genetic protection area;  
18) Fauna refugee area;  
19) Coral reef; and  
20) Corridor area for protected flora or marine biota. 
According to Decree of Minister of Environment No. 05/2012 
use of these areas that is not in line with the purpose of the 
original protection should be avoided. These areas are 
normally identified in Spatial Planning documents. The 
Government Regulation PP No. 27/2012 (article 4) mentions 
that purpose and location of an activity should comply with 
official spatial plans. In case of non-compliance, the AMDAL 
application will be refused.  
Business activities which do not require explicitly an AMDAL 
and have no significant impact on the environment will 
required an UKL-UPL.  
Category: UKL/UPL: Smaller projects require an Environmental 
Management Measure (UKL) and Environmental Monitoring 
Measure (UPL). 
However, special discretion and judgment of environmental 
agencies at local and national level(based on particular 
consideration) may override the category, and UKL/UPL 
Category may be“upgraded” to AMDAL.In addition to the 
Indonesia national regulations, it is a requirement that 
provincial and local regulations related to environmental 
management, spatial planning [RTRW (regional spatial 
planning) and zoning regulation], forest conservation, and 
others. Also essential that any local customary laws will also 
be followed. 
Category: SPPL: Projects that do not require AMDAL or 
UKLUPLare obliged to submit a ‘statement of 
management and environmental monitoring ability’or SPPL. 
93 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
analysis is required. Projects in category C 
generally do not require additional environmental 
analysis because the activities have positive 
environmental impacts, or negligible or minimally 
adverse environmental impacts  
94 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
2 
2.1 
Table 3: Preliminary Screening of Social and Environmental Categories  
IFAD  Criteria 
Category A 
for  Environment 
GoI  Criteria 
Assessment 
Geographic location and sensitive areas: 
for  Full  AMDAL 
Preliminary Screening 
Recommendation 
IFAD 
Govt 
Wetland development 
May require AMDAL 
No activities proposed in wetlands. 
Not applicable 
NA 
B 
NA 
UKL/ UPL 
Conversion  of  significant  areas  of 
natural forests or other wild lands; 
Larger  schemes  may 
AMDAL. 
require 
agriculture 
All 
implemented 
agricultural land. 
would 
be 
existing 
on 
Permission  will  be  required  from 
Forestry  Department  and 
from 
Governor.  Permission  is  normally 
granted  for  small  impact  projects 
that  benefit  communities.  Forest 
department may apply a water use 
charge. 
May require AMDAL 
A  few  irrigation  intakes  maybe 
located 
forest  areas.  Work 
in 
include  construction  or 
would 
rehabilitation  of  small  weirs  and 
transmission pipe.  
Projects would be located in existing 
agriculture  lands  with  minimal  or no 
impact 
to  biodiversity  or  natural 
habitat. 
or 
Loss  of  natural  habitat  and  loss  of 
environmental 
biodiversity 
services  provided  by  a  natural 
ecosystem  in  sensitive  areas  – 
protected  areas  and  their  buffer 
zones,  ecologically sensitive  areas, 
coral  reefs,  mangroves  swamps, 
small  island  ecosystems,  areas  of 
global/national 
for 
biodiversity  conservation  and/or 
biodiversity-rich areas, and habitats 
dependent  on  by  endangered 
species;  
significance 
Weirs height should be restricted 
to  less  than  4  metres  and  small 
diameter  pipe  should  be  buried. 
Trenches  to  be  excavated  by 
hand. 
New  weir  would  require  water 
management  analysis  to  ensure 
not  conflict  with  downstream 
user. 
Not applicable 
B 
High  risk  of  major  destruction  as  a 
result  of  geophysical  hazards 
(tsunamis,  landslides,  earthquakes, 
volcanic eruptions). 
No criteria 
Natural Resources 
Most of the districts are vulnerable to 
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.  
Risks  of 
to  project 
impact 
investments  in  agriculture  and 
small  scale  infrastructure  would 
however be minimal. 
B 
N 
practices. 
resource 
Unsustainable  natural 
management 
For 
example, their development in areas 
and 
little 
information  exists  on  sustainable 
yield and carrying capacities 
situations 
where 
No criteria 
Projects  are  in  existing  agricultural 
land and carrying capacity and yields 
are reasonably well defined. 
incorporate  soil 
Project  will 
assess 
better 
testing 
to 
requirement 
sustainable 
for 
agriculture  and  requirements  for 
organic and inorganic fertilizers. 
B 
NA 
95 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
IFAD  Criteria 
Category A 
for  Environment 
GoI  Criteria 
Assessment 
for  Full  AMDAL 
Preliminary Screening 
Recommendation 
IFAD 
Govt 
May require AMDAL 
There  would  be  no  significant 
alteration  of  ecologically  sensitive 
areas. 
NA 
NA 
NA 
B 
NA 
Large-scale aquaculture projects, or 
where  their  development  involves 
significant  alteration  of  ecologically 
sensitive area, etc.;  
Significant 
of 
increased 
agrochemicals  which  may  lead  to 
life-threatening illness and long-term 
public health and safety concerns 
use 
(ground 
Water-based 
and/or 
surface) development where there is 
reason  to  believe  that  significant 
depletion  and/or 
flow 
may/has occurred from the effects of 
climate 
from 
recharge 
overutilization 
capacity); 
reduced 
change 
(above 
or 
No criteria 
No criteria 
Some increase in agro-chemicals as 
part of the agriculture program.  
No long term health and public health 
envisaged. 
Training  will  be  given  in  the 
correct  safe  and  environmentally 
appropriated 
of 
agrochemicals.  Promotion  of 
organic pest control methods will 
be  provided 
the  organic 
in 
programs. 
use 
Most  schemes  will  build  on  existing 
water sources and schemes. 
Some  new  water  sources-surface 
and groundwater will be developed.  
B 
Any  new  water 
(surface  or 
groundwater)  sources  will  be 
subject  to  rigorous  analysis  to 
ensure abstraction is sustainable 
and  does  not  impact  on  other 
users. 
Introduction  of  potentially  invasive 
species  or  genetically  modified 
organisms which might alter genetic 
traits  of  native  species  or  have  an 
adverse effect on local biodiversity;  
Risk of project-induced pollution and 
other  adverse  health  effects  on 
sensitive 
and 
vulnerable  communities,  or  the  risk 
of  pollution from  an  existing source 
which might affect a new project. 
ecosystems 
No criteria 
No new species  
Not applicable 
NA 
NA 
No criteria 
Some  wastes  from  small/medium 
agricultural processing. 
processing 
Agricultural 
units 
need  to  incorporate  treatment  of 
waste. 
B 
NA 
Some  increase  in  CO2  emissions 
from small pumping units. 
Opportunities to offset carbon will 
be explored including mini hydro, 
bio-gas 
Infrastructure development: 
Large-scale 
dam/reservoir 
construction  (more  than  15  metre 
high wall, more than 500 metre long 
reservoir 
crest,  and/or  with  a 
Dam height>15m 
Area>200ha 
Dam/reservoir construction would be 
less  than;  15m  height,  500m  crest, 
3million  m3  storage  and  incoming 
B 
UKL/ UPL 
96 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
3 
3.1 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
for  Environment 
IFAD  Criteria 
Category A 
exceeding 3 million m3) or incoming 
flood of more than 2,000 m3/s;  
GoI  Criteria 
Assessment 
for  Full  AMDAL 
Preliminary Screening 
Recommendation 
IFAD 
Govt 
flood  of  2000m3/s.  Area  would  be 
less than 200ha 
3.2 
3.3 
Construction of large-scale irrigation 
schemes 
Rehabilitation/development  (above 
100ha per scheme);  
New Schemes>2000ha 
Rehab. >1000ha 
Construction/rehabilitation 
or 
upgrade of rural roads that entail the 
total  area  being  cleared  above  10 
km long. 
No criteria 
All schemes  would small and would 
be less than 100ha. 
Final scheme sizes to be finalized 
during project implementation 
B 
UKL/ UPL 
the 
roads  are  an 
important 
Farm 
component  of 
infrastructure 
investment-roads  would  be  built 
along  lines  of  existing  roads  or 
pathways-no 
clearance 
envisaged.  Lengths  would  be  less 
than 10 km. 
land 
B 
UKL/ UPL 
B 
UKL/ UPL 
Selection and design of roads will 
be  carried  out  under  project 
implementation.  Routes 
to  be 
selected  based  on  maximum 
benefit 
minimum 
environmental  impact  including 
land requirements  
and 
the 
the 
Districts  would  negotiate 
land 
requirements  with 
owners-in most cases land would 
be  donated  due  to  incremental 
value  of  infrastructure-canal  or 
road. 
3.4 
Any  farmer  with  more  than  10  per 
cent of his/her private land taken; 
Land  requirements  would  be  less 
than 10% of land holdings.  
In accordance with Presidential 
that 
Regulation  40/2014 
land 
acquisition of less than 5 ha can be 
direct 
undertaken 
negotiation  between 
landowners 
and the district agency needing the 
land 
through 
3.5 
3.6 
4 
4,1 
Drainage  or  correction  of  natural 
waterbodies (e.g. river training); and 
No criteria 
Significant  extraction  or  diversion/ 
containment  of 
surface  water 
leaving  the  river  flow  below  20  per 
cent 
flow  plus 
downstream user requirements. 
environmental 
No criteria 
Not proposed under project 
Not Applicable 
B 
Irrigation  development  would  be  a 
mix 
and 
rehabilitation. 
irrigation 
new 
of 
Rehabilitation 
existing 
schemes  would  follow  current 
operation procedures. 
of 
New schemes would be required 
to  maintain  20%  environmental 
flow 
Land  would  be  donated.  The 
project  would  ensure  that  any 
properly 
land 
donation 
is 
B 
Designs would be based on rigorous 
analysis  of  water  availability  and 
including  environmental 
demand 
flow 
Social 
Economic  or  physical  displacement 
(i.e.  land,  potable  water  and  water 
for  other  uses),  or  physical 
Land under  5ha can be negotiated 
by  District  Administration  and 
landowners 
Some land may be required for small 
farm roads and canal but this would 
be  small  and  less  than  10%  of  an 
97 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
GoI  Criteria 
Assessment 
for  Environment 
IFAD  Criteria 
Category A 
resettlement  of  more 
than  20 
people,  or  impacting  more  than  10 
per cent of any one community’s or 
individual  farmer’s  or  household’s 
assets; 
Conversion  and  loss  of  physical 
cultural resources;  
No criteria 
Significant social adverse impacts to 
(including 
local 
disadvantaged 
vulnerable 
groups  and  indigenous  peoples)  or 
other project-affected parties;  
communities 
and 
No criteria 
Manufacture  and  transportation  of 
hazardous  and  toxic  materials  and 
storage;  
No criteria 
Construction  of  large-  or  medium-
scale  industrial  plants  (other  than 
small-scale artisanal production. 
No criteria 
4,2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
for  Full  AMDAL 
Preliminary Screening 
Recommendation 
IFAD 
Govt 
individual  households  land  holding. 
Land for storage and other buildings 
there is some flexibility and would in 
most 
or 
government land.  
village 
cases 
use 
documented 
including 
measurement  and  agreement  by 
village  and 
landholder  and 
district. Government. 
The project will not impact on any  
The project design includes focused 
actions  to  ensure  vulnerable  and 
indigenous groups are protected and 
actively  engaged 
the  project 
activities. 
in 
The  project  environment  and 
plan 
management 
social 
to 
core 
identifies 
involve 
groups 
vulnerable 
including  youth,  women  and 
indigenous groups. 
initiatives 
specific  hazardous  waste. 
agricultural 
of 
No 
Increased 
use 
machinery (pumps, tractors etc.) 
Agricultural  processing  will  be small 
and medium scale  
Project  will  incorporate  initiatives 
to ensure management of waste 
B 
B 
B 
B 
B 
B 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Development 
of 
production forestry. 
large-scale 
AMDAL may be required 
finance:  projects 
Rural 
involving 
lines  of  credit  to  financial  service 
providers  to  support  any  of  the 
activities above.  
No criteria 
Some small-scale planting of trees to 
support 
conservation  and 
soil 
erosion control 
NA 
Rural finance will be only to support 
small scale agriculture. 
NA 
98 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Environment Conclusions 
  The project design will focus on the promotion of sustainable agriculture in upland areas including 
the development of small-scale irrigation and farm roads. 
  A  preliminary  screening  of  the  project  interventions  has  been  carried  out.  The  environmental 
screening has incorporated the requirements of IFAD, IsDB and Government. The IsDB environmental 
procedures follow the IFAD safeguards. In parallel a preliminary screening of the projects in relation to 
the Government environment regulations has been carried out.  
  Based on the IFAD guidelines the project is categorized as Category B. The proposed projects 
are spread over ten districts and; (i) would not impact on any sensitive areas or result in loss natural 
habit and biodiversity, all of the agricultural development would be located on existing cultivated lands; 
(ii) the  projects  would  be  located in  areas  at  high  risk of  geophysical  hazards,  notably  earthquakes, 
however the  risks  to  agriculture  and small-scale  infrastructure  are considered to  be  minimal; (iii) the 
project design is directed at environmentally sound and sustainable agriculture, the project will invest 
in rehabilitation and new irrigation with a high emphasis on sustainable water use efficiency and strong 
water management, some increased use  of pesticides is envisaged however these be supported by 
guidance and training in the safe and environmentally sound  practices for  pesticide  use, waste from 
agriculture and processing will be small scale and will include measures to ensure safe disposal, and 
where viable include recycling; (iii) infrastructure will be small scale irrigation schemes less than 100ha 
including rehabilitation and new schemes, dams would be small (less than 5m); (iv) the projects would 
require only limited land acquisition mainly for farm roads, land requirements would small and dispersed 
and would require only a small percentage (less than 10%) of individual owner’s land; and (v) the project 
design is aimed at ensuring vulnerable and socially disadvantaged groups are actively engaged in the 
project activities. 
In relation to the Government environmental requirements, preliminary screening indicates that 
the projects would be small with limited environmental impact and as such, would meet the criteria for 
a simpler UKL/UPL environmental permit rather than a full AMDAL assessment.  
  This  SECAP  review  note  and  the  Preliminary  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan 
(ESMP) presented in Attachment  2 will be  fully  reviewed  and updated as  part of the  detailed  design 
process  during  year the first  year of the  project implementation; the approach for preparing the final 
project screening including the preparation of assessment to meet the environmental requirements of 
the UKL/UPL are described in the SECAP 
(iv)  Government Environmental Requirements.  
Government  environment  clearance  must  be  considered  in  parallel  to  the  IFAD  environmental 
requirements; the flow chart for GoI clearance is shown in Figure 4. AMDAL refers  to environmental 
impact  assessment  at  whole,  while ANDAL  is  part  of  the  assessment  where  environmental  impact 
analysis (ANDAL)  carried out for the significant issues. In addition to ANDAL report, the  assessment 
will  be  supported  with  RKL/RPL 
for 
managing/mitigating the impacts and subsequently monitoring the effectiveness of the environmental 
impacts management/mitigation  
the  Environment  Management  Plan) 
(equivalent 
to 
Initial screening described in the table above indicates the sub projects are relatively small and 
low environmental impacts and a UKL/UPL environmental permit would be acceptable. The procedure 
for  a  UKL/UKP  permit  the  project  would  prepare  an  application  according  to  the  requirements;  the 
application would be submitted to the Government for review and issue of an environment permit. The 
government  can  reject  the  application  or  can  request  a  full  AMDAL  assessment;  the  AMDAL 
assessment must be carried out by licenced AMDAL consultants. 
99 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Figure 4: Flow Chart for GoI Environmental Clearance  
Environment Conclusion 
  Based on a preliminary screening of the project components described in the above the project 
to  be  a  Category  “B”.  The  sub  project  would  appear  to  comply  with  GOI  UKL/UPL  environmental 
category. The final categorization however would be defined during the year 1 project implementation 
stage  as  a  part  of  the  project  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  design.  At  this  stage  the  social  and 
environmental status would be reviewed. The following scenarios  
(a) 
The social and environment category remains at B and a UKL/UPL environment permit is 
issued then the sub-project can continue to implementation. 
In  most  cases  it  is  considered  that  all  the  projects  would  likely  comply  with  Category  B 
requirements and the UKL/UPL environment categories. In some cases, there may be requirement to 
adjust the project design to reduce any major environmental impacts. The process is shown in Figure 
5 below.  
100 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Figure 5: Environmental and Social Screening Process  
(v)  Climate risk category (High, Moderate, Low) 
1)  Current Climate 
Indonesia is the world’s largest archipelagic state encompassing more than 17,000 islands. The 
large areas of water keep the overall temperature are fairly consistent over the year about 280C for the 
coastal  plains,  260C for the maintain  areas. Rainfall  varies from  1800  and  3200mm for the  lowlands 
increasing with elevation up to 6000mm for the mountain areas. Most of the rainfall most of the rainfall 
occurs during the wet season which last from November to April (with a rainfall peak in January and 
February). The  dry  season last from  May to  October  (with July  to  September  as the  driest months). 
Indonesia is vulnerable to a range of natural disasters including floods, droughts, earthquakes, tsunamis 
and volcanic eruptions. In the proposed project areas there are two types of rainfall pattern as shown 
in Figure 6 below. 
Figure 6: Rainfall Types  
  The total annual  rainfall in districts is shown in Figure 7 due to the irregular  topography in the 
uplands  there  may  be  some  significant  differences  due to  altitude  between  the  rainfall  in  the  district 
capitals shown in the graph and the actual agricultural areas of the project. The monthly distribution of 
rainfall is shown in Figure 8: 
101 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Figure 7: Average Rainfall by District  
Average Annual Rainfall 
)
m
m
(
l
l
a
f
n
i
a
R
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
m
m
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
District 
Figure 8: Monthly Rainfall by District  
Monthly Rainfall(mm)
J
F
M
A
Lebak
Garut
Sumenep
Gorontalo
M
J
Month
Subang
Banjarnegara
Malang
Minahasa
J
A
S
O
N
D
Tasikmalaya
Purbalingga
Lombok Timor
Cirebon
Magelang
Sumbawa
a)  Historic Climate Trends 
  There is strong evidence of climate change in Indonesia; surface temperatures have increased 
by 0.040C per decade over the last 40 years, the increase is more pronounced in the larger islands in 
the west of the country. Total annual rainfall has increased by 12% over the last 30 years, however there 
are different trends between the dry and wet season, it is reported that dry season rainfall has decreased 
but there have been increases in the wet season rainfall.  
  The regional differences are shown in Figure below which shows the total rainfall has increased 
in  the  northern  regions  but  there  are  decreases  reported  in  the  southern  regions.  There  is  a  trend 
towards more extreme events, while droughts occurred in the 1960s they are now frequently reported 
once  every  3  years28. There  also  evidence  in  the  changes  of  timing  of the  wet  and  dry  seasons.  In 
general rainfall predictability is decreasing. 
28 Wingquest and Dahlberg (2008), World Bank (2014); Karmalkar et cal (2012) and Syaukat (2011) 
102 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Figure 9: Change in Rainfall 1991 to 2010 in relation to Rainfall 1971 to 1990  
b)  El Niño 
  Precipitation in Indonesia is heavily influenced by the El Niño-Southern Oscillation cycle (ENSO), 
El Niño and La Niña are the opposite phases of the cycle. El Niño is referred to as the warm phase of 
ENSO  and  La  Niña  as  the  cold  phase  of  the  weather  patterns  that  result  from  variations  in  ocean 
temperatures in the Equatorial Pacific. These fluctuations in from the normal surface temperatures and 
have large scale impacts on the ocean processes, global weather and climate.  
Indonesia generally experiences droughts during El Niño and excessive rainfall during La Nina 
events. Currently the ENSO climate events form a large component of the current climate of Indonesia 
in Indonesia. There is only limited understanding of the linkage of the ENSO events with climate change; 
it is however predicted by several researches that there will be more frequent and intense ENSO events 
in the future due to climate change. For Indonesia there have been projections29 that ENSO events are 
likely to increase from the current 3 to 7 years intervals to occurrences every 2 to 3 years. In the near 
future,  it  is  likely  that  the  rainfall  shortage  by  El  Niño  is  more  significant  than  the  climate  change; 
although the two impacts cannot be disconnected.  
2)  Projections for Future Climate Change 
  There  are  a  lot  of  analyses  of  climate  change  in  Indonesia;  there  however  remain  many 
uncertainties  especially  in  relation  to  precipitation  in  the  higher  elevation  and  complex terrain  of  the 
UPLANDs projects.  
a)  Temperature 
2. 
Over Indonesia temperature it is projected to increase by 0.2-0.30C per decade with a total 
increase estimated by 0.9-2.20C by the 2060s and 1.1-3.20C by 2100. Project warming is more 
rapid for the larger islands than for the sea and the smaller islands. Projections by the 
International Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) for future climate changes are presented in 
Table  below.  
29 Indonesia Climate Change Sector Road Map Government of Indonesia BAPPENAS 2010. 
103 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Table 4: Projected Temperature Changes (0C)  
Province 
Temp 2016-2035 
Temp 2046-2065 
Temp 2081-2100 
Median value 
Median value 
Median value 
Possible 
value  
extreme 
Banten 
West Java 
Central Java 
East Java 
NTB 
Gorontalo 
N. Sulawesi 
0.5-1.0 
0.5-1.0 
0.5-1.0 
0.5-1.0 
0.5-1.0 
0.5-1.0 
0.5-1.0 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.0-1.5 
1.5-2.0 
1.5-2.0 
1.5-2.0 
1.5-2.0 
1.5-2.0 
1.5-2.0 
1.5-2.0 
Source: IPCC change in temperatures with respect to median values RCP4.5 scenario. Extreme value is based RCP4.5 with 
the 75 percentile which shows are possible more extreme scenario.  
  A summary of the temperatures and projected changes by Kabupaten is shown in Table  below. 
Table 5: Historic and Projected Temperature by Kabupaten (this is a table, not a figure) 
Province
Kabupaten
Average 
Temp (0C)
Projected 
increase (OC)
22.50
23.00
23.50
24.00
24.50
25.00
25.50
26.00
26.50
27.00
27.50
28.00
Temperature Degree Centigrade
Banten
West Java
Lebak
Subang
Tasikmalaya
Cirebon
Garut
Banjarnegara
Central Java
Purbalingga
East Java
West Nusatenggare
Magelang
Sumenep
Malang
Lombok
Sumbawa
Gorontalo
Gorontalo
N Sulawesi
Minahasa
25.3
25.5
25.2
27.4
23.1
25.0
26.4
24.8
27.0
23.7
23.9
25.4
27.0
22.7
0.70-to 0.75
0.86 to 0.90
0.86 to 0.90
0.86 to 0.90
0.86 to 0.90
0.71 to 0.80
0.71 to 0.80
0.71 to 0.80
0.71 to 0.86
0.71 to 0.86
0.71 to 0.75
0.71 to 0.75
0.76 to 0.80
0.70 to 0.75
Current average temperatures (source climate-data.org) 
Future Projections 2032 to 2040 (BKMG Bandung)
b)  Precipitation 
  There are many caveats and uncertainties that apply to the simulated precipitation projections 
including the rate of change of green-house gases and the significant differences the different climate 
models. In Indonesia  there are many difficulties to fully capture the range of rainfall behaviour of the 
tropical  region  due  to  the  challenges  to  fully  modelling  cumulus  precipitation  due  to  the  complex 
coastline, steep and irregular topography and the smaller islands (CSIRO)30.  
  Overall the  projection for Indonesia is for changes  between -1% to  and 5% by  2100 but large 
seasonal  and  regional  variations  are  expected.  Changes  in  the  southern  islands  s  of  Java,  Nusa 
Tenggara  Barat  and  Timor  will  likely  result  in  reduced  annual  rainfall  of  between  -5%-15%;  The 
estimated change in precipitation the northern parts of Indonesia is less than the southern area and a 
small increase in wet and dry season precipitation of 0 to +10% is estimated for Gorontalo and North 
Sulawesi. 
  Taking  an  ensemble  average  of  different  models  and  focusing  on  relative  change  rather  than 
absolute values reduces some of uncertainty and the IPCC have analysed an ensemble of 42 climate 
models. The  estimated changes prepared by the  IPCC in precipitation in the seven  provinces of the 
30  High-resolution  climate  projections  for  the  islands  of  Lombok  and  Sumbawa,  Nusa  Tenggara  Barat  Province,  Indonesia: 
Challenges and implications Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), 2015 
104 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
UPLANDs project areas are shown in Table 6 below. These are the median (most likely) values based 
on the RCP 4.5 scenario (which is low-medium climate change scenario).  
Table 6: Projected Precipitation Changes  
Province 
Precipitation  change  %  2016-
2035 
Precipitation change % 2046-2065 
Precipitation 
2100 
change  2081-
Oct-Mar 
April-Sept 
Oct-Mar 
April-Sept 
Oct-Mar 
April-Sept 
Banten 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
West Java 
0 to -10%  
0 to -10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
Central Java 
0 to -10%  
0 to -10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
East Java 
0 to -10%  
0 to -10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to -10% 
NTB 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to -10% 
0 to -10% 
Gorontalo 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
N. Sulawesi 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
0 to +10% 
Source: IPCC 2013 Annex 1: Atlas of Global and Regional Climate Projections. CIMP5 model output based on 42 climate 
models. Based on the RCP4.5 scenario and median Values 
c)  Downscaled Projections 
  Downscaled  climate  projections  for  NTB  at  14km  resolution  prepared  by  CSIRO  illustrate  the 
potential and constraints of down scaled climate projections that could be potentially be prepared for 
each  of  the  project  Kabupatens.  For  NTB  the  simulations  of  rainfall  changes  by  2060  suggest  both 
increases and decreases of up to 5% in December–February, with more acute declines of 10% in some 
areas,  and  decreases  of  up to  10%  in March–May.  For the  other  seasons,  generally  little  change is 
simulated. The regional temperatures are projected to increase by about 1.00C by 2030 and 1.6–20C 
by 2060. The high-resolution model outputs enable detailed differentiation between locations across the 
islands. The results show that due to the effect of the mountain terrain there are steep climate gradients. 
Estimated rainfall changes by 2030 are shown in Error! Not a valid bookmark self-reference.. The 
detailed  simulations  downscale  from  200km  to  14km  resolutions  allow  sufficient  detail  on  decisions 
making at the district level and incorporates the local variations due to topography which can be seen 
in the figure above. The approach taken in the CSIRO study would be appropriate for UPLANDs project 
Figure 10: Downscaled Simulated Ensemble Percentage Rainfall Change NTB (%) by 2030 
105 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
3)  Climate Change Conclusions 
  Based on available information on historic climate changes and projections using climate change 
models it is estimated that the project to be ‘highly sensitive’ to climate change.  
  Relative  to  the  1986-2005  values;  by  2100  the  over  Indonesia  temperature  is  projected  to 
increase by 0.9-2.20C and rainfall by between -1% to +5%. For the UPLANDs project areas there will 
be  significant  local  differences  due  to  the  altitude  and  complex  topography.  In  the  seven  provinces 
where the UPLANDs projects climate change impacts include:  
  As  a  ‘high  climate  risk  project’  an  in-depth  climate  risk  analysis  will  be  carried  out  to  help  to 
examine the nature of climate and disaster hazards in the geographical location of the various projects; 
the analysis will examine the exposure and sensitivity of the project and associated communities. Based 
on  the  climate  change  risk  analysis  a  detailed  climate  change  adaptation  plan  and  program  will  be 
prepared for the project.  
31 Integrated Participatory Development Management of Irrigation Project IFAD/ADB March 2017 
106 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
(vi)   Recommended features of project design and implementation 
1) 
Introduction 
  The overall goal of the project will be to reduce poverty and support small holders in building and 
remunerative  sustainable  and  resilient  livelihoods  in  the  upland  areas.  The  project  will  support  the 
development  of  land  and  water  infrastructure,  modern  agriculture  cultivation  techniques  and  holistic 
integrated  agriculture  management  systems.  The  project  is  categorized  as  Category  B  and  an 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP)  has  been  prepared.  The  ESMP  sets  out  the 
measures to be taken during the implementation and operation of the UPLANDs project/ to eliminate or 
offset adverse environmental and social impacts, or to reduce them to acceptable levels; and (ii) the 
actions  needed  (monitoring/supervision/reporting  requirements), 
implementation  arrangements, 
institutional  responsibilities,  time  schedule  and  costs  to  implement  the  measures.  The  ESMP 
requirements are described below and the ESMP is presented in Attachment 2.  
2)  Environment and social mitigation measures 
Indigenous People: Continuous assessment of the participation of Maysakarat Adat needs to 
be fully assessed during project implementation. Should significant populations of indigenous people 
be found in the district projects then the IFAD’s guidelines for indigenous people will be followed. On 
the basis of current information provided the villages identified for project intervention in Lebak, Banten 
may include Indigenous (Masyarakat Adat) communities. Following IFAD’s requirement for working with 
indigenous communities as specified in IFAD's policy for Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, and an 
FPIC implementation plan will be developed and attached to the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). 
The project will start in other provinces except for the region with indigenous people where the activities 
will start only if and when FPIC is obtained. 
3)  Climate change adaptation and mitigation measures 
  Mainstreaming climate change and future uncertainty into agricultural development planning is a 
pressing challenge, as the process is laying the foundation future events there is very limited information 
how  to  successfully  operationalize  adaptation  pathways  or  how  to  evaluate  the  processes32.  The 
UPLANDs project has been designed provide a strong foundation to climate change adaptation through 
; (i) incorporating climate change adaptation as an integral part of the project, the development good 
agricultural practices will from the start include climate resilience; (ii) the climate change adaptation will 
be participative building on the existing farmer adaptation mechanisms together with the information 
from  the  science;  (iii)  building  the  skills  and  capacities  of  the  farmer,  government  institutions  to 
proactively meet the needs of climate change adaptation; (iv) to develop linkages and partnerships with 
private sector; and (v) provide a base to upscale the UPLANDs initiatives to wider areas. 
  The climate risk analysis will refer to any existing broader agricultural risk management analysis 
as well as project-level risk analysis to ensure the right prioritization and consistency with other sources 
of risk. Based on this analysis practical risk management and adaptation measures can be defined that 
can be integrated into the project design. 
  Developing  initiatives  to  provide  improved  productivity  and  financial  returns  in  parallel  with 
strengthening  the  institutional  base  and  laying  foundations  for  climate  change  adaptation  is  critical; 
experience that many programs for climate change adaptation has been less successful as farmers are 
reluctant to change or invest in measures that may not be immediately apparent or may not occur. The 
climate adaptation plan incorporates two activities. 
32 CSIRO Priming Adaptation Pathways through Adaptive Co Management undertook research in Nusatenggara Barat carried 
out a four year trial to introduce innovative approaches. The study concluded found the approaches applied were unsustainable 
due to difficulties to change  policies and  institutions  were inherently  unsustainable. The study  recommended  the  approach  to 
develop  informal  livelihood  innovation  niches  a  priming  process  to  establish  bridgeheads  and  to  establish  cadres  of  leaders, 
brokers, facilitators and policy entrepreneurs that can be used to implement and re-ignite adaptation measures when opportunities 
eventuate. The study found that participatory monitoring and evaluation may be useful tool to help plan and implement adaptation.  
107 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
  Development of a climate adaptation strategy; this would follow on from the climate change 
analysis and would evolve over the project period, the programme would include; 
(a) 
The establishment of good agricultural practices will from the start incorporate initiatives to 
strengthen existing and future climate resilience. The adaptation program will incorporate 
actions for the main commodity crops, together with secondary crops, with the objectives 
of ensuring improved returns within a framework of long-term sustainability. 
4)  Multi-benefit approaches 
Nutrition 
  The UPLANDs project will develop value chains with a strong focus on agricultural commodities 
with the highest prospect of increasing smallholder incomes. Smallholder and poorest household spend 
the largest proportion of their incomes on food and hence an increase in the income of households at 
108 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
the  lower  end  of  the  income  spectrum  immediately  translates  into  improved  food  intake.  To  further 
ensure that the benefits of increased incomes translate into improved health outcomes for women and 
men small-holder farmers and their households, appropriate nutrition interventions at each stage of the 
value-chain will be identified. The nutrition program will include: 
In the selection of the value chains there has been a strong focus on commodities with the highest 
prospect  of  increasing  smallholder  incomes.  Smallholder  and  poorest  households  spend  the  largest 
proportion of their incomes on food and hence an increase in the income of households at the lower 
end of the income spectrum immediately translates into improved food intake. To further ensure that 
the benefits of increased incomes translate into improved health outcomes for women and men small-
holder farmers and their households, appropriate interventions at each stage of the value-chain will be 
identified. A rapid  Nutrition assessment, at the  implementation stage, will be used to identify the key 
nutritional  challenges  and  opportunities  specific  to  the  project  districts  and  appropriate  nutrition 
interventions at relevant stages of the value-chain. A full-time Nutrition team (Specialist and Assistant 
Nutrition Specialist) will work closely with the Value-chain Specialist and the Agri-Extension Specialist 
to fully mainstream nutrition in the various project value chains. Some of the interventions for nutrition 
will include extension advice on nutritious crop varieties, safe handling of pesticides, and balancing use 
of land for commercial and household nutrition needs, maximizing nutritional potential of homestead 
gardens,  social  marketing  events  and  nutrition  awareness  sessions.  The  Gender  Action  Learning 
System (GALS) described below will support nutrition in two ways: (i) GALS will support the nutrition 
intervention as women’s empowerment is considered a key factor in improving nutrition (ii) GALS tools 
will be used to help women and men reflect on nutritional goals and challenges. Nutrition interventions 
will be also be supported through extension training and seed inputs for homestead gardens for women 
with  a  focus  on  young  women  and  women-headed  households  to  increase  the  convenience  and 
availability of supplementary vegetables and fruit to improve the quality of the dietary mix. The nutrition 
programme will include: 
109 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Gender Action Learning System (GALS) 
  GALS  (Gender Action  Learning  System)  is  a  community-led  empowerment  methodology  that 
uses  principles  of  inclusion  to  improve  income,  food  and  nutrition  security  of  vulnerable  people  in  a 
gender-equitable way. It positions poor women and men as drivers of their own development, identifying 
and dismantling obstacles in their environment, negotiating with service providers and private actors. It 
has  proven  to  be  effective  for  changing  gender  inequalities  that  have  existed  for  generations, 
strengthening negotiation power of marginalized stakeholders and promoting collaboration, equity and 
respect between value chain actors. The GALS will be developed as a complementary initiative to the 
main project VCD approaches.33. The added value of using GALS complementary to the main value 
chain development strategy include:  
5) 
Incentives for good practices 
  UPLANDs  will  be  piloting  a  number  of  innovations,  including  (i)  a  focus  on  public-private 
partnership along the value chain using the BLUD and KUBE systems. A key objective will be to ensure 
these organizations are professionally managed, financially sustainable and their development is based 
on flexible viable business models. Significant emphasis will be to provide training, institutional support 
provision  of  micro  finance  for  both  crop  production  and  on  and  off  farm  equipment.  In  parallel  with 
production  orientated  activities  the  new  BLUDs  and  KUBEs  will  be  required  to  support  the  social 
environmental and climate programs; these activities will be initially financed by the project however in 
the long term their sustainability will require the BLUDS and KUBE to be self-financing with sufficient 
margins and access to finance to ensure continuity of social, environmental and climate activities.  
In parallel the UPLANDs will directly support the establishment of individual enterprises or small 
group  enterprises  including  farmers,  women  youth  and  labourers;  these  could  be  in  production, 
processing  or  marketing. Although the UPLANDs will  provide  support and  subsidies  in  all cases the 
critical requirement will be viable and long term self-financing and commercial enterprises; a business 
model will be a key requirement. 
6)  Participatory processes 
Community Mobilization Process 
  A  strong  and  well-defined  social  mobilization  process  will  facilitate  the  delivery  of  programme 
activities in an inclusive and effective manner. It will ensure that the project is able to target and include 
its intended beneficiaries and that the target group fully understand the opportunities presented by the 
programme as well as the obligations and responsibilities for those who chose to join the programme. 
It will enable project activities to be fine-tuned to respond to the  ground realities and priorities of the 
households. The program will be managed through a central Community Mobilization & Empowerment 
Officer; in addition District Community Mobilization & Empowerment Officers will also be engaged as 
well as Sub-district Supervisors for Community Mobilization and Empowerment as necessary. 
Table 7: Number of Villages in the UPLANDs District 
No 
District 
Sub-District 
Villages 
Farmer 
Farmer Group 
Members  
Area (ha) 
33 Oxfam Novib, GIZ, BMZ, WEMAN, PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR TRANSFORMING GENDER AND UNEQUAL POWER 
RELATIONS IN VALUE CHAINS. 
https://www.oxfamnovib.nl/Redactie/Downloads/English/publications/150115_Practical%20guide%20GALS%20summary%20P
hase%201-2%20lr.pdf 
110 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Groups* 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Lebak 
Tasikmalaya 
Subang 
Cirebon 
Garut 
Banjarnegara 
Purbalingga 
Magelang 
Malang 
Sumenep 
Lombok Timur 
Sumbawa 
Minahasa 
Selatan 
Gorontalo 
Total  
1  
1 
7 
13 
1 
5 
1 
3 
1 
1 
7 
13 
1 
1 
55 
4 
4 
25 
21 
5 
31 
9 
31 
1 
3 
21 
26 
10 
1 
188 
19 
8 
56 
32 
10 
42 
14 
97 
3 
75 
100 
59 
118 
9 
623 
569 
 1,077  
 2,638  
 568  
 872  
 1,209  
 237  
 6,336  
 860  
 1,621  
 2,964  
 2,700  
450.00 
 500.00  
 1,444.00  
 485.00  
 200.00  
 563.00  
 -  
 1,800.20  
 150.00  
 150.00  
 1,677.27  
 3,000.00  
 2,179  
 2,000.00  
 181  
 23,442  
 227.50  
 12,196.97  
Village Facilitators (VF) will be recruited for each target village preferably from the Village/Sub-District according to 
specified criteria (minimum of 50% women). 
Community Mobilization and Empowerment Guidelines and Farmer’s Group Assessment Tool will be prepared at the 
National level in coordination with the Districts 
The District Community Mobilization Officers will prepare Community Mobilization Plans based on the guidelines and 
submit them for review to the central office for approval and feedback.  
(vii)  Analysis of alternatives 
  The project design will focus on the promotion of 10 agricultural commodities in 14 districts. For 
most of the commodities farmers in parallel grow seasonal secondary crops; the project investments 
including irrigation, farm roads and storage will be of benefit to both the focus commodity crop and the 
secondary crops. 
  Over time there maybe requirements to consider crop diversification to reduce risk and also adapt 
to climate and market changes. Commodity prices are now internationally led and although the project 
is  designed  to  improve  efficiency  and  market  competitiveness  farmers  will  be  vulnerable  to  sudden 
changes in demand. Similarly, increased temperatures and more variable rainfall may affect viabilities 
of growing certain crops. The increase in temperature may impact on the lowland areas and open new 
opportunities in the upland areas. 
(viii)  Institutional analysis 
  The  institutional  framework  is  described  in  the  main  report.  The  implementation  structure  will 
have a strong management structure at the National and District level. For the environmental, climate 
activities  require  a  clear  management  structure  and  a  phased  transfer  of  responsibilities  as  follows; 
(i) the National PMU supported by the consultants will undertake to clearly define and prepare detailed 
guidelines for each activity (this would be in year 1); (ii) the National PMU would train and strengthen 
the District PMU (DPMUs) to implement the activities; (iii) district PMUs would work with the different 
stakeholder  groups  and farmer institutions to implement the various environment, climate and social 
activities,  the  PMU  would  support  and  guide  as  required;  and  (iv)  DPMU  would  be  responsible  for 
monitoring and evaluation based on criteria prepared by the PMU. 
  Environment:  The  environmental  management  procedures  are  based  on  existing  government 
environmental regulations and environmental guidelines34. There is however a lack of clear guidelines 
on  the  environmental  requirements  financed  by  the  District  governments.  District  agricultural  and 
environment agencies however do not have dedicated safeguard unit or staff to oversee environmental 
management. 
34  ADB-financed  Participatory Irrigation Sector  Program (PISP)  developed a rapid  environmental screening  checklist that  was 
used by local governments in identifying environmental impacts and in determining the environmental assessment document to 
be submitted to the environmental agencies.  
111 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
1)  Capacity building 
  The UPLANDs project would have a strong focus on building of capacity for the implementation 
at  the  central,  district  and  community  levels.  Capacity  building/training  would  be  provided  to  all  key 
institutional participants and the principal stakeholders in order that UPLANDs is properly understood 
and  the  different  parties  are  able  to  implement  their  assigned  responsibilities.  Key  information  and 
outreach  materials  would  be  produced  according  to  the  specific  audience  being  addressed  (e.g., 
government, private sector, community, smallholders). A training needs assessment would be carried 
out in order to inform the production of the training and information materials for the various government 
agencies responsible for peatland landscape. The focus of training for the social, environmental and 
climate activities would be those described in the Environment, Social Management Plan described in 
Attachment 2. 
2)  Additional funding 
  All the funding for social, environmental and climate activities are included in the overall project 
cost tables in the main report. 
(ix)  Monitoring and Evaluation 
  Monitoring and evaluation for the Social Environmental and Social activities would be integrated 
with  the  overall  project  M&E  described  in  the  main  report.  The  broad  details  of  the  monitoring  and 
evaluation are described below 
(x)  Further information required to complete screening, if any 
  None 
(xi)  Budgetary resources and schedule 
  There is allocation for the environmental, social and climate change programs in the cost tables 
presented in the main project design report. 
(xii)  Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public etc. 
Information to be compiled from the various missions 
112 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Attachment 1: Check List and Preliminary Screening for Environmental and Social Categories and 
Climate Change 
IFAD  classifies  all  projects  into  one  of  three  environmental  and  social  categories  (A,  B  or  C)  and  one  of  three 
climate risk classifications (high, moderate and low). Where IFAD is jointly financing a project with other agencies, 
IFAD  will  cooperate  with  the  partner  agency  and  agree  on  a  common  approach  for  the  assessment  and  the 
categorization of the project. 
Determination  of  the  category  and  classification  will  also  depend  on  the  national  requirements  and  the  existing 
national capacity to promote and implement environmental and social mitigation measures. The determination is 
informed by existing assessments of national frameworks and capacities. 
A positive response to any question between 1 and 23 will categorize the project as A. Similarly, a positive response 
to question 24 to 40 will categorize the project as B. In case all answers are negative, the project will be categorized 
as C. 
This list of questions can be used at different stages of the project design and should be used in conjunction with 
the respective guidance statements. 
The checklists for environmental and social and climate risks will: 
1. 
initially  be  filled  in  during  concept  development  to  help  guide  in  the  identification  of  opportunities  and 
possible risks and activities that will need to be considered in the project design; 
2.  be attached to the SECAP review note; and 
3.  be reviewed during project design phases and updated as required. 
Project title: 
IFAD project no.: 
Country: 
Checklist prepared by (name, 
title and institution) 
Version of checklist:  
Version 1 
Indonesia 
Date of this version: 
Adrian Young IFAD Consultant 
15/09/2017 
In  completing  the  checklist  both  short-  and  long-term  impacts  should  be  considered.  This  list  of 
questions can be used at different stages of the project cycle and should be used in conjunction with 
the respective guidance statements. Capitalize on information based on reports and field visits during 
design. The details of the  elaboration on issues that  arise as a result of screening should be clearly 
articulated in the SECAP review note. 
113 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/No  Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily remedied adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1. Would the project develop any wetlands? (Guidance statement GS1) 
2. Would the project cause significant adverse impacts to habitats and/or 
ecosystems and their services (e.g. conversion of more than 50 hectares of 
natural forest, loss of habitat, erosion/other form of land degradation, 
fragmentation, and hydrological changes)? (GS 1, 2 and 5) 
No 
No 
All the projects are located in dry land and upland areas. 
Project would work only in existing or abandoned areas of agricultural land. 
3. Does the proposed project target area include ecologically sensitive areas,35 
areas of global/national significance for biodiversity conservation and/or 
biodiversity-rich areas and habitats depended on by endangered species? (GS1) 
No 
All the investments and activities will be located in existing agriculture land. 
4. Is the project location subjected to major destruction as a result geophysical 
hazards (tsunamis, landslides, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions)? 
(Yes) 
Indonesia and some of the locations are vulnerable to earthquakes and 
volcanic eruptions. Risks of impact to project investments in agriculture and 
small scale infrastructure are however considered minimal. 
Natural resources 
5. Would the project lead to unsustainable natural resource management 
practices (fisheries, forestry, livestock) and/or result in exceeding carrying 
capacity. For example, is their development happening in areas where little up-
to-date information exists on sustainable yield/carrying capacity? (GS 4, 5 and 6) 
No 
6. Would the project develop large-scale36 aquaculture or mariculture projects, 
or where their development involves significant alteration of ecologically 
sensitive areas? 
No 
7. Would the project result in significant use of agrochemicals which may lead to 
life-threatening illness and long-term public health and safety concerns? (GS 14) 
No 
Project design is to develop improved and sustainable agricultural 
The project will promote the safe and efficient use of agrochemicals including 
review of requirements, safety, health. In parallel the project will promote the 
use of organic pesticides. 
35 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats 
depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change 
and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other 
cultural significance) and areas with high social vulnerability. 
36 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on 
minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as an 
aquaculture unit size to trigger ESIA. 
114 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/No  Comments/explanation 
8. Does the project rely on water-based (ground and/or surface) development 
where there is reason to believe that significant depletion and/or reduced flow 
has occurred from the effects of climate change or from overutilization? (GS7) 
No 
9. Does the project pose a risk of introducing potentially invasive species or 
GMOs which might alter genetic traits of indigenous species or have an adverse 
effect on local biodiversity? (GS1) 
No 
10. Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. industrial, mining, sewage 
effluent)? (GS7) 
No 
Infrastructure development 
Most of the irrigation investment will be rehabilitation of existing surface water 
irrigation. 
11. Does the project include the construction/ rehabilitation/upgrade of 
dam(s)/reservoir(s) meeting at least one of the following criteria? (GS8) 
No 
Irrigation will focus on rehabilitation and upgrading of small-scale irrigation. 
Dams would be small <15m with minimal storage. 
more than 15 metre high wall or  
more than 500 metre long crest or  
more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity or  
incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
12. Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes 
rehabilitation/development (above 100 hectares per scheme)?37 (GS7) 
13. Does the project include construction/rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that 
entail a total area being cleared above 10 km long, or any farmer with more than 
10 per cent of his or her private land taken? (GS10) 
No 
No 
14. Does the project include drainage or correction of natural water bodies (e.g. 
river training)? (GS7) 
No 
15. Does the project involve significant extraction/diversion/containment of 
surface water, leaving the river flow below 20 per cent environmental flow plus 
downstream user requirements? (GS7) 
No 
All the schemes will be less than 100ha 
Roads would be spread over wide areas -lengths of any specific stretch of 
road would be less than 10km  
Project would focus on rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes and would 
not affect the existing water management arrangements. 
Any l new schemes will be fully planned including defining requirements of 
environmental flow. 
37 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations 
determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation 
development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
115 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/No  Comments/explanation 
Social 
16. Would the project result in economic displacement38 or physical 
resettlement of more than 20 people, or impacting more than 10 per cent of an 
individual household’s assets? (GS13) 
No 
17. Would the project result in conversion and/or loss of physical cultural 
resources? (GS9) 
18. Would the project generate significant social adverse impacts to local 
communities (including disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and indigenous 
people) or other project-affected parties? (GS13) 
Other 
19. Does the project include manufacture and transportation of hazardous and 
toxic materials which may affect the environment? (GS2) 
20. Does the project include the construction of a large or medium-scale 
industrial plant? 
 21. Does the project include the development of large-scale production 
forestry? (GS5) 
Rural finance 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
The project activities will have a positive social effect as the project aims to 
include vulnerable groups such as women, women-headed households in 
farmers’ groups through a well-designed social mobilization strategy. 
Preliminary information provided by the government indicates that the project 
villages do not belong to indigenous communities. 
Involvement of youth is a key project objective. 
Project investment would be restricted to small scale agro-processing at 
village level.  
22. Does the project support any of the above (Q1 to Q22) through the provision 
of a line of credit to financial service providers? (GS12) 
No 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
23. Does the project involve agricultural intensification and/or expansion of 
cropping area in non-sensitive areas that may have adverse impacts on habitats, 
ecosystems and/or livelihoods? (GS1, 2 and 12) 
No 
38 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or means of livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
116 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/No  Comments/explanation 
Natural resource management 
24. Do the project activities include rangeland and livestock development? (GS6) No 
25. Does the project involve fisheries where there is information on stocks, 
fishing effort and sustainable yield? Is there any risk of overfishing, habitat 
damage and knowledge of fishing zones and seasons? (GS4) 
26. Would the project activities include aquaculture and/or agriculture in newly 
introduced or intensively practiced areas? Do project activities include 
conversion of wetlands and clearing of coastal vegetation, change in hydrology 
or introduction of exotic species? (GS4) 
27. Do the project activities include natural resources-based value chain 
development? (GS 1, 6 and 12) 
No 
No 
No 
28. Do the project activities include watershed management or rehabilitation?  No 
29. Does the project include large-scale soil and water conservation measures? 
(GS 1 and 5)  
No 
Minor initiatives for soil and water conservation 
Infrastructure 
30. Does the project include small-scale irrigation and drainage, and small and 
medium (capacity < 3 million m3) dam subprojects? (GS 7 and 8) 
No 
Dams would be existing or new with no or minimal storage (capacity would 
be less than 3 million m3 
31. Does the project include small and microenterprise development 
subprojects? (GS 12 and 13) 
Yes 
32. Does the project include the development of agro processing facilities? (GS 
2, 6 and 12) 
Yes 
Small scale agriculture processing 
33. Would the construction or operation of the project cause an increase in 
traffic on rural roads? (GS10) 
Yes 
Some increase in traffic but this would be farm access traffic 
Social 
34. Would any of the project activities have minor adverse impacts on physical 
cultural resources? (GS9) 
35 Would the project result in physical resettlement of less than 20 people, or 
impacting less than 10 per cent of an individual household’s assets (GS13)? 
No 
No 
117 
Some land may be required for small farm roads but this would be small and 
less than 10% of an individual households land holding. Land for storage and 
other buildings there is some flexibility and would in most cases use village or 
government land. In all cases land would be donated. The project would 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/No  Comments/explanation 
36. Would the project result in short-term public health and safety concerns? 
(GS14) 
No 
ensure that any land donation is properly documented including 
measurement and agreement by landholder and village and district. 
government. 
The project is promoting a gender and nutrition sensitive approach to value-
chain development. In case there is any potential health concern in the 
production or post-harvest processing of commodities, this will be 
systematically identified in the proposed Nutrition value-chain studies and 
measures implemented to address it through the nutrition intervention. 
37. Would the project require a migrant workforce or seasonal workers (for 
construction, planting and/or harvesting)? (GS13) 
No 
The project is working with small-holder farmers with family members working 
on the farms and or other villagers hired as wage labourers 
Rural finance 
38.Does the project support any of the above (Q24 to Q37) through the provision 
of a line of credit to financial service providers?(GS12) 
118 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Guidance for categorization: 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment or an Environmental and Social Management Framework (full or 
specific) are required depending on availability of information. 
Also some specific questions would require the below specific actions: 
 
Yes to Q16 – A Resettlement Action Plan or a Resettlement Action Framework is required depending on 
availability of information. 
Yes to Q17 – A Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan is required that includes provisions for 
managing chance finds at implementation. 
Yes to Q18 – Free, prior and informed consent should be obtained/Free, Prior and Informed Consent 
Implementation Plan is required depending on whether the affected communities are identifiable. In 
instances where indigenous peoples are affected an Indigenous Peoples Plan is required. A Social Impact 
Assessment is required. 
Yes to Q8 and/or Q15 – A water resources management plan for the project is required. 
Yes to Q7, Q9 and/or Q19 – A Pest Management Plan is required. 
 
 
 
 
An environmental and social analysis to develop an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is 
required. 
No further analysis is required. 
"Yes" response to any 
questions between 1 and 22 
''No'' responses to all Q1-Q22 
and "Yes" response to any 
questions between 23 and 38 
"No" response to all questions 
between 1 and 38 
Environmental and 
social category is A 
Environmental and 
social category is B 
Environmental and 
social category is C 
In case projects fall under both Category A and B, the highest category will be taken as reference. The determination of the project category and classification 
will  depend  on  the  magnitude  of  impacts  and  would  depend  on  the  scale  of  such  activities;  a  cautious  approach  to  the  concern  of  cumulative  impacts  is 
considered essential. In such cases, the necessary environmental and social analysis and associated budget should be incorporated into project design. Such 
projects may be considered for Category B. 
Determining the environmental and social Category A, including the extent of assessments and studies to be conducted, will also take into account available 
information, i.e. recent studies and assessments, including other initiatives in the country, to the extent these are relevant to the proposed project. 
Declassification (from A to B or from B to C) may also be possible in case negative externalities are being addressed by other projects or activities implemented 
by third parties. 
119 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
1. Is the project area subject to extreme climatic events such 
as flooding, drought, tropical storms or heat waves? 
Yes 
X 
2. Do climate scenarios for the project area foresee changes 
in temperature, rainfall or extreme weather that will adversely 
affect the project impact, sustainability or cost over its 
lifetime? 
3. Would the project make investments in low-lying coastal 
areas/zones exposed to tropical storms? 
4. Would the project make investments in glacial areas and 
mountains zones? 
5. Would the project promote agricultural activity in marginal 
and/or highly degraded areas that have increased sensitivity 
to climatic events (such as on hillsides, deforested slopes or 
floodplains)? 
6. Is the project located in areas where rural development 
projects have experienced significant weather-related losses 
and damages in the past? 
7. Would the project develop/install infrastructure in areas 
with a track record of extreme weather events? 
8. Is the project target group entirely dependent on natural 
resources (such as seasonal crops, rainfed agricultural plots, 
migratory fish stocks) that have been affected by in the last 
decade by climate trends or specific climatic events? 
9. Would climate variability likely affect agricultural 
productivity (crops/livestock/fisheries), access to markets 
and/or the associated incidence of pests and diseases for the 
project target groups? 
X 
X 
No 
Additional explanation of “yes” response* 
Climate change and El Niño events will further challenge water and 
agriculture, here remains uncertainties in the projections however it is 
concluded that extreme climatic events will occur and more detailed climate 
change analysis adaptation initiatives must be incorporated into the project 
design 
Climate models envisage increase in temperature, variabilities in precipitation. 
Project design will incorporate climate resilience initiatives. 
The upland project includes land at higher levels (as opposed to the plains). 
Some projects would be in foothills of mountains however no projects would 
be in the mountain zones. 
Farmers already face some challenges of climate change and ENSO events. 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
120 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Yes 
10. Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes likely 
adversely impact upon key stages of identified value chains 
in the project (from production to markets)? 
11. Is the project investing in climate-sensitive livelihoods 
that are diversified? 
12. Is the project investing in infrastructure that is exposed to 
infrequent extreme weather events? 
13. Is the project investing in institutional development and 
capacity-building for rural institutions (such as farmer 
groups, cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous areas? 
14. Does the project have the potential to become more 
resilient through the adoption of green technologies at a 
reasonable cost? 
15 Does the project intervention have opportunities to 
strengthen indigenous climate risk management capabilities? 
16. Does the project have opportunities to integrate climate 
resilience aspects through policy dialogue to improve 
agricultural sector strategies and policies? 
17. Does the project have potential to integrate climate 
resilience measures without extensive additional costs (e.g. 
improved building codes, capacity-building, or including 
climate risk issues in policy processes)? 
18. Based on the information available would the project 
benefit from a more thorough climate risk and vulnerability 
analysis to identify the most vulnerable rural population, 
improve targeting and identify additional complementary 
investment actions to manage climate risks? 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Additional explanation of “yes” response* 
No 
X 
X 
X 
This is a key part of the project. 
Farmers have developed basic capacities to adjust to climatic uncertainties. 
Yes proposed that climate adaptation is mainstreamed with other 
interventions. 
Yes adaptation initiatives would be carefully targeted and can be incorporated 
into the mainstream initiatives for production, processing and marketing. 
More detailed climate change analysis and development of a comprehensive 
climate adaptation plan will be prepared as part of implementation program. 
*The additional explanation, where possible, will provide the justification for classification. Consideration should be given particularly to provide additional explanations for questions 13 to 17. 
121 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Guidance for classification:  
Yes response to any of the questions 1 to 7  The climate risk classification is high 
Yes response to any of the questions 8 to 17 
Yes response to question 18 
The climate risk classification is moderate  A basic analysis is required 
GHG assessment  
A detailed analysis is required 
For example, EX ACT tool 
No further analysis is required, but voluntary 
measures can be incorporated 
No response to almost all questions 
The climate risk classification is low 
122 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Attachment 2: Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Key Requirements 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsibility 
Time Frame 
Budget 
Source 
Environment 
Project environmental 
requirements and responsibilities 
need to be clearly defined. 
Detailed plans and designs for sub 
projects developed.. 
Plans to be endorsed by 
communities and approved by 
project. 
Preparation of environmental guidelines 
for district projects.  
Design consultant to prepare detailed 
plans and designs for projects.  
Plans to include details of infrastructure, 
production, processing and financing 
details including O&M responsibilities. 
Plans to include detailed environmental 
and water resources assessments.. 
UPL/UKL permits required for sub 
projects 
Plans including O&M responsibilities to 
be endorsed by stakeholders 
Environmental guidelines including 
environmental screening, approvals, 
mitiagation measures and 
responsibilities defined. 
Detailed Plans and Designs for Sub 
Projects. 
Community and stakeholder 
endorsement of plans 
Approval of plans by DPIU, PIU and 
District Government. UPL/UKL 
permits for all projects in place. 
. 
PIU in 
coordination with 
MoE 
DPIU, design and 
specialist 
consultants. 
PIU to supervise 
DPIU/ BLH 
2019 
PIU 
2019-2020 
PIU 
Plans to be approved by district 
government including UPL/UKL permits. 
Guidelines prepared for reducing 
environmental impacts of agriculture 
production and processing. 
Training and awareness of farmer 
groups 
Investment in environemtal mitigation 
measures including integrated pest 
management, chemical fertiliser and 
plastic substitution etc. 
. 
Implementation responsibilities to be 
defined, allocated and costed. 
Bid Documents and TOR for the various 
components need to incorporate the 
ESMP requirements 
Environmental mitigation actions 
including pesticides, mechanical 
equipment, chemical fertilisers and 
plastics etc. 
Implementation of the 
Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) 
Climate Change 
Guidelines prepared  
PIU 
2019 
PIU 
Increased awareness and capacity of 
farmers groups 
DPIU/ consultants 
2019 
DPIU 
Investment in environmental 
mitigation 
Monitoring and evaluation of 
environemtal mitigation. 
DPIU 
2020 
Bid documents include requirement 
for environment, climate 
 and social requirements. 
DPIU and 
Contractors and  
Implemenation 
agencies 
2019 
DPIU 
124 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
Key Requirements 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsibility 
Time Frame 
Climate change impacts and 
adaptation responses need to be 
understood. 
Preparation of detailed climate analysis 
and adaptation guidelines for projects. 
Detailed Climate Change Analysis 
and Adaptation Guidelines 
Training for farmer institutions and 
government in climate change 
adaptation. 
Responsibilities and financing for climate 
change adaptation is agreed. 
Climate change adaptation initiatives 
are being implemented. 
Monitoring and evaluation of climate 
parameters and progress of 
adaptation initiatives 
PIU 
 and specialized 
climate change 
consultants. 
DPIU and 
consultants 
Budget 
Source 
PIU 
2019 
2020-2024 
DPIU 
Design of infrastructure need to 
incorporate climate change 
impacts. 
Preparation of guidance notes for project 
design standards including reference to 
existing standards of Ministries of Public 
Works and Agriculture . 
Project design standards agreed and 
incorporate climate change 
requirements. 
PIU 
2019 
PIU 
Risks from climate change are 
reduced. 
Social 
A strong and well-defined social 
mobilization process to facilitate 
the delivery of programme 
activities in an inclusive and 
effective manner 
Stakeholders need to participate in 
the design and implementation of 
the projects 
Screening and meeting the needs 
of any indigenous people 
(Masyarakat Adat) need to defined 
and implemented 
Participative and sustainable climate 
change adaptation program is 
implemented.. 
Monitoring of climate adaptation 
programs and climate damage. 
DPIU 
2020-2024 
DPIU 
Detailed design of the social 
mobilisattion program 
Implementation of the social mobilisation 
program 
Detailed information and engagement 
with stakeholders including farmers, 
disadvantaged groups, women and 
youth 
Final plan and design to be endorsed by 
representative stakeholders. 
Prepare guidance on screening, impact 
assessment of indigenous people. 
Preparing screening for indigenous 
peope of all projects at district level. 
For any identified indigenous 
communites Free Prior and Informed 
Consent (FPIC) to be prepared. 
Approved social mobilisation plan 
Districts establish the framework for 
social mobilisation and activities 
implemented 
Monitoring and evaluation of social 
mobilsation 
Guidelines for stakeholder 
engagement in design of sub 
projects. 
Documentation of stakeholder 
engagement and endorsement. 
Guidelines Prepared 
PIU DPIU and 
consultants 
2019 
PIU 
DPIU 
2020-2024 
DPIU 
DPIU 
2020-2024 
PIU, DPIU and 
consultants 
Stakeholders 
2019 
PIU 
2020-2024 
DPIU 
PIU and Dinas 
Social in 
coordination with 
AMAN. 
2019 
PIU 
FPIC for any district project with 
indigenous people. 
DPIU 
2019 
PIU 
125 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: Social and Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Key Requirements 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsibility 
Time Frame 
Budget 
Source 
Requirements and methodology to 
acquire land for infrastructure 
needs to be agreed and properly 
managed. 
Guidelines for minor land acquisition to 
be prepared and approved39. 
Approved guidelines 
PIU and 
consultants. 
2019 
Land acquistion programemd and 
implemented. 
Monitoring and evaluation of land 
acquistion 
DPIU and 
affected farmers 
2020-2021 
Gender equitable approaches are 
developed for improving income, 
food and nutrition. 
Gender equitablity is achieved through a  
Community led empowerment 
methodology known as GALS (Gender 
Action Learning System). 
Gender program including detailed 
design of GALs prepared. 
. 
PIU and 
consultants 
2020-204 
2019 
PIU 
DPIU 
2020-2024 
DPIU 
Training and implementation of the 
GALS 
Monitoring and evaluation of the 
GALs program. 
Nutrition packages and 
programmes are established to 
ensure that the benefits of 
increased incomes translate into 
improved health outcomes. 
A Nutrition Study to be implemented in 
each of the 14 project districts. 
Nutrition Packages for each of the 14 
districts to be implemented. 
. 
Disadvantaged groups including 
rural youth are effectively 
incorporated into the district 
activities. 
Opportunities are identified for the 
disadvantaged and rural youth at each 
stage of the value-chain. 
Viable youth orientated interventions are 
programmed and implemented. 
Institutional 
District level environmental 
agencies lack knowledge and 
capactities to assess,supervise 
and monitor social and 
environmental requirements. 
Guidelines of responsibilities at District 
level for ensuring social and 
environmental requirements. 
Training and strengthening of capacities 
in district offices of environmental and 
social initiatives. 
Nutrition study report 
. 
PIU and 
consultants 
DPIU 
2019 
PIU 
2020-2024 
DPIU 
Monitoring and evaluation of nutrition 
program 
Initiatives to support disadvantaged 
and youth identified and 
programmed. 
Monitoring and evaluation of 
disadvantaged and youth programs. 
DPIU 
PIU 
DPIU 
DPIU 
Social and Environmental Guidelines 
Training and institutional 
strengthening of BLH and other 
related agencies 
PIU/DPIU and 
consultants. 
BLH 
2020-2024 
DPIU 
2019 
2019 
PIU 
PIU 
2020-2024 
DPIU 
2019 
DPIU 
39 Presidential Regulation 40/2014 sets out that land acquisition of less than 5 ha can be undertaken through direct negotiation between landowners and the district agency needing the land 
126 
Project requires a independent 
grievance redress mechanism. 
Need an active institutional 
framework for the participation of 
disadvantaged groups, women and 
youth.. 
Monitoring 
Effective public disclosure of 
environmental documentation 
Overall monitoring and evaluation 
needs to be coordinated and 
effective to meet project evaluation 
requirements. 
Routine monitoring of social and 
environmental activities especially 
progress of ESMP implementation 
land acquision, active participation 
of disadvantaged groups. 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 5: 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
Key Requirements 
Actions 
Indicator 
Responsibility 
Time Frame 
Requirements and approach to be 
established 
Grievance redress mechanism (GRM) 
through independent organization in 
place and effective 
Institutional framework defined and 
approved 
Approved GRM  
GRM reports 
2020-2024 
DPIU  
Independent 
Agency to be 
defined 
Budget 
Source 
To be 
defined 
Monitoring and evaluation of 
institutional framework for 
disadvantaged, women and youth 
PIU and 
consultants 
DPIU 
2020-2024 
PIU 
Requirements to be defined according to 
MOEF) and IFAD requirements. 
Monitoring and evaluation requirements 
would be defined; requirements to 
include expenditure, physical progress, 
production,  
Quarterly and annual reports 
Requirements to be defined 
Public disclosure effectively 
documented. 
Approved plan for monitoring and 
evaluation. 
Monitoring and evaluation reports. 
Routine ESMP Reports 
DPIU 
2019-2024 
DPIU 
PIU and 
consultants 
DPIU 
DPIU 
PIU 
2019 
DPIU 
2020-2014 
2010 to 
2024 
DPIU and 
PIU 
Notes: AMAN-Alliance of Indigenous Communities; BLH-District Environment Offices; ESMP-Environmental and Social Management Plan, PIU-Project Implementation Unit 
, DPIU-District Project Implementation Unit, MOEF-Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
127 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 6: 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Table 1: Summary 2020 Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Total Budget for FY1 (2020)
Uplands Agricultural Productivity and Markets Project
Com ponents by Financiers
(US$ '000)
(IDR'000,000)
1 Productivity Enhancem ent & Resilience Building
11
12
Land and Infrastructure Development
Production and Farm Management
2 Agribusiness Developm ent & Livelihood Facilitation
Farmer Institutional Development
21
22 Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment
23
24
Strengthening Marketing Linkages & Alliances
Access to Financial Services
3 Strengthening Institutional Delivery System s
31 Capacity Building for Government Staff
32
Adaptive Research
4 Project Managem ent
Total Budget
Categories by Financiers
I. Investm ent Costs
A. Works
B. Equipment & Materials
C. Vehicles
D. Goods, Services & Inputs
E. Workshops
F. Training
G. Consultancies & Studies
H. Credit & Guarantee Funds
I. Grants & Subsidies
J. Unallocated
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operating Costs
B. Salaries & Allow ances
Total Recurrent Costs
International Fund
for Agricultural
Developm ent
IDR
Islam ic Developm ent
Bank
IDR
USD
The Governm ent
IDR
USD
Beneficiaries
IDR
Private Sector
IDR
USD
USD
USD
Total
IDR
USD
-
-
-
-
-
8.0
-
0.5
-
1 742.0
-
119.1
-
-
-
-
-
215.8
-
14.8
-
1 965.8
3 976.4
-
-
-
271.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11 547.1
789.7
2 778.3
1 615.6
-
-
-
-
-
190.0
110.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 319.1
432.2
-
403.9
-
-
-
27.6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 754.7
2 019.5
-
-
-
-
17 866.2
1 221.9
-
134.4
462.0
138.1
-
-
-
-
15 523.5
1 061.7
4 401.9
301.0
8 061.1
551.3
403.9
27.6
215.8
14.8
28 606.1
1 956.4
-
-
-
3 976.39
-
1 666.73
3 792.37
-
-
-
-
-
6 088.01
-
-
-
-
271.95
-
113.99
259.36
-
-
-
-
-
416.36
-
-
1 615.58
-
2 786.27
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
110.49
-
190.55
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 742.03
-
1 133.37
400.01
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 785.73
-
-
-
119.14
-
77.51
27.36
-
-
-
-
-
-
327.30
-
403.90
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27.62
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
215.76
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
14.76
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 019.5
-
8 720.4
-
2 800.1
4 192.4
-
-
-
-
-
6 088.0
4 785.7
-
138.1
-
596.4
-
191.5
286.7
-
-
-
-
-
416.4
327.3
15 523.50
1 061.66
4 401.85
301.05
8 061.14
551.31
403.90
27.62
215.76
14.76
28 606.15
1 956.39
128 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 7: 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Following the approval of the project by the financiers, advance procurement will be undertaken 
1. 
in order to expedite the readiness for physical implementation by the time of effectiveness conditions of 
the  Financing  Agreements  are  fulfilled.  Given  the  straightforward  technical  nature  of  the  activities 
involved, and the understanding that there is sufficient local expertise and technology (including initial 
assessment from IFAD), it is proposed that all procurement be undertaken on national basis. 
2. 
In  this  line,  a  summary  of  the  procurement  plan  is  shown  in  the  table  below.  The  use  of  the 
national e-procurement system will be used, as applicable and as allowed under the donor guidelines. 
Application of national procurement procedure will follow the recent Presidential Regulation (PerPres) 
No.  16/2018  regarding  Procurement  of  Government’s  Goods/Services.  Procurement  of  Goods, 
Construction Works and Services under this regulation can be implemented through (i) self-managed 
(Swakelola) and/or (ii) providers. When Swakelola procedure is implemented, it can apply one from 4 
(four) types of Swakelola as shown in the following table. 
Table 1: Four Type of Swakelola in Procurement of Goods/Construction/Services 
No 
Type 
1 
2 
Type-1 
Type-2 
3 
Type-3 
4 
Type-4 
Summary description 
planned, implemented, and supervised by the Ministry / Regional Institution / 
Administrators responsible for the budget 
  planned and supervised by the Ministry / Regional Institution / Administrators in 
 
charge of the budget responsible authority and  
implemented by other Ministries / Institutions / Regional Administrators implementing 
the Self-Management 
  planned and supervised by the Ministry / Institution / Regional Apparatus responsible 
for the budget and  
  carried out by the Community/Social Organizations 
  planned by the Ministry / Institution / Regional Administrators responsible for the 
 
budget and / or based on community group proposals, and  
is carried out and supervised by the Community Group implementing self-
management. 
3.  When procurement will be implemented through Providers, the regulation divides it into 2 (two) 
groups of procurement procedures, i.e. (i) procurement of goods/construction works/other services, and 
(ii)  procurement  of  consulting  services.  Procurement  methods  of  goods/construction  works/other 
services consist of: (i) E-purchasing; (ii) Direct Procurement; (iii) Direct appointment; (iv) Fast Tender; 
and  (v)  Tender.  Whereas  the  procurement  method  of  consulting  services  consists  of:  (i)  Selection; 
(ii) Direct Procurement; and (iii) Direct appointment. Summary description of the procurement methods 
is shown in the tables below. The three evaluation methods of goods/construction work other service 
are: Value System (technical and cost); Cost Assessment During Economic Life; or Lowest price. In the 
meanwhile,  the  evaluation  method  for  Consultancy  Service  Provider  is:  Quality  and  Cost;  Quality; 
Budget ceiling; or Lowest Cost. 
129 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 7: 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Table 2: Procurement Method for Goods/Construction Works/Other Services Implemented 
through Provider 
No 
Method 
Requirements 
1 
2 
3 
E-
purchasing; 
Goods/Construction Work/Other Service that have been listed in the electronic catalogue 
Direct 
Procurement  
Goods/Construction Work/Other Service which have a maximum value of IDR 
200,000,000.00 (two hundred million rupiahs)  
Direct 
Appointment  
Goods/Construction Work/Other Service under certain circumstances. i.e.: 
a.  preparation of sudden activities to follow up on international commitments attended by 
the President / Vice President; 
confidential goods / services for the country interest 
b. 
c.  Building construction work which is a unit of construction system and a unit of 
responsibility for the risk of building failure which as a whole cannot be planned / 
calculated before 
d.  only 1 (one) business actor is capable 
e.  procurement and distribution of superior seeds which include rice, corn and soybean 
seeds, and fertilizers which include Urea, NPK, and ZA to farmers in order to ensure the 
availability of seeds and fertilizers appropriately and quickly for the implementation of 
increased food security 
infrastructure works, facilities and public utilities in the housing environment for Low-
Income Communities carried out by the developer concerned 
f. 
g.  goods / construction work / other service that are specific and can only be carried out by 
patent holders, or parties that have obtained permission from patent holders, or those 
who won the tender to get permission from the government; 
h.  goods / construction work / other service which after a re-Tender have failed 
specifications and volume of work can be determined in detail;  
a. 
b.  Business Actors have been qualified in the Provider Performance Information System. 
implemented in the event that it cannot use the Provider selection method as referred to point 
above. 
4 
5 
The Fast 
Tender  
Tender 
Source: Presidential regulation No. 16/2018 
Table 3: Procurement Method for Consulting Services Implemented through Provider 
No 
Method 
Requirements 
1 
2 
3 
Selection 
implemented for Consultancy Services with a value of at least IDR 100,000,000 
Direct 
Procurement 
implemented for Consultancy Services which are worth up to a maximum of Rp100,000,000 
(one hundred million rupiah). 
Direct 
Appointment  
a.  Consulting Services under certain circumstances. i.e.: 
b.  Consultancy Services which can only be done by 1 (one) Business Actor who is 
capable; 
c.  Consultancy services that can only be done by 1 (one) registered copyright holder or a 
party that has obtained permission from the copyright holder; 
d.  Legal consultancy services include legal consultants/advocacy or procurement of 
arbitrators that are not planned in advance, to deal with lawsuits and / or lawsuits from 
certain parties, whose nature of work and / or defense must be immediate and cannot be 
delayed; or 
e.  Repeat requests for the same Consultant Service Provider. 
Source: Presidential regulation No. 16/2018 
4. 
By  referring  to  the  Presidential  regulation  no.  16/2008,  and  considering  the  characteristics  of 
goods/construction  works/services;  local  capacities;  geographical  area;  and  project  component,  the 
procurement  arrangement  can  be  summarized  in  the  following  tables.  The  procurement  of 
goods/construction  work/services  are  packaged  in  accordance  with  the  procurement  method, 
geographical  area,  and  the  nature  of  goods/construction  work/services;  as  well  as  considering  the 
efficiency, risks and manageability of the procurement. For example, when the number of farmer groups 
is too many, application of Type-III Swakelola is recommended by village rather than by farmer groups. 
Each Design and Construction Supervision Services is divided into two packages, i.e. DED consultant 
and CS consultant. 
130 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 7: 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Table 4: Procurement of Construction Works Managed by Local Government 
Procurement Plan Of Uplands Agricultural Productivity and Markets Project In FY 2019 (18 months)
GOODS
No.
1
Description
IMPLEMENTING 
AGENCY
Lot/Ref. No
FISCAL YEAR
BASIC DATA
Budget on AWPB 
(IDR Million)
Budget on 
AWPB 
(USD.000)
Proc. Method
Pre or Post 
Qualification
Plan vs 
Actual
Prior or 
Post 
Review
2
3
4
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1 Digital Tablets
NPMU
DT_4_2
2019
1 200
85.106
e-Purchasing
Post Qual
Post
2 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
NPMU
DT_4_2
2019
453
32.121
e-Purchasing
Post Qual
Post
3 Vehicle (4 wheel)
NPMU
DT_4_2
2019
1 000
71.921
e-Purchasing
Post Qual
Post
BANJARNEGARA DISTRICT
1 Coffee nursery development-seedling
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
2 900
205.674
Tender
Post
post
2 Chemical fertilizer
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
7 200
510.638
e-Purchasing
Post
prior
3 Prunning equipment - coffee
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
600
42.553
Tender
Post
prior
4 Refrigerator
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
5 Drug Stock
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
6 Veterinary equipment
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
7 Scales (10 units)
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
38
43
53
25
2.660
3.014
3.723
1.773
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Post
post
Post
post
Post
post
Post
post
8 Breeding does
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
1 200
85.106
Tender
Post
post
9 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Post
post
131 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 7: 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
CIREBON DISTRICT
1 Seedlings/saplings
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
1 650
117.021
e-Purchasing
Post
post
2 Organic Feetilizers and Pesticides
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
3 850
273.050
Tender
Post
post
3 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
GARUT DISTRICT
1 G-2  and G20 Seed Production Inputs
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
7 500
531.915
Tender
Pre
prior
2 Indigofera seedlings
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
200
14.184
3 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
post
Pre
post
GORONTALO DISTRICT
1 Seeds, fertilizers, pesticides
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
821
58.241
Tender
Post
Post
2 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
LEBAK DISTRICT
1
Chemical fertilizers and pestiside 
(NEW AREA) 
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
13 552
961.135
Tender
Pre
Prior
2
Organic fertilizer, chemical fertilizer 
and pestiside (EXISTING AREA)
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
3 880
275.177
Tender
Pre
Prior
3 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
LOMBOK TIMUR DISTRICT
1 Seeds, fertilizers & pesticides
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
41 000
2 907.801
Tender
Pre
Prior
2 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
132 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 7: 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
MAGELANG DISTRICT
1 Nursery development
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
420
29.787
 Tender
Post
Post
2 Seeds, fertilizers & pesticides
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
6 000
425.532
Tender
Pre
Post
3 Organic fertilizer processing unit
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
1 250
88.652
Tender
Post
Post
4 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
MALANG DISTRICT
1 Seeds, fertilizers & pesticides
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
5 000
3.546
e-Purchasing
Post
Post
2 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
MINAHASA SELATAN DISTRICT
1 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
PURBALINGA DISTRICT
1 Refrigerator
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
2 Drug Stock
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
8
9
0.532
0.603
3 Veterinary equipment
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
11
0.745
4
Scales 
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
2
0.156
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
Post
Post
Pre
post
Pre
post
Pre
post
Pre
post
5 Smallholder cost : breeding stocks /f
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
5 400
382.979
Tender
Pre
Post
6 Feedlot : feed supply /j
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
7 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
32
50
2.234
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
Pre
Post
133 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 7: 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
SUBANG DISTRICT
1 Seedlings
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
2 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
90
50
6.383
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
Pre
Post
SUMBAWA DISTRICT
1 Shallot seed (white label G-0)
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
2.4
0.170
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Pre
Post
2 Shallot seed (G-1 )
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
30 000
2 127.660
Tender
Pre
Post
3 Seeds, fertilizer & pesticides
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
1 250
88.652
Tender
Post
Post
4 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Post
Post
SUMENEP DISTRICT
1 Seeds, fertilizer & pesticides
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
8 000
567.376
Tender
Pre
Post
2 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Post
Post
TASIKMALAYA DISTRICT
1 Seeds, fertilizers & pesticides
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
1 750
124.113
Tender
Pre
Post
2 Office equipment, furniture, renovation
DPIU
DT_4_2
2019
50
3.546
Direct 
Purchase 
(Pengadaan 
Langsung)
Post
Post
134 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 7: 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Table 5: Procurement of Goods Managed by Local Government 
Procurement Plan Of Uplands Agricultural Productivity and Markets Project In FY 2019 (18 months)
WORKS
No.
1
Description
IMPLEMENTING 
AGENCY
Lot/Ref. No
FISCAL YEAR
BASIC DATA
Budget on AWPB 
(IDR Million)
Budget on 
AWPB 
(USD.000)
Proc. Method
Pre or Post 
Qualification
Plan vs 
Actual
Prior or 
Post 
Review
2
3
4
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
PURBALINGA DISTRICT
1
Feedlot : irrigation (pump, pipe, well, 
etc) /l
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
3 600
255.319
Tender
Post
Post
2
Smallholder cost : animal health center
DPIU
DT_1_2
2020
245
17.376
Tender
Post
Post
135 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 7: 
Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Table 6: Procurement of Services Managed by Local Government and MoA 
Procurement Plan Of Uplands Agricultural Productivity and Markets Project (UPLAND) In Fy 2019 (18 months)
CONSULTING SERVICES
DESCRIPTION
Lot/Ref. Nomor
FISCAL YEAR
SELECTION  
METHOD
IMPLEMENTING 
AGENCY
 ESTIMATED 
AMOUNT 
(IDR.Million)
ESTIMATED 
AMOUNT 
(USD.000)
PRIOR OR    
POST
PLAN               
VS           
ACTUAL
2
3
4
5
6
10.0
11.0
12
11
No.
1
NATIONAL LEVEL
1
Design of training manuals 
DT_4_1
2019
swakelola
NPMU
261.0
19.0
post
2
Training of trainers
DT_4_1
2019
swakelola
NPMU
169.0
12.0
post
3
Nutri<on studies(7 District)
DT_4_2
2019
swakelola
NPMU
1680.0
119.0
post
4
Manuals & materials /a
DT_4_2
2020
swakelola
NPMU
840.0
60.0
post
5
Monitoring cost
DT_4_2
2020
swakelola
NPMU
3194.4
227.0
post
6
Delivery of training of trainers
DT_4_1
2019
swakelola
NPMU
87
6
post
7
8
Delivery, supersion of 2 basic training 
courses
Basic course in VF & social mobilization (8 
times)
DT_4_1
2019
swakelola
NPMU
95.7
7.0
post
DT_4_1
2019
swakelola
NPMU
3 160
224.0
post
9
TOT for VF refresher training /a
DT_4_1
2020
swakelola
NPMU
100
7.0
post
10
VF refresher training /b
DT_4_1
2020
swakelola
NPMU
2 200
156.0
post
11
Training for VFs (6 times)
DT_4_2
2020
swakelola
NPMU
1 057
75.0
post
12
Village nutrition awareness classes (200 
<mes)
DT_4_2
2020
swakelola
NPMU
1 000
71.0
post
13
Social marke<ng ac<vi<es (200 <mes)
DT_4_2
2020
swakelola
NPMU
1 000
71.0
post
14
Project & Fiduciary Management Training 
DT_4_2
2019
swakelola
NPMU
833
59.0
post
15
User training for monitoring, evaluation and 
knowledge management software
DT_4_2
2019
swakelola
NPMU
58.5
4.0
post
136 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Background 
Despite years of under investment in upland agriculture, there is considerable potential to unlock 
that potential with carefully targeted investment in both on-farm and post-harvest points on the value 
chain.  The  UPLANDs  approach  will  be  to  develop  an  integrated  and  sustainable  upland  farming 
systems  approach,  focusing  on  sustainable  production  and  post-harvest  improvements  to  the  value 
chains  for  10  key  commodities. A  key  determinant  for  commodity  selection  was  clear  evidence  of 
“demand pull” for on-farm and post-harvest activity and investments. The district selection process was 
based  on  a  call  from  the  Ministry  of Agriculture  to  interested  Districts  for  investment  proposals  for 
development of commodity value chains.  
The UPLANDs design is directed to effectively support upland smallholders in overcoming their 
constraints to improving productivity and quality of output. In addition to on farm support, the project will 
provide  support  to  downstream  post-harvest  processing,  aggregation  and  marketing  initiatives.  The 
project will also look to address the high costs and dis-economies of small-scale production, weak local 
institutional capacity, and lack of access to inputs, technology and finance. In addition, the project will 
support  the  remote  farmer  communities  and  many  other  players  in  the  agricultural  value  chains  to 
address structural constraints in marketing, transport, handling and processing. Investment is directed 
at promoting environmentally sustainable agriculture practices as well as socially inclusive investment 
activities – especially in respect of employment opportunities for women and youth. 
The  Government  sees  the  UPLANDs  Project  as  an  opportunity  to  develop  replicable 
development models for a range of commodities across a diverse range of districts. The upland areas 
play  an  important  role  in  the  production  of  horticulture  crops  in  fragile  catchment  areas.  There  are 
opportunities  to  improve  water  conservation  in  Indonesia’s  tropical  environment,  where  precipitation 
ranges from 1500 to more than 3000 mm/year, often falling within a few months of the year. 
Project Objective, Target Group and Area  
  Project  Objective.  The  goal  of  UPLANDs  is  to  reduce  poverty  and  enhance  food  security  in 
upland  areas  through  remunerative,  sustainable  and  resilient  livelihoods.  The  Project 
Development  Objective  is  to  assist  rural  households  to  increase  smallholders’  agriculture 
productivity, incomes, livelihoods and resilience in the targeted uplands.  
Expected Outcomes. The expected outcomes of UPLANDs includes: 
The  core  outputs  of  the  project  will  however  be  through  the  quasi-private  sector  consisting  of 
individual farmers working individually or working in collaboration with small, micro and medium sized 
enterprises to  effectively  meet the value  chain targets of  production,  processing  and marketing. The 
approach  will  be  to  develop  and  strengthen  the  linkages  of the  different  parts  through  associations, 
partnerships.  The  institutions  will  be  based  on  the  institutional  frameworks  being  promoted  by 
Government  including  KUBEs  (small  to  medium  commercial  operation  owned  by  associations  of 
farmers) and BLUDs (medium to large commercial entities with multiple ownership options, including 
farmers, local government and the private sector). A key objective will be to ensure these organizations 
are professionally managed, financially sustainable and their development is based on flexible viable 
business models. Significant emphasis will be to provide training, institutional support provision of micro 
finance for both crop production and on and off farm equipment. 
Key  Indicators.  The  detailed  key  performance  indicators  (KPIs)  are  presented  in  the  logical 
framework (Annex-4). The project goal is to reduce poverty and enhance food security in upland areas 
through  remunerative,  sustainable  and  resilient  livelihoods.  The  poverty  level  of  rural  area  in  the 
targeted districts will reduce from in average 16.52% in 2017 to become in average 12.83% by end of 
2023.  
Some of the expected results related to the project objectives are summarized as the following: 
137 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Outcome 1: Increase in poor rural people’s productive capacities 
  Outcome  2:  Increase  poor  rural  people's  incomes  from  enhanced  processing  and/or  market 
participation. 
  Outcome 3: Enhanced delivery of UPLANDs services & research 
  Target Group. The target groups of the project will be the average farm size in the 14 locations 
is 0.71 Ha (but with considerable range from around 0.1ha to 2ha). The social mobilization process will 
ensure that women, men and youth farmers with the potential for contributing and benefitting from the 
value chain of the selected commodity are included. 
  The UPLANDs target groups will include: 
138 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Poverty. District selection is justified based on an assessment of the poverty and employment 
profile in these districts. As per the 2017 data from the National Statistics Bureau, the average incidence 
of  poverty  in  these  sub-districts  is  13.9%  which  is  considerably  higher  than  the  national  average  of 
10.12%. In terms of unemployment, the average sub-district unemployment rate is 6.13% which is also 
just above the national average of 5.5%. The project will be implemented in the 14 districts identified by 
the district Agriculture Departments with the potential for development of specific upland commodities. 
  Gender  and  Youth.  UPLANDs  will  have  a  strong  focus  on  inclusion  of  women  as  decision-
makers through their active participation in farmers groups and as farmers and processors by providing 
them with agricultural/business knowledge, skills and equipment directly, facilitating women’s groups to 
access  skills  and  machinery  for  post-harvesting  processing.  It  will  benefit  women  by  reducing  their 
workload through increased mechanization.  
  The gender strategy will be based on lessons from projects effective in the inclusion of women 
and  the  experience  of  projects  regarding  interventions  that  can  increase  women’s  productivity  and 
incomes,  enhance  their  decision-making  and  control  over  productive  assets  and  lead  to  their 
empowerment.  
  The youth strategy will involve systematic identification of opportunities for their involvement in 
the  value-chain,  their  inclusion  in  formal  women  and  men  farmers  groups  and  capacity  building  as 
agents of change for inclusive socio-economic development. The inclusion of women and youth, in the 
implementation of the project, and as beneficiaries, will be further ensured through setting quotas. In 
each of the value-chains of selected commodities the entry points and opportunities available for youth 
and women all along will be identified and priority given to supporting their entry or existing production, 
employment and business opportunities available for them through project activities.  
  The empowerment of women will be ensured through a range of strategies: (i) a gender analysis 
of each value-chain will be undertaken to identify the level of women’s engagement with special focus 
on  targeting  women’s  groups  for  post-harvest  processing  facilities  (ii)  a  40%  target  will  be  set  for 
women’s participation in all key project  activities with active inclusion of women and women-headed 
households  in  farmer’s  groups;  (iii)  TOR  for  technical  experts  will  include  responsibilities  for 
implementing  the  gender  strategy  of  the  project  (iv)  the  project  will  be  sensitive  to  arrangements 
required  to  enable  women  to  participate  –  such  as  arranging  training  at  village  or  district  level  to 
accommodate women’s time constraints or providing transport; (v) inclusion indicators disaggregated 
by sex to track the project’s performance in promoting women’s empowerment in terms of their capacity-
building and benefits; (vi) PMU and PIUs will be encouraged to maintain a gender balance in staffing, 
with women comprising around 50% of the staff; (x) a team of village facilitators will be hired to provide 
backstopping  for  (inter  alia)  social  mobilization  and  implementation  of  gender  strategies;  (xi) 
organizations  recruited for  assisting in  implementation  of  project  activities will  be required  to  have  a 
demonstrated  ability  to  work  with  women;  (xii) ;  any  studies  undertaken  by  the  project  will  address 
gender issues and disaggregate data collection,  analysis and findings by gender; and (xiii) a  gender 
assessment of project activities will be conducted prior to the mid-term review.  
  Youth  will  be  mainstreamed  in  the  value-chain,  as  stated  above,  through  the  systematic 
identification of opportunities for their involvement in the value-chain and support for their involvement 
from the project will be further ensured through quotas, as specified in the table below. Youth will be the 
catalysts of change for the project in their capacity as Village Facilitators (80 per cent below the age of 
30) ensuring inclusive targeting, building capacities, and managing and monitoring project activities at 
village level.  
139 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Table 1: Targets for Participation of Women and Youth in UPLANDs. 
Issue 
Women 
Young men and women (Age 
30 or less) 
Component 1: Productivity Enhancement and Resilience-Building 
Farmers  receiving  training  and 
technical  support 
for  selected 
commodities 
Nutrition intervention 
40 %  
15,000 women will be involved in 
nutrition  awareness  training  and 
social  marketing  events  held  in 
villages 
Component 2 : Agribusiness Development & Livelihood Facilitation 
Farmer Groups 
600  farmer’s  production  groups 
(men and women’s groups) 
200 women’s processing groups  
50% 
50 % 
200 women’s groups 
Village facilitators 
Training and Technical Support in 
Farm Management 
Management, 
Training 
In 
Business  Development 
And 
Institutional  Strengthening  For 
Farmer’s Groups  
Exposure visits 
30  %  (  women  from  women’s 
groups and mixed farmer groups) 
50 %  
in  Processing  and 
in  Maintenance  and 
Training 
Marketing 
Training 
Operation of Farm Machinery 
Component 3 : Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems  
Training in Market Intelligence 
Component 
Management 
Staff of PMU 
Staff of PIU 
Stakeholder forums 
M&E  
Project 
50 % 
4 : 
50 % 
50 % 
50 % 
A  monthly  dashboard  would  be 
established to report  progress on 
the  key  outputs  and  objectives, 
disaggregated by gender and age 
the 
to  capture  and  monitor 
involvement of youth and women. 
25 %  
50% 
25 %  
80 % 
25 %  
30 %  
25% 
75 %  
100 % 
25 % 
25 % 
  Target Area. The UPLANDs will target 14 District in 6 Provinces. Table 2 below gives an overview 
of the target area with number of sub-districts, villages and farmer’s groups in each district. 
140 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Table 2: Commodity Data by Targeted Districts and Villages 
District 
Village
s 
Commodit
y 
Area 
(ha) 
Farmer Group 
Estimated*) 
Farmer 
Groups
* 
Member
s  
#Wome
n 
#Yout
h 
Total 
Beneficiarie
s 
N
o 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Lebak 
Tasikmalaya 
Subang 
Cirebon 
5  Garut 
6 
7 
Banjarnegara 
Purbalingga 
8  Magelang 
9  Malang 
10  Sumenep 
11 
Lombok Timur 
12  Sumbawa 
13 
Minahasa 
Selatan 
14  Gorontalo 
4 
4 
31 
21 
5 
31 
9 
31 
3 
3 
21 
26 
10 
1 
231 
Mangostee
n 
421 
Organic rice 
500 
Mangostee
n 
2,000 
Mango 
1,500 
Seed 
Potato 
Goats & 
Coffee 
Goats 
200 
385 
Organic rice 
2,000 
Shallots 
Shallots 
300 
160 
19 
8 
75 
32 
10 
25 
14 
97 
3 
80 
569 
 1,077  
199 
431 
 3,138  
1,255 
 568  
 872  
 1,209  
 237  
590 
174 
487 
45 
 6,336  
2,158 
 860  
 1,733 
233 
340 
Garlic 
1,640 
100 
 2,964  
1,045 
Shallot 
Seed 
3,000 
59 
 2,700  
972 
Potato 
2,000 
118 
 2,179  
872 
Banana 
20 
10 
135 
50 
475 
455 
60 
225 
100 
500 
65 
275 
530 
445 
640 
40 
832 
1,558 
4,868 
2,520 
1,106 
1,930 
595 
8,054 
1,076 
1,747 
4,477 
4,117 
3,691 
76 
14,12
6  
640 
 24,442  
8,812 
3,995 
36,648 
  The  selection  of  districts  is  driven  by  the  identification  of  high  potential  and  the  comparative 
advantage the area has in the commodity selected. Important criteria for the selection of villages are (i) 
concentration  of  farmers  engaged  in  the  production  of  the  selected  commodity  (ii)  potential  for 
intensification  of  production  and  engagement  in  the  value-chain  (iii)  potential  for  engagement  with 
private  sector  (iv)  contiguity  to  ensure  that  project  villages  are  not  too  widely  scattered  across  the 
country. There are approximately 55 sub-districts and 200 villages targeted in the selected districts. The 
project will work with a minimum of 623 women and men farmer’s groups and 200 women’s groups in 
the target area.  
Project Components and Activities 
In general, Ministry of Agriculture through Directorate General of Agricultural Infrastructures and 
Facilities will be the Project Implementing Agency which in its daily implementation will be carried out 
by  the  National  Project  Management  Unit  (NPMU)  in  central  government.  While,  implementing 
organizations at the district level is the District/City Agricultural Service which forms the District Project 
Implementing  Unit  (DPIU)  which  is  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  daily  projects.  NPMU  in 
carrying  out  its  duties  should  coordinate  with  DPIU.  NPMU  represents  the  whole  DPIU  in 
communicating and coordinating with IsDB and IFAD. 
  The  Project  would  consist  of  four  main  components  which  would  include  the  following; 
(1) Component-1:  Productivity  Enhancement  &  Resilience  Building;  (2)  Component-2: Agribusiness 
Development & Livelihood Facilitation; (3) Component-3: Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems; 
and (4) Component-4: Project Management. 
Component 1: Productivity Enhancement and Resilience-Building 
  This  component  would  consist  of  four  sub-components  designed  to  invest  in  the  productive 
potential  and  resilience building  of  farming  households  in upland  areas. The  sub-components would 
include  the  following;  (i)  Land  Development;  (ii)  Physical  Infrastructure;  (iii)  Farm  Management  & 
Advisory Services (iii) Agriculture Machinery. The overall Implementation of the component would be 
141 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
undertaken  by  the  District  Project  Implementation  Units  (DPIU)  and  coordinated  by  the  Project 
Management  Unit (PMU)  at the  national  level with  support from  design and  supervision  consultancy 
(DSC) services where deemed necessary. 
  Sub-Component  1.1:  Land  Infrastructures  and  Development.  Land  development  activities 
would be based on soil and water conservation approaches to reduce the risk of erosion and landslides 
due to agriculture activities. The specific land development activities would be customized within each 
district  to  suit  the  specific  environment;  referencing  topography,  soil  type,  climate,  any  evidence  of 
deforestation  and  consideration  of  current  and  planned  agricultural  activity. Activities  would  include 
terracing  and  contouring,  use  of  soil  bio-engineering  stabilizers  such  as  mulches,  and  the  strategic 
planting of agro-forestry trees and shrubs including perennial horticultural crops. The selection of the 
farming  households  would  be  through  the  farmer  groups  in  each  district  who  are  participating  in 
production of selected commodities. The selection will be based on the technical and feasibility of the 
sites selected and the commitment of the selected farmers to contribute at least 25% of the cost of land 
development. It is expected that the project would help to develop 7.032 ha benefitting around 6,017 
households. The land development works will be done on selected smallholder farms that pose a great 
brisk for soil erosion and landslips. The land owner will implement the construction work supported by 
specialist/expert from the Design and Supervision consultant,  DSC. The cost  of land  development is 
estimated at an average of about US$500 per ha. 
In addition to land development, the project will assist smallholder farmers in the uplands to invest 
in  physical  infrastructure  such  as  irrigation  systems  for  improving  access  to  water  and  access/farm 
roads  that  facilitate  farmers  to  markets.  The  investments  will  be  designed  to  promote  resilient  and 
sustainable agriculture, with improved access to markets, in the upland areas. 
  To improve resilience and water supply, the project will assist farmers to invest in water storage 
ponds,  shallow  wells,  and  small  weirs  for  12,099  ha.  The  irrigation  infrastructure  types  will  include 
rehabilitation and new tertiary surface, piping drip and sprinkler irrigation systems, solar and electricity 
pumps. The MoA has pre-identified a preliminary list of 239 villages in the selected districts with about 
12,099ha  that  will require improved water  security  through  the water  infrastructure investments. The 
farms are owned by about 23,391 farmers organized in 663 groups. The irrigated land under each group 
ranges from 1.17 to 62.5 ha, with an average land holding ranging from 0.14 to 1.1 ha. The average 
cost  of  irrigation  development  is  about  US$2,800  per  ha.  These  villages  are  growing  the  prioritized 
crops selected for the project. However, each proposed site in the selected villages would be assessed 
to ensure that it meets the following criteria; (i) serve the priority commodity and promotes integrated 
farming; (ii) gives priority to smallholder poor farmers; (iii) technical feasibility; (v) economic feasibility 
and (vi) promotes good environmentally and social stewardship. 
Table 3: Proposed Land Development Activities 
k
a
b
e
L
a
y
a
l
a
m
k
i
s
a
T
g
n
a
b
u
S
n
o
b
e
r
i
C
t
u
r
a
G
a
r
a
g
e
n
r
a
n
a
B
j
a
g
g
n
i
l
a
b
r
u
P
g
n
a
l
e
g
a
M
g
n
a
l
a
M
p
e
n
e
m
u
S
i
r
u
m
T
k
o
b
m
o
L
a
w
a
b
m
u
S
l
e
s
n
M
i
l
o
a
t
n
o
r
o
G
l
a
t
o
T
Land clearing, 
soil 
conservation/land 
terracing (ha) 
332  500 
400  500 
  160  1,640 
3,000 
500 
7,032 
Irrigation (ha) 
332  500  2,004  500  200 
Farm road (km) 
38 
10 
33  100 
16 
43 
42 
-  1,400  300  160  1,640 
3,000  2,000 
20  12,099 
7 
15 
18 
5 
35 
70 
15 
3 
406 
  The project will invest in the improvement of access and farm roads, in total about 406 km farm 
road. The  roads  will typically  be  engineered compacted  gravel  or concrete roads  (depending  on the 
ground  conditions),  2.5  to  4m  wide  (depending  on  the  type  of  vehicles  mix)  to  use  the  roads.  In  all 
cases,  provision  of  routes for  non-motorized traffic  should  be  prioritized, where  ever  necessary. The 
cost of road development is estimated at an average of about US$27,269 per km. 
  Prior  to  final  selection  and  construction  activities,  a  feasibility  study  and  detailed  engineering 
design would be prepared for each scheme with detailed costs. In addition, an ESMP, will be prepared 
for each site to ensure that all identified environmental and social impacts are adequately addressed. 
The feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs will be implemented in a participatory way, led 
142 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
by staff at Dinas Pertanian, assisted by experts from the DSC. Particularly for the area with earthquake 
risk such as Lebak, Tasikmalaya, Garut, Lombok Timur, and Minahasa Selatan, the infrastructure design 
has to be earthquake resistant. The construction works will be done through community contracting or 
through  private  contractors,  depending  on  the  nature  of  engineering  works  to  be  done.  The  private 
contractors  will  be  competitively  procured  following  the  country  procurement  system.  The  local 
government  or  local  communities  would  be  responsible  for  securing  the  land  required  for  the 
development of infrastructure. All the infrastructure investments by the project will be owned by either 
village or district government or by the farmers, groups of farmers or their associations. The farmers will 
finance at least 25% of the cost of the on-farm irrigation costs infrastructure, through own funds, loans 
from a bank or grant from the village government. The district government and the project funds will 
finance water infrastructure to the group farm edge. 
  Farmers  would  pay  for  the  full  operations,  maintenance  and  management  for  the  irrigation 
infrastructure built by the project. The farmers will be trained, in their existing groups, to operate and 
manage the irrigation facilities for their group. In some cases, where it is technically feasible and farmers 
are willing, the groups would aggregate to form water user associations, for the purpose of managing 
irrigation infrastructure. The village government will pay for the maintenance of all access roads built 
outside the farms, and the farmers will be responsible for the maintenance of roads built within their 
farm boundaries. 
  Sub-Component  1.2:  Production  and  Farm  Management.  In  the  context  of  a  commodity 
development approach in each of 14 districts, UPLANDs will ensure around 32,600 men and women 
farmers receive commodity specific training and technical support to enhance their overall agricultural 
production and management capacity. 
  About 1,300 farmer extension or training groups of around 25 farmers (including the poor, women 
and youth) will be formed and socialized by the UPLANDs village facilitators. These extension groups 
will be the access point to village farmers for extension training, nutrition training, and microfinance and 
market information. The project will work with at least 300 women farmer extension/training groups and 
demonstrations will be organized for aspects of production in which they are engaged. Similarly, training 
will be provided to youth for crops and activities appropriate for them, for example, management and 
operation of agriculture machineries. 
  The  project  will  include  a  suite  of  complementary  support  mechanisms  suited  to  smallholder 
farming in which both the public and (where possible) private sector will be involved. These activities 
will be coordinated by 235 Facilitators, and 114 Extension staff, supported by 14 teams or district level 
technical specialists. Training and technical support will include Farmer Field Schools with a series of 
trainings  throughout  the  crop  cycle.  Training  will  be  delivered  on  improved  agronomic  practices 
(including Good Agricultural Practices - GAP) relevant to  each commodity  including  quality  genetics, 
soil management, crop nutrition, water management, Integrated Pest Management (IPM), sustainable 
use and management of farming equipment, canopy management (for trees crops) and optimal harvest 
and post-harvest practices at the farm and village level. 
Table 4: Proposed Extension Staff and Facilitators 
k
a
b
e
L
a
y
a
l
a
m
k
i
s
a
T
g
n
a
b
u
S
n
o
b
e
r
i
C
t
u
r
a
G
a
r
a
g
e
n
r
a
j
n
a
B
a
g
g
n
i
l
a
b
r
u
P
g
n
a
l
e
g
a
M
g
n
a
l
a
M
p
e
n
e
m
u
S
i
r
u
m
T
k
o
b
m
o
L
a
w
a
b
m
u
S
l
e
s
n
M
i
o
l
a
t
n
o
r
o
G
l
a
t
o
T
240  486  1,860 
1,860 
4 
9 
31 
31 
  180 
900 
890 
 270  
 36   6,722 
3 
15 
15 
 5  
1 
114 
Extension Staff 
•  Person 
month 
•  #Person 
Facilitators 
(PM) 
•  Village Fac 
432  240  1,350 
875 
270  1,860  432  1,860 
  180  1,458  1,404  540 
  10,901 
•  Sub-District 
Fac./Coord 
•  District Fac./ 
Manager 
108 
162 
162 
300 
180 
378 
162 
54 
60 
54 
54 
54 
60  144 
60 
60 
54 
54 
54 
1,452 
762 
Subtotal (PM) 
594  300 
1566 
1,091 
324  2,220  576  2,100 
  240  1,890  1,620  594 
  13,115 
143 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
# Facilitators 
11 
5 
29 
20 
6 
37 
12 
35 
4 
35 
30 
11 
235 
  While production inputs applicable to the commodity will be made available to eligible farmers in 
the first year of engagement to help initiate farmer support and improved farming practices, UPLANDs 
will require a 25% contribution from the farmers with the balance funded by the project. It is anticipated 
the farmer contribution will come from village fund support. After year 1, farmers will be able to borrow 
for these inputs through UPLANDs supported microfinance. This will be delivered via local banks with 
credit lines from UPLANDs. These inputs include seed, seedlings, fertilizers and pesticides. 
  A major challenge for small farmers is the high-risk environment in which they operate, making 
them traditionally highly risk averse and in turn inhibiting their willingness to adopt new and improved 
farm  practices.  On  top  of  everyday  production  risks,  the  risk  profile  for  farmers  is  becoming  more 
challenging due to climate change related production risks like drought, flood, and pests. Recognizing 
this reality, UPLANDs will link with a new IFAD initiative (‘Insurance for Rural Resilience & Economic 
Development Technical Assistance Programme’) which designed to improve access for smallholders to 
appropriate crop insurance. 
Intensification of agricultural production requires improvement in labour productivity and efficient 
operations. The effective utilization of agricultural machinery suitable for smallholder agriculture is one 
of  the  key  strategies  to  be  used  to  improve  land  and  labour  productivity,  reduce  costs  in  uplands 
agriculture  production.  Use  of  machinery  is  also  an  effective  way  to  reduce  drudgery  of  agricultural 
labour for women, men and youth. Youth are more likely to participate in primary agricultural production 
if this  drudgery is reduced. The type and number of machines would be selected by  commodity and 
utilized  within the uplands  taking  into consideration the  steepness  of land, the  needs  of women  and 
youth and the type of crop to be grown. There would be appropriate machinery and powered equipment 
sourced  for  land  preparation,  planting,  cultivation,  pest  and  disease  management,  weed  control  and 
harvesting and transport. In general, the type of equipment will include hand powered cultivators, power 
sprayers,  hand  sprayers,  small  powered  harvesting  equipment,  wheel  barrows  among  other  types. 
Specialist  machinery  and  equipment  would  also  be  sourced  for  specific  commodity  production 
requirements. The farmers  would  pay  25%  of the  cost  of  purchasing the  machinery. The project  will 
assist in linking the farmers with local financial institutions or value chain actors, to finance the farmers' 
payment. 
  Machinery and equipment would be owned by the farmer's group or association. Assurance of 
the  provision  of  training  in  the  safe  and  appropriate  use  and  maintenance  of  all  machinery  and 
equipment would be a key element of these terms of partnership. Young people (both men and women) 
will be trained in the operation and maintenance of the equipment, so as to be able to offer a service to 
farmer  groups.  The  project  will  facilitate  in  the  provision  of  the  appropriate  technical  and  on-the-job 
training  and  workplace  supervision  to  the  youth  who  take  part  in  the  equipment  support  business 
opportunities.  In  some  cases,  the  youth  may  be  employed  by  Farmer’s  Groups  and  federations  to 
undertake and/or  oversee machinery operation and also ensure appropriate maintenance  schedules 
and tasks are performed. Users will pay fees on a full cost recovery basis. 
  The machinery management sub-committee (MMSC) will be responsible for the following: 
Operator selection and supervision 
Each group will appoint a designated tractor operator who will be fully responsible for operations 
and maintenance. The operator will receive operator training prior to delivery of the tractor to 
each production group. 
Establishing a user fees schedule that accounts for O&M and replacement funds 
(depreciation). 
Provision of sound security and storage at all times 
Establishing transparent schedules of service for members (rotating  by crop cycle) to ensure 
fairness. 
Establishing transparent rules for non-group member usage (if relevant). 
Establishing an agreed and transparent dispute resolution process. 
144 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Establishing transparent rules for any wilful damage to machinery by members or non-
members 
Reporting to the wider group on a quarterly basis. 
Establishing a machinery replacement fund with dual signing by Group Treasurer and MMSC 
Leader. 
  Procurement. Procurement will be undertaken within the rules and regulations of the GOI/MOA 
and the process will be closely supervised by the UPLANDs project management unit.  
  Assurance  of the  provision  of training in the  safe  and  appropriate  use  and maintenance  of  all 
machinery and equipment would be a key element of these terms of partnership. Young people (both 
men and women) will be trained in the operation and maintenance of the equipment, so as to be able 
to offer a service to farmer groups. The project will facilitate in the provision of the appropriate technical 
and on-the-job training and workplace supervision to the youth who take part in the equipment support 
business opportunities. In some cases, the youth may be employed by Farmer’s Groups and federations 
to undertake and/or oversee machinery operation and also ensure appropriate maintenance schedules 
and tasks are performed. Users will pay fees on a full cost recovery basis. 
  Training will be provided taking into consideration the workplace health and safety risk associated 
with operating machinery on slopes. In addition, minimum tillage approach will be promoted to reduce 
risk of soil erosion. Proper terms of partnership would be signed between the district Government and 
the  Farmer  Groups  or  Associations  on  the  hand  over,  operation,  maintenance  and  storage  of  the 
equipment to ensure its effective utilization. 
 Livestock training will be delivered in farmer field schools, covering the basics of animal nutrition, 
housing, health and reproduction. Annual flock management plans will be prepared including disease 
prevention, fodder production, feeding regimes and planning and monitoring including vaccination and 
parasite  treatment,  livestock  inventory,  mating  and  live  weights,  In  addition,  besides  group  training 
UPLANDs will document the training and provide goat group members with copies of training material 
for their future reference. 
  While UPLANDs will mainstream nutrition into activities, it is recognized that there is no single 
solution to tackle these problems. Yet the fact that malnutrition rates remain unchanged despite rising 
incomes and food availability give some clues that some of the remaining constraints to better nutrition 
are driven by social norms and behaviours. UPLAND will therefore adopt a multi-pronged and main-
streamed  approach  to  improving  nutrition.  It  will  also  encourage  local  innovation  combined  with 
evidence-based  assessment  to  identify  and  scale-up  promising  innovations  in  the  approaches  to 
improving  nutrition.  Nutrition  activities  will  be  conducted  in  all  UPLANDs  villages  coordinated  by  the 
Village Facilitators. 
  To  further  ensure  that  the benefits  of  increased  incomes  translate  into  improved  health 
outcomes for women and men small-holder farmers and their households, appropriate interventions at 
each stage of the value-chain will be identified. A rapid nutrition assessment will be used to identify the 
key  nutritional  challenges  and  opportunities  specific  to  the  project  districts  and  appropriate  nutrition 
interventions at relevant stages of the value-chain. A two-person nutrition team will work closely with 
the other technical specialists to mainstream nutrition in the various projects commodity development 
activities. Some of the interventions for nutrition will include extension advice on nutritious crop varieties, 
social  marketing  events  and  nutrition  awareness  sessions.  Given  the  complexity  of  the  nutrition 
challenge, UPLANDs will actively encourage and reward local innovation by teams in districts to work 
out what combination of factors works best to deliver sustainable nutrition outcomes. 
Component 2: Agribusiness Development & Livelihood Facilitation 
  This component is designed to facilitate farm gate to market activities which will improve product 
quality and marketability as well as enhance market linkages based on improved market intelligence. 
The  component  would  have  four  sub-components;  (i)  Farmer  institutional  development;  (ii)  Market 
infrastructure  and  equipment;  (iii)  Strengthening  market  linkages  and  alliances;  and  (iv) Access  to 
financial services. 
Sub-Component  2.1:  Farmer  institutional  development.  Groups  of  farmers  will  be 
encouraged to form associations or federations (some already formed) which can evolve into KUBEs 
or  KUBE-look like institutions. Depending on location, a KUBE can be at village level,  or involve 2-3 
145 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
villages in one KUBE, or at kecamatan level as business association of farmer group. An estimated 180 
KUBEs and around 14 larger BLUDs or Cooperatives will be supported. 
Table 5. Establishment Plan Of Kube And Blud Or Cooperative 
No. 
District 
Commodity 
1 
Lebak 
2  Tasikmalaya 
3  Subang  
4  Cirebon  
5  Garut 
6  Banjarnegara 
7  Purbalingga 
8  Magelang 
9  Malang  
10  Sumenep 
11  Lombok Timur  
12  Sumbawa  
13  Minahasa Selatan  
14  Gorontalo  
Mangosteen 
Organic Rice  
Mangosteen 
Mango 
Potato Seed  
Coffee, Goat &Sheep 
 Goat  
 Organic Rice  
 Shallot  
 Shallot  
 Garlic  
 Shallot Seed  
 Potato  
 Banana  
Total Number 
Land 
(Ha) 
421 
500 
2,000 
1,500 
200 
385 
2,000 
300 
160 
1,640 
3,000 
2,000 
20 
 14,126  
# 
Farmer 
Groups  
23 
8 
75 
77 
10 
37 
18 
94 
11 
53 
92 
59 
118 
6 
681 
# KUBE 
# BLUD/Cooperative 
at District Level 
Village  Sub-District  BLUD  Cooperative 
4 
7 
1 
34 
18 
11 
52 
1 
128 
2 
1 
7 
3 
6 
30 
10 
59 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
10 
In collaboration with both national and district governments, the UPLANDs will work closely with 
individual famers, farmers group and farmers' association. Many farmers groups and association do not 
currently have sufficient capacity, suitable legal basis or flexibility to deal with some required functions 
and  responsibilities  needed  to  support  the  project.  To  address  this,  the  project  will  provide  farmer 
institutional development to ensure sustainable management and business unit formed and functional. 
  UPLANDs is looking at several options of entities or management/business units that can bridge 
the gap by providing sufficient flexibility to ensure sustainability of project impacts in the long run. Some 
of the available options include KUBE, BLUD, Cooperative and BUMDES
40.  
  KUBE  (Kelompok  Usaha  Bersama)  is  a  Joint  Business  Group  which  aims  to  empower  poor 
communities  (including  small  holder  farmers)  by  providing  business  capital  to  manage  productive 
economic activities/businesses. In general, a KUBE will be established at farmer association level (to 
manage capital assets invested by UPLANDs) and will typically provide services to 3-4 farmer groups. 
  BUMDES  (Badan  Usaha  Milik  Desa)  is  a  village-owned  business  entity  is  a  village  business 
managed by the Village Government, and incorporated where the establishment is determined by the 
Village Regulation. The management of the BUMDES consists of the village government and the local 
village community. The capital of BUMDES can come from the Village Government, community savings, 
assistance  from  the  government,  loans,  or  other  parties'  equity  participation  or  profit-sharing 
cooperation on the basis of mutual benefits.  
  BLUD  (Badan  Layanan  Umum  Daerah)  or  Regional  Public  Service  Agency  (BLUD)  is  a 
management and service unit within the local government formed to provide services to the community 
in  the  form  of  the  provision  of  goods  and  /  or  services.  While  BLUD  is  a  non-profit  entity,  it  is  still 
professionally managed based on principles of efficiency and productivity. The characteristics of each 
management/business/service unit options are provided in the table below: 
40 BUMDES: is a village-owned business entity is a village business managed by the Village Government, and 
incorporated where the establishment is determined by the Village Regulation 
146 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Table 6. Farmer Post-Harvest Institution Summary 
Management/ 
Business Unit 
KUBE 
Owner / 
Shareholders 
Community or 
smallholders’ 
farmers 
Management 
Community/ 
Farmers 
Association 
BUMDES 
Village owned 
Appointed 
professional 
BLUD 
Government 
institution 
Cooperative 
Farmers/farmer 
groups 
Government 
official and 
supported by 
professional 
management 
Appointed 
professional 
Characteristics and Flexibility 
-  Similar to cooperative / enterprise group; 
-  Capital: government grant and members 
contributions; 
-  Acts as a private business; 
-  Profit oriented; 
-  Profit shared as revenue to its members. 
-  Enterprise type; 
-  Profit oriented; 
-  Profit shared as revenue to it’s the village; 
-  First capital could be provided by the government 
or from village funds. 
-  Manage government assets; 
-  Non-profit; 
-  Service oriented; 
-  Allowed to collect fees to support its operational; 
-  Can get subsidy from the government. 
-  Enterprise group; 
-  Profit oriented; 
-  Profit shared as revenue to its member; 
-  First capital could be provided by the government 
or from village funds. 
  Because there is no 'one fixed solution' that fits all across the 14 districts, selection of institution 
or management unit that will be established to support the project will be customize based on the needs 
of each value chain and which is suitable to the local context. UPLANDs Project will not create a new 
entity or management/business unit where an existing institution is functioning efficiently. In this case, 
the Project will empower existing KUBEs that are ready apply for assistance e.g. to have sorting and 
grading equipment and are able to certify that they have the required beneficiary contribution. Where 
new institutions are required district governments call for proposals for the establishment of processing 
facilities e.g. for potatoes and mangoes. But, in all cases, the district government will first undertake full 
feasibility assessment including the applicant’s business plan. 
  KUBEs will be responsible for operating and managing product collection vehicles (three-wheeler 
bikes) provided to each village. A truck will be also provided to transport the commodity from KUBE to 
the BLUD or other major processing, storage or marketing centre. UPLANDs will establish BLUDs at 
district level or at the end part of the value chain that will deal directly with the market. The BLUD or 
Cooperative at District level operates as a primary commodity service in large scale to serve the KUBEs. 
It  will  manage the  significant  capital  assets  invested  by  the  project  such  as  grading  and  processing 
equipment and facilities. BLUD or Cooperative will develop marketing network of processed products. 
  Sub-Component  2.2:  Market  Infrastructure  and  Equipment.  Marketing  infrastructure, 
equipment and systems are based on the systematic aggregation and value adding of product to meet 
the demands of markets; commencing from the farmer and Farmer  Group level, farmer associations 
activities,  then  to  KUBE  level  facilities  and  processes  and  finally  to  commodity  processing  and 
distribution centres operating under Cooperatives, Federation or BLUD arrangements, as applicable to 
each District and commodity. Farmer Groups and organizations which demonstrate their commitment 
to enhancing access to markets would be eligible to apply for marketing infrastructure and equipment 
support  under the  project.  Marketing infrastructure  and  equipment  provision  will  ensure the selected 
commodities will be cost effectively and efficiently made market-ready in terms of agreed specifications 
and supply arrangements with buyers. 
Infrastructure  and  equipment will include  small scale  collection,  drying  (where  applicable)  and 
pre-sorting  facilities  located  strategically  at  the  Farmer  Group  and  Village  levels,  larger  scale  post-
harvest handing, packaging and aggregation facilities and equipment operating at the KUBE level and 
facilities  and  equipment  for  final  aggregation,  processing,  storage  and  distribution  of  fresh  and/or 
processed products operating at the District level. Investments in transport equipment will allow efficient 
and  timely  movement  of  product  from  the  field  to  collection/aggregation  points  and  on  to 
processing/packing facilities. Transport investments will include 3 wheelers for moving produce post-
harvest  from  farms  to  KUBE  and  small  trucks  for  moving  product  from  KUBE  to  larger  scale 
BLUD/Cooperative managed facilities. 
147 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  All facilities and equipment will be “fit for purpose” i.e. designed and fitted out to an appropriate 
level of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) in terms of market and regulatory compliance. Young men 
and women with an interest in maintaining and operating post-harvest and processing equipment and 
with the required technical and personal attributes would be employed to carry out skilled work within 
processing and storage facilities. These young men and women will receive appropriate technical and 
on-the-job  training  in  safe  equipment  operation  and  maintenance  procedures  and  would  also  be 
supervised appropriately. 
  To  qualify  for  UPLANDs  support,  Farmer  Groups,  Associations,  KUBEs  or  Federations/ 
Cooperatives will have to a) be formally registered; b) demonstrate their capacity to invest at least 25% 
of their own equity or leverage this proportion of financing from other sources (e.g. equity from village 
funds or from local government contributions); c) willingly participate in project activities. 
  An  eligibility  and  screening  criteria  will  be  developed  during  early  project  implementation  to 
ensure that the equipment goes to groups who are committed and can utilize the equipment effectively 
for the benefit of their members. The provision of these investments will be based on criteria including 
the following; (a) equity investment; (b) employment generation potential; (c) targeting of women from 
poor households; and (d) the number of women and youth benefitting. 
  Applicants  are  expected  to  develop  Business  Plans  to  justify  the  project  investment  in 
infrastructure and/or equipment. UPLANDs will provide technical assistance to facilitate development 
of  these  plans.  This  would  result  in  start-up  marketing  groups  and  those  in  their  early  stage  of 
development  being  able  to  calculate  short  and  medium-term  production  based  on  realistic  market 
projections. 
  Sub-Component  2.3:  Strengthening  Market  Linkages  and  Alliances.  Under  this  sub-
component mentoring support would be provided to establish or further build market linkages for the 
selected products and assist them in growing their markets. The project will engage experienced and 
suitably  skilled  Value  Chain,  Business  Development  and  Capacity  Development  specialists  in  each 
District so that Farmer Groups/Associations receive ongoing support through the market development 
process. 
  Throughout  the  project,  buyers  in downstream  markets  will  be  invited to  visit  Farmers  Groups 
and  Associations  operating  at  the  KUBE  and  BLUD  level  to  discuss  market  expectations. 
Representatives  of  Farmer  groups  and  Associations  will  also  undertake  market  visits  to  better 
understand  distribution systems  and  downstream markets. These study visits would be facilitated by 
the Value Chain and Business Development specialists in consultation with Village Coordinators. 
  Technical assistance will be provided to Farmers Groups and Associations operating at the KUBE 
and BLUD level for improving the market readiness and brand recognition of specific products in areas 
such as selection of primary and secondary packaging, labelling and sales promotion. This will extend 
to  assistance  with  achieving  compliance  with  certification  standards  where  required,  for  example 
organic rice. 
  Systems for regular exchange of meaningful, marketing related information between buyers and 
sellers will be developed and introduced in the early stages of the project. This would include specific 
marketing opportunities, for example, for organic and value-added products or opportunities to access 
new, higher value markets such as modern retail or export. 
Identification and correction of harvest and post-harvest issues will involve product assessments 
being undertaken by Quality Assessors (particularly women and youth) trained within the project and 
operating within packing and processing facilities. Consignments would be checked for compliance with 
buyer requirements before dispatch and these assessments would be communicated to downstream 
markets using check-sheets and digital photography. 
  Simple technologies such as temperature recording devices would also be used to monitor cool 
chain performance during distribution. These consignments would  be further  assessed by buyers on 
receipt. If quality issues were identified (such as overripe fruit) these issues would be communicated 
back up the Value Chain and collectively analyzed so that appropriate corrective actions could be taken. 
  Quality  assessments  for  each  commodity  end-product  would  be  developed  by  Value  Chain 
Technical Specialists in concert with Farmer Groups, Associations and Commodity Alliances. As part of 
this  process  product  quality  specifications  suited  to  the  intended  market  may  be  agreed  by  chain 
148 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
participants and regular, scheduled quality  assessments carried  out  at each stage of the  production, 
distribution and marketing system. 
  This  collective  gathering  and  sharing  of  post-harvest  and  market  information  will  enhance 
smallholder  understanding  of  market  dynamics,  particularly  in  distant  markets  and  help  build  and 
strengthen  commercial  relationships.  Over  the  life  of  the  project  these  systems  will  be  refined  and 
improved, best practices established, and implementation progressively extended to larger numbers of 
project beneficiaries in each district. 
  Market Intelligence systems offer job opportunities for women and youth. To ensure sustainability 
training  would  be  provided  so  that  beneficiary  groups  take  a  progressively  larger  role  in  information 
collection,  analysis  and  dissemination  with  continued  technical  support  from  Government  and  other 
support agencies as required. These systems will act as models for enhancing smallholder capacity, 
productivity and incomes through commercially relevant value chain engagement. 
  At an early stage of the project, buyers in downstream markets will be invited to visit Districts to 
discuss market expectations. Representatives of Farmer groups and Associations will also undertake 
market  visits  to  better  understand  distribution  systems  and  downstream  markets.  These  study  visits 
would  be  facilitated  by  the  Value  Chain  and  Business  Development  specialists  in  consultation  with 
Village  Coordinators.  Technical  assistance  will  be  provided  for  improving  the  market  readiness  and 
brand recognition of specific products in areas such as selection of primary and secondary packaging, 
labelling and sales promotion. This will extend to assistance with achieving compliance with certification 
standards where required, for example organic rice. 
Sub-component  2.4:  Access  to  Financial  Services.  An  important  constraint  to  improved 
production  and  post-harvest  performance  and  development  is  limited  or  no  access  to  finance  - 
especially microfinance to farmers and agri-related microenterprises. The current situation is one where 
the individuals or groups have to either borrow from moneylenders at high mark-up/interest, or place a 
high  collateral  with  banks/MFIs,  or  are  simply  non-bankable  (i.e.  with  no  operating  institutions,  no 
suitable products or non-favourable lending criteria). 
  The project will provide access to financial  services in the selected project  areas  according to 
crop requirements. It is expected the UPLANDs will provide US$ 3.7 m (3% of total UPLANDs cost) for 
up  to  60%  of  the  seasonal  finance  requirements  for  a  particular  crop. Although  the  majority  of  the 
financing allocation would be for microfinance support, the project may also consider larger loans for 
working  capital  or  asset  financing  for  individual  farmers  or  groups,  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  target 
communities  and  the  value  chains  to  be  developed.  The  principal  of  providing  an  allocation  for 
microfinance, is not only to provide access to finance for the target beneficiaries, but also to provide 
stimulation and capacity building to the local banks/MFIs so that they would be incentivized and capable 
of providing microfinance products beyond the life of the project. 
In line with the national regulations, and based on the situations in project locations, microfinance 
funds  will  be  delivered  using  on-granting  mechanisms  to  each  Kabupaten  (district).  Each  respective 
district would then identify a local bank (e.g. provincial bank, district bank, national bank branch in the 
district,  etc.)  or  a  local  Microfinance  Institution  (MFI).  Based  on  mutual  agreement,  the  Head  of  the 
district (Bupati) would then issue an official administrative instruction (Decree/SK) stating that a certain 
amount of funds from the district government would be placed in the selected local bank/MFI for the 
purpose  of  providing  access  to  finance  to  the  local  beneficiaries,  with  the  fund  to  be  managed  the 
bank/MFI for a fee. The administrative/management fee of the bank/MFI would be set in the SK  and 
shall be a competitive rate based on local benchmarks. The terms and conditions of the microfinance 
lending (i.e. tenor, mark-up rates, lending criteria) would also be stated in the instruction from the District 
head. The microfinance lending would be structured so that it would be offered to individuals as well as 
groups, with or without collateral, based on necessity or local circumstances. UPLANDs microfinance 
specialists would work with the PMU and PIUs to develop the full set of criteria, operating procedures, 
requirements,  terms  and  conditions,  monitoring  guidelines,  and  other  required  mechanisms  and 
documentation, based on the local contexts. 
  To explore value chain financing options, the project would initiate a dialogue with the commodity 
alliances established under the project and examine the scope for financing by both input suppliers and 
wholesalers  and  retailers  purchasing  the  selected  commodities.  There  is  evidence  that  value  chain 
financing options can work effectively in dealing with smallholders under specific circumstances. 
149 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  A financial literacy training course would be organized for farmer groups, women and youth and 
will be built into the capacity development and business development curriculum. Basic financial literacy 
training would be offered to women’s and men’s farmer groups with the objective of helping to improve 
livelihoods  through  inculcating  the  knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  required  to  adopt  good  money-
management  practices  for  earning,  spending,  saving,  borrowing  and  investing.  This  would  include 
understanding the benefits of savings and loans, planning of income and expenditures of households, 
analyzing investments and understanding the role of financial institutions. The project would utilize the 
methodology and materials being used in IFAD’s READ SI project and build on lessons learnt. 
Component 3: Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems 
  This  component  would  include  two  (2)  sub-components;  (i)  Capacity  building  and  institutional 
development of MOA and Districts; and (ii) Adaptive Research. 
  Sub-Component 3.1:  Capacity  building  and  institutional  development  of  MOA  and 
Districts.  All  agriculture  extension  staff  in  each  district  will  be  encouraged  to  focus  on  the  target 
commodity for their specific location. UPLANDs will fund preparation and delivery of a number training 
courses  specifically  written  for  each  commodity,  including  guidelines.  This  refresher  training  will  be 
delivered at MOA training centres in Batu and Lembang in 2019. To improve their understanding and to 
ensure they can work effectively with extension staff in their respective locations, village facilitators will 
be invited to participate in the extension training programs (training will be delayed until after VFs have 
been recruited). Extension staff will be trained to understand post-harvest and market linkages as well. 
Follow  up  refresher  training  may  be  provided  by  UPLANDs  crop  and  product  specialists.  Wherever 
feasible, this training can be delivered in partnership with private sector extension providers41. 
  Because  of  their  inexperience  with  managing  and  implementing  projects  funded  by  external 
financial  institutions,  district  authorities  (including  PIU  and  Bappeda  staff)  will  be  supported  by 
UPLANDs capacity building specialists who will be located at each district. This support will be designed 
to  ensure  smooth  implementation  of  on-granting  and  procurement  activities  in  particular.  Similarly, 
farmer  institutions  (KUBE,  BLUD  etc.)  will  be  supported  in  business  management,  in  particular  in 
preparation of business plans, cash flow management, operations and maintenance of capital assets, 
staff management etc. 
  UPLANDs  will  support  and  train  national  and  provincial  seed  centres.  While  the  IFAD  funded 
IPDMIP  project  is  also  engaged  with  these  institutions,  the  range  of  crop  varieties  most  relevant  to 
upland  farming  systems  will  still  require  support  and  capacity  building  from  UPLANDs  technical 
specialists. 
It is recommended that wherever feasible, UPLANDs should build on the capacity building done 
by  other  on-going  IFAD  funded  projects  such  as  READSI  and  IPDMIP.  In  particular,  the  on-granting 
guidelines prepared by IPDMIP can be adopted for use at UPLANDs PIUs. 
  Sub-component  3.2: Adaptive Research. Adaptive research will  be an important aspect of this 
component. This is important given that are many technologies ‘on shelf’ at the research institutes, but 
not  extended  to  farmers.  There  is  also  need  to  continuously  assess  the  adaption  and  adoption 
processes of the introduced technologies, and incorporate lessons learnt into the extension programs 
to help their greater uptake and use by farmers and local agribusinesses. The adaptive research will be 
conducted  on-farm  and  will  engage  extension  staff  and  farmers  in  their  design,  management  and 
evaluation. It will have three key activities for which the project will budget for 
  On-farm  trials  of  new  crop  varieties  and  their  good  agronomic  practices.  Examples  include: 
(i) high yielding coffee varieties which respond well to fertilizer application; (ii) rice; and (iii) potatoes. All 
3  crops  are  target  crops  of  the  project.  The  trials  could  also  include  intercropping  that  farmers 
traditionally practice – how this can be done well in ways that does not adversely affect the yields of the 
two crops. The on-farm trials design will be determined in consultation with extension staff and farmers 
with budgets to support their establishment and management. 
  Soil fertility including developing appropriate fertilizer recommendations based on diagnostics. It 
is important that farmers get the best advice on what fertilizers to use judiciously within the framework 
of integrated soil fertility management. The program budgets will support soil sampling, rapid analysis 
and reporting on the key project locations. Where the data exists from previous studies, the project will 
41 As IFAD has done on other projects e.g. READSI with MARS Cocoa. 
150 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
support its synthesis and fine-tuning to the needs of the farmers, the fertilizer industry and extension 
system in easy to understand comprehensible formats. 
  Yield and socio-economic studies – including yield analysis and periodic assessment of farmers' 
adoption  patterns  of  project  innovations.  This  requires  setting  up  good  baselines.  The  project  will 
provide resources for national research to set a good sampling framework, collect and analyze the data, 
and report fast the outcomes to all stakeholders involved in the project. The frequency of the studies 
could be twice a year, at least for the annual crops. For the perennial crops (e.g. mango), once a year 
would  be  adequate.  Data  collected  will  be  archived  well,  updated  and  shared  with  all  stakeholders 
regularly. All data collected from the field will be geo-referenced. 
Component 4: Project Management 
  This  component  would  cover  the  incremental  costs  of  Project  Management  Unit  at  all  levels, 
including  one  PMU  and  14 PIUs. The Government would  pay the  salaries  of its staff  but the  project 
would pay additional incentives to the staff. The component would also pay for hiring additional staff, 
technical assistance and consultancies. Based on its experience of successful implementation, IsDB 
would  like  to  procure  the  services  of  a Project  Management,  Consultant,  as  well  as  a  Design  and 
Supervision Consultant to help in the implementation and supervision of the project. The PMU will also 
be  supported  by  a  team  of  technical  specialties  such  as  procurement,  financial  management,  M&E, 
etc.). The operational expenses related to the project management and implementation, including the 
start-up workshop and review activities will be financed under this component. The component would 
also  pay  for  all  travel  and  associated  costs.  The  component  would  also  pay  for  the  monitoring  and 
evaluation  costs  including  the  costs  of  undertaking  the  baseline,  mid-term  and  project  completion 
surveys  and  other  third  party  studies  required.  The  component  may  provide  the  additional  vehicles 
required for the project and other office equipment and facilities. 
VALUE CHAIN BY COMMODITY 
  Lebak  District.  The  project  area  in  Lebak  District  consist  2  types,  existing  area  (89  ha)  and 
extension area (331.6 ha). All of mangosteen harvested will be collected to Farmer Groups and then 
delivered  to  KUBE.  There  are  will  be  2  units  of  KUBE  in  project  location.  It  is  estimated  that  total 
production of mangosteen in project location  could be 472 ton consist of super grade 178 ton (38%) 
and low grade 294 ton (62%). Super grade of mangosteen would be for exporters and low grade would 
be for processing units which manage by KUBE. There are 2 end products that would be produced by 
KUBE, mangosteen juice for local market and mangosteen peel flour for pharmaceutical industries. 
151 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Figure 1: Value Chain for Mangosteen of Lebak District 
  Tasikmalaya District. The project in Tasikmalaya District will develop organic rice in area 500 
hectares involve 1.077 farmers divided into 8 Farmer Groups and located in 4 villages of Cipatujah Sub-
district.  Seed  of  the  organic  rice  will  be  obtained  from  local  farmers  of  Tasikmalaya  District.  It  is 
estimated that total production will reach 2,500 tons of unhulled rice. All of the harvesting rice would be 
collected  in  Farmer Groups,  then will  be  delivered  to  Farmers Association or  Cooperative  which will 
form KUBE for marketing purpose. In this KUBE, the unhulled rice will be process to be Branded Organic 
Rice and deliver to retail market, wholesaler, and industry for consumers. 
Figure 2:. Value Chain for Organic Rice of Tasikmalaya District 
152 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Subang District. Mangosteen would develop in project area of Subang District with total area 
2,000  cover 7 sub districts in 31 villages. It is  estimated  that total production will reach 8,000 tones, 
about 60% of production would be delivered to wholesalers through collectors, 20% for supplier trader 
and  last  20  % for  7  KUBEs then will  be  delivered  to  BLUD. The  fresh mangosteen that  delivered  to 
wholesaler, then will be distributed for exporters (80%), modern retailers (15%) and supermarket (5%). 
In this value chain,  Farmer Groups will manage  all of mangosteen production, then KUBE will 
manage  20%  (1,600  ton)  of  production  for  BLUD,  and  then  BLUD  will  manage  the  product  such  as 
follow: for processing unit (skin pulp) as much 20% (320 tons) and 80% remain (1,280 tons) would be 
sold in fresh and distribute to local market 15% and exporter agent 65%. 
Figure 3: Value Chain for Mangosteen of Subang District 
  Cirebon District The project of Cirebon District will develop mango in area 1,500 ha consist of 
existing area 1,000 ha and new area 500 ha with total production 15,000 tons. All of production will be 
managed  by  Farmer  Groups,  then  as  much  80%  (12.000  tons)  will  distribute  to  Collector  and  20% 
(3,000  tons)  remaining  will  distribute  to  KUBE.  The  next,  the  collectors  will  deliver  the  product  to 
153 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
wholesaler, then wholesaler will sell the fresh mango to Modern Retailer (25%) and Traditional Retailer 
(75%). 
  Meanwhile, 20% of total production in KUBE will be delivered for BLUD, then the fresh mango as 
much 20% (600 tons) will be processed such for dried and sweet snack and 80% (2,400 tons) for export 
market of Singapore, Malaysia, UEA, RRC and Europe. 
Figure 4: Value Chain for Mangos of Cirebon District 
  Garut District The project in Garut District will develop potato seed that has 2 kinds of products, 
there are G-0 Potato Seed and G-2 Potato Seed. Production of G-0 seed will involve 20 famers in their 
12,570 m2 screen house. While, production of G-2 seed will involve 852 farmers in their 200 ha of land 
that  incorporated  in  Smallholder  Potato  Seed  Growers.  In  this  project,  G-0  seed  will  be  delivered 
through  KUBE  only  to  Smallholder  Potato  Seed  Growers  who  will  produce  G2-seed  and  then  to  be 
delivered to Potato Grower in Garut and surrounding and also to South Minahasa District through BLUD. 
Figure 5: Value Chain for Potato Seed of Garut District 
154 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Banjarnegara District. The project in Banjarnegara District will develop goat/sheep in communal 
cage and also coffee in area 588 ha which involve 1,218 farmers divided into 47 Farmer Groups, located 
in 34 villages under 5 sub-district. 
  Number  of  sheep  proposed  in  this  project  is  1,032  heads  of  Batur  sheep  and  3,085  heads  of 
Ettawa goat. Farmer group will manage communal cage of sheep/goat and will raise the goat/sheep 
until the female and male population & composition achieve optimum number (e.g. 40 head of female 
goat/sheep per farmer). To support the health of goat/sheep of the project, it need 3 animal health center 
(AHC) that located in Susukan, Karangkobar, and Pucung with a staff in each AHC. 
  Goat farmer group will produce milk and young goat, whereas sheep farmer group will produce 
young sheep and sheep wool. Milk production from farmer group will be sold to Gapoktan for further 
processing by District Cooperative that will process to produce various milk-processed products (e.g. 
milk  powder,  etc.).  While,  young  goat/sheep  and  post-productive  will  be  sold  to  other  farmers  for 
fattening  before  for  consumers  after  processed  in  slaughterhouses.  In  addition,  manure  from 
sheep/goat will be processed by farmer group to produce organic fertilizer to be applied for their coffee 
plant. 
  There are 2 types of coffee in Banjarnegara District, Arabica for land with altitude more than 1,500 
m above sea level and Robusta for land with altitude less than 1,500 m above sea level. Coffee will be 
cultivated by farmers and will produce cherries coffee. Farmer group will collect the cherries and to be 
sold to Gapoktan. Gapoktan will be formed at village level and act as farmer-own business entity (e.g. 
KUBE).  Gapoktan  will  process  the  cherries  coffee  to  produce  coffee  bean  with  special  processing 
methods, then sell it to cooperative at district level and also to coffee collector from district and other 
area such as Jakarta and Semarang. 
  Cooperative at district level will be formed and all Farmer Group or Gapoktan is the shareholder 
of the cooperative. The cooperative will has some of activities, such as process coffee bean to produce 
roasted  coffee  and  sell  various  village-branded  roasted  and  packaged  ground  coffee.  Green  coffee 
would be sold to Coffee Cafes which manage by the  youth at district level. At the end, the  coffee  of 
Banjarnegara would be accepted by industries and consumers. 
Figure 6: Value Chain for Coffee Integrated Sheep and Goat of Banjarnegara District 
155 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Purbalingga  District.  The  project  in  Purbalingga  District  will  develop  goats/sheeps  in 
communal cage that involve 450 farmers which divided into 18  Farmer Groups, located in 9 villages 
under Kejobong Sub-district. One farmer group will manage one communal cage that consists of 150 
female goats plus 15 male goats. The Farmer Groups will get advantage from selling meat or life goat 
to local and regional market, also get advantage from selling goat dung to Gapoktan Cooperative. 
To  ensure  that  goat  feed  is  always  available  in  sufficient  quantities  and  good  quality,  the 
Gapoktan Cooperative in sub-district level will produce the goat feed by using local raw materials, such 
cassava skin, onggok (side product of cassava industries), coffee skin, etc. This product could be called 
concentrates that will be sold to the Farmer Groups of goat. To support goat rising of Farmer Groups, 
the project will establish Animal Health Services Unit, Goat Slaughterhouse and cold storage services 
which could be managed by UPTD (Unit Pelakasana Teknis Daerah/ regional technical implementation 
unit). 
Figure 7: Value Chain for Goat of Purbalingga District 
Magelang  District  The  project  in  Magelang  District  will  develop  organic  rice  in  area  2,000 
hectares involve 5,396 farmers that located in 33 villages under 4 sub-districts and divided into 3 zones, 
namely  Bandongan,  Grabag  and  Sawangan.  As  much  1,030  ha  of  that  area  have  got  organic 
certification from Seloliman (LESOS)  Mojokerto.  Seed of  the  organic  rice  will  be  obtained  from  local 
farmers of Magelang, especially from AGRO AS SYIFA Farmer Group in Grabag. 
Total production of the organic rice for the project area 2,000 ha is estimated about 10,000 tons 
of  dry  husked  rice  grain  per  season. After  harvesting,  the  product  from  farmers  will  be  collected  in 
Farmer Groups and about 80% of the total production will be distributed to middle trader and collector 
for Rice Processing Companies. While, 20% remain will be delivered to Gapoktan in each zone level. 
In Gapoktan, this dry  husked rice grain will be process to be Packed & Branded Organic Rice, then 
distributed to Cooperative of Organic Rice Association at district level. Finally, this branded organic rice 
will be distributed to Industries and trader for consumers. 
156 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Figure 8: Value Chain for Organic Rice of Magelang District 
  Malang District The project in Malang District will develop shallot in area 300 hectares involve 
778 farmers divided into 11 Farmer Groups and located in 3 villages under 2 sub-district. Seed of the 
shallot  will  be  obtained  from  local  farmers  and  in  the  future  may  from  Sumbawa  farmers.  Total 
production of shallot of this project is estimated about 3,000 tons. Most of the shallot would be delivered 
to Farmer Federation, cooperative and collectors. Then  the products would be distributed to primary 
and  secondary  wholesaler,  processors  and  retailer.  At  the  end,  the  product  would  be  delivered  to 
consumers. 
Figure 9: Value Chain for Shallot of Malang District 
157 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Sumenep District The project  in Sumenep District will develop  shallot in area 160 hectares 
involve 1,132 farmers divided into 53 Farmer Groups and located in 4 villages under 1 sub-district. Seed 
of the shallot will be obtained from local farmers and in the future may from Sumbawa farmers. Total 
production of shallot of this project is estimated about 1,600 tons. Most of the shallot would be delivered 
to Farmer Federation, cooperative and collectors. Then  the products would be distributed to primary 
and  secondary  wholesaler,  processors  and  retailer.  At  the  end,  the  product  would  be  delivered  to 
consumers. 
Figure 10: Value Chain for Shallot of Sumenep District 
  East  Lombok  District  The  project  in  East  Lombok  District  will  develop  garlic  in  area  1,640 
hectares involve 2,902 farmers divided into 92 Farmer Groups, located in 7 sub-districts and 26 villages. 
Seed of the potato will be obtained from local area. All production of garlic would be collected by Farmer 
Groups, then delivered to KUBE which 1 KUBE in 1 sub-district of project location. Furthermore, the 
product would be delivered to Farmer Association in district level and will be processed into 3 kinds of 
product, there are black garlic (D class), seed (C class), raw seed (A & B class). All kind of the products 
will be marketed for inter/regional market, local market, and for local consumption. 
158 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Figure 11. Value Chain for Garlic of East Lombok District 
  Sumbawa  District  The  project  in  Sumbawa  District  will  develop  shallot  seed  in  area  3,000 
hectares  involve  2,700  farmers  divided  into  59  Farmer  Groups,  located  in  13  sub-districts  and  26 
villages. Seed of the shallot will be obtained from local area. All production of shallot would be collected 
by  Farmer  Groups,  then  delivered  to  KUBE  which  1  KUBE  in  1  sub-district  of  project  location. 
Furthermore, the product would be delivered to Farmer Association in district level and will be processed 
into 3 kinds of product, there are Food Products, seed (0/1), and raw seed. All kind of the products will 
be marketed for regional market, local market, and for local consumption. 
Figure 12: Value Chain for Shallot Seed of Sumbawa District 
159 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  South Minahasa District The project in South Minahasa District will develop Potato for industry 
in area 2,000 hectares involve 2.179 farmers located in 10 villages of Modoinding Sub-district. Seed of 
the potato will be obtained from potato seed farmers of Garut District. Total production of potato of this 
project estimated about 30,000 ton per season (4-5 months). All of potato production will be collected 
in  KUBE  (Kelompok  Usaha  Bersama/Joint Business  Group). This Kube  would  be  a  business  unit  of 
Bumdes (Badan Usaha Milik Desa/Village-owned Business Entity) which currently exists and is already 
running. There are 10 Bumdes in project location (1 village 1 Bumdes). After the potatoes are collected 
in  Kube,  then  would  be  delivered  to  BLUD  (Badan  Layanan  Umum  Daerah/Regional  Public  Service 
Agency). The main activities in Kube are grading, packaging, and marketing. 
It  is  estimated  that  80%  of  all  production  could  be  high  grade  and  will  be  delivered  to  potato 
industries such Indofood, Nestle, etc. While 20% of production could be low grade and will be delivered 
to inter-island market and Processing Unit which managed by Women Farmers Groups. All of marketing 
activities would be supported by local government, especially District Agriculture Services and District 
Trade Services. 
Figure 13: Value Chain for Potato Industry of South Minahasa District 
  Gorontalo  District  The  project  in  Gorontalo  District  will  develop  Gapi  Banana  (special  local 
banana) in area 20 hectares of Pilot Project involve 26 farmers. Seed of the banana would be provided 
by Seed  Plant Supervision and  Certification of Food Crops  and  Horticulture (Balai Pengawasan dan 
Sertifikasi  Benih  Tanaman  Pangan  dan  Hortikultura)  of  Gorontalo  Province.  It  is  estimated  that  total 
production of the banana about 1,000 tons per year. All of the harvested products would be delivered 
to Regional Public Service Agency (Badan Layanan Umum Daerah/BLUD) under District Government 
of Gorontalo. 
  Activities of the BLUD cover grading, packaging, cold storage and ripening of the Gapi Banana. 
It is estimated that high grade of banana about 50% and medium grade 30%. The high grade will be 
distributed to Inter-Island  and export market, while  the medium  grade  will be  allocated  for  retail  and 
local market. The 20% of low-grade banana would be delivered to Women Farmer Groups for processed 
bananas. The  processed  products  will  be  distributed  to  local  market.  Banana  marketing  of  the  Pilot 
160 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
project would be supported by Successful Team for Gapi Banana Marketing that the members consist 
of District Agriculture Services Staff, District Trade Services Staff, representative of Farmer Groups and 
Women Farmer Groups. 
Figure 14: Value Chain for Banana of Gorontalo District 
Implementation Arrangements 
  Executing Agency. In general, Ministry of Agriculture through Directorate General of Agricultural 
Infrastructures and Facilities will be the Project Implementing Agency which in its daily implementation 
will  be  carried  out  by  the  National  Project  Management  Unit  (NPMU)  in  central  government.  While, 
implementing organizations at the district level is the District/City Agricultural Service which forms the 
District Project Implementing Unit (DPIU) which is responsible for the implementation of daily projects. 
NPMU  in  carrying  out  its  duties  should  coordinate  with  DPIU.  NPMU  represents  the  whole  DPIU  in 
communicating and coordinating with IsDB and IFAD. 
  The  main  function  of  PMU  is  to  regulate  policies  regarding  project  implementation  and  be 
responsible for  project  implementation from the  planning,  implementation,  administration, monitoring 
and reporting of project activities. The project's daily executor is chaired by the Project Manager who is 
directly responsible to the Director General of Agricultural Infrastructure and Facilities. In carrying out 
its  work  PMU  is  assisted  by  a  Project  Management  Consultant  (PMC)  whose  job  is  to  provide 
managerial  input  to  PMU,  Design  and  Supervision  Consultants  (DSC)  in  charge  of  designing  and 
supervising infrastructure development, and individual technical experts tailored to the needs of each 
commodity  and  location.  Procurement  of  consulting  services  for  Project  Management  Consultants 
(PMC) and Design and Supervision Consultants (DSC) will be carried out through the implementation 
of Prequalification (Short Lists) for national consulting companies. While the procurement of technical 
experts is carried out individually. The procurement of PMC, DSC and technical experts is carried out 
by PMU. Besides that, in each village there will be a facilitator who will carry out the procurement by 
the PIU in the district.  
161 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  While the PMU has overall responsibility for project delivery, each of the Components will have 
specific implementation arrangements: 
  Figure 15 shows Organization Structure of the UPLANDs project. 
Figure 15: Organization Structure of the Project 
  Project Management Unit. The PMU will coordinate the 14 district Project Implementation Units 
(PIU)  which will be embedded at Dinas Pertanian (District Agricultural Agency). Main implementation 
162 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
activities will be undertaken at district level. The PMU and PIUs will be staffed by  dedicated full time 
staff and supported by technical and administrative staff to ensure timely project delivery. 
  The  PMU  has  overall  responsibility  for  project  implementation  and  will  be  led  by  a  Project 
Manager supported by a Planning Assistants to provide overall coordination and oversight of all project 
activities  within  a  number  of  districts  and  ensure  adequate  presence  and  support  of  the  project 
management out in the districts level. In addition, the Project Manager will be supported by Financial 
Management  team,  Procurement  Officer  and  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  officer  that  will  oversee 
financial  management,  procurement  and  programme  administration  issues,  including  planning,  M&E 
and reporting. 
Interact with the Advisory and Technical group regarding project preparation; 
  The NPMU will: 
  Prepare guidelines as a reference in project implementation; 
 
  Conduct socialization and preparation to district level; 
  Provide training to the DPIU’s staff in project management and implementation. 
  Monitor program implementation to be in accordance with applicable norms and regulations; 
  Monitor and coordinate relations with the Lender during project implementation; 
  Responsible for all project implementation activities; 
  Responsible  for  the  overall  sustainability  of  the  project,  during  the  pre-project  period,  project 
implementation and post-project period; 
  Responsible for indicators of program success; 
  Make and consolidate overall and annual work plans, budget plan and project implementation 
programs; 
  Submitting project progress reports to relevant agencies and donor countries; 
  Coordinate with relevant agencies; 
  Make regular coordination with DPIUs; 
  Evaluate the program; 
  Prepare regular coordination meetings with related parties. 
163 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Occupation/ 
Position 
PMU’s Project 
Manager 
PMU’s Planning 
Asst  
PMU’s Financial 
Management 
Asst 
PMU’s 
Procurement 
Asst 
Table 7: PMU Roles and Responsibilities 
Task and responsibility 
  Reported directly to the DG of Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities (DGAIF); 
  Coordinate the PMU staff, management consultant, technical consultant and Design 
and  Supervision  consultants  in  the  preparation  of  project  implementation  and 
management  guideline,  preparation  of  overall  and  annual  work  plan  and  budgeting, 
project procurement at MoA level, project finance management, project monitoring and 
evaluation, and project reporting; 
  Support the Agency at MoF in preparing grant agreement with participating districts; 
  Maintain close coordination and communication with IsDB and IFAD and other related 
agencies at Bappenas, MoF and MoHA, as well as Provincial Agriculture Office; 
  Maintain close coordination and communication with DPIUs, including conduct regular 
meeting and field supervision; 
  Prepare and submit project management and implementation reports to DGAIF; 
 
In  consultation  with  Advisory  and  Technical  Groups  and  upon  approval  of  DGAIF, 
IsDB/IFAD to take any actions to ensure the project implemented as plan and comply 
with the government regulations and Loan Agreement. 
  Support  the  PMU  Project  Manager  in  preparing  guideline  in  project  planning  and 
budgeting; 
  Make  coordination  with  DPIUs’  planning  assistants  in  preparing  overall  and  annual 
work plan and budgeting, including train to the DPIUs’ planning assistant in planning 
and budgeting procedures; 
In coordination with PMU’s financial management assistant support the PMU manager 
in preparing overall and annual work plan and budgeting of activities at central level, 
and consolidating planning from DPIU level; 
 
  Make coordination with procurement assistant in preparing procurement plan at central 
level. 
  Support the PMU Project Manager and agency at MoF in making grant agreement with 
participating districts; 
  Support  the  PMU  Project  Manager  in  preparing  guideline  in  project  finance 
management including the use of on-granting system; 
  Make coordination with DPIUs’ financial management assistants in the implementation 
of on-granting system, including working with appointed MoF staff to provide training 
the DPIUs in on-granting system and mechanism; 
  Make  coordination  with  DPIUs’  financial  management  asssistant  in  the  budgeting, 
disbursement  and  document  verification,  and  reporting  of  project  finance  including 
preparation of statement of expenditure (SOE); 
  Monitor and record the project project disbursement at central and district level; 
  Support  the  PMU  Project  Manager  in  preparing  regular  project  financial  and 
disbursement report to be submitted to DGAIF, Bappenas, MoD, IsDB and IFAD. 
  Support the PMU Project Manager in preparing guideline in procurement which follow 
the recent government regulation, e.g. Prepress No. 16/2018; 
  Make  coordination  with  DPIUs’  procurement  assistants  in  the  implementation  of 
Prepres No. 16/2018 regarding the procurement of goods/services; and as necessary 
provide training in procurement procedures; 
  Make  coordination  with  DPIUs’  procurement  asssistant  in  the  procurement  plan  at 
district level, and monitoring the progress of procurement activities at district level; 
  Make  coordination  with  Pokja  Pemilihan  dalam  Pengadaan  Barang/Jasaand/or 
PPK42in the MoA to support the PMU project manager/PPK in tender or selection of 
providers  at  central  level,  since  preparation  of  Terms  of  Reference  or  Specification, 
other  tender/selection  document,  announcement  and  tender  process  applying  e-
procurement; 
  Monitor the progress of procurement activities at central and district level, and prepare 
regular report to PMU Project Manager. 
42PPK is abbreviated as Pejabat Pembuat Komitmen (Authorized Commitment Maker). PPK is part of Satker (Satuan Kerja or 
Working Unit). Satker is the Authorized Budget User/Goods User which is part of an organizational unit in the Ministry/Institution 
that carries out one or several activities of a program. Satker and its PPK is the program/project administrative and management 
entity in the government system. In some extend, the PPK and PMU Project Manager at central level or PPK and PIU Project 
Manager at regional level can be the same person. 
164 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Occupation/ 
Position 
PMU’s 
Monitoring & 
Evaluation Asst 
Task and responsibility 
  Support  the  PMU  Project  Manager  in  preparing  guideline  project  monitoring  and 
evaluation system; including developing on-line M&E system; 
  Make  coordination  with  DPIUs’  monitoring  and  evaluation  assistants 
the 
implementation  project  monitoring  and  evaluation  procedure,  and  as  necessary 
provide training in procurement procedures; 
in 
  Work  with  other  PMU  assistants  to  make  coordination  with  DPIUs’  monitoring  and 
evaluation asssistant in monitoring and evaluation of the project progress (pyisical and 
financial),  and  achievement  of  project  output  which  refer  to  the  Project  Design  and 
Monitoring Framework (DMF), including to make regular visit and to ensure that project 
progress and achievement are recorded and documented properly; 
  Support  the  PMU  Project  Manager  in  preparing  regular  Monitoring  and  Evaluation 
report of the project. 
  District  Project  Implementing  Units.  The  PIUs  will  be  housed  under  the  Dinas  Pertanian  in 
each district. With similar structure to PMU, PIU will be led by a District Project Manager and supported 
by the relevant support staff to provide implementation support and managing all project activities within 
number  of  villages.  Similar  to  PMU,  the  PIU  will  be  equipped  with  staff  that  will  oversee  financial 
management,  procurement  and  programme  administration  issues,  including  planning,  M&E  and 
reporting. 
  The PIU will: 
  Conduct socialization at village and farmer group level; 
  Facilitate and monitor social preparation; 
  Train  all  project  actors  at  district  and  village  level  in  project  implementation  guideline  and 
procedure; 
Interact with the district’s Advisory and Technical group regarding project preparation. 
 
  Monitor program implementation at district level to be in accordance with applicable norms and 
regulations; 
  Responsible for all project implementation activities at district level; 
  Responsible for the sustainability of the project at district level, during the pre-project period, 
project implementation and post-project period; 
  Prepare overall and annual work plans and budget plan; 
  Submitting project progress reports to Head of Agriculture Office and PMU; 
  Coordinate with relevant agencies at district level and with PMU; 
  Evaluate the program implementation and output at district level; 
  Prepare regular coordination meetings with related parties; 
  Aligning the policies of the Directorate General related to the UPLANDs project. 
165 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Occupation/ 
Position 
PIU’s Project 
Manager 
PIU’s Planning 
Asst 
Task and responsibility 
  Reported directly to the Head of District Agriculture Office and to the PMU in the 
project implementation; 
  Coordinate  the  PIU  staff  and  facilitators  in  the  project  preparation  and 
implementation at district level including social & institutional preparation at field 
level,  preparation  of  overall  and  annual  work  plan  and  budgeting  plan,  project 
procurement,  project  finance  management,  project  monitoring  and  evaluation, 
and project reporting; 
  Maintain close coordination and communication with PMU Project Manager and 
other  related  agencies  at  district  level  (e.g.  Bappeda,  Dinas  PU)  as  well  as 
Provincial Agriculture Office in the project implementation; 
  Prepare and submit project management and implementation reports to PMU and 
 
Head of District Agriculture Office; 
In consultation with District Advisory and Technical Groups and upon approval of 
Head  of  District  Agriculture  Office  and  PMU  to  take  any  actions  to  ensure  the 
project  implemented  as  plan  and  comply  with  the  government  regulations  and 
Loan Agreement; 
  Support the PIU’s Project Manager in preparing guideline in project planning and 
budgeting; 
  Make  coordination  with  Facilitators  (if  any)  and  farmers’  leader  in  preparing 
 
overall and annual work plan and budgeting; 
In  coordination  with  DPIU’s  financial  management  assistant  support  the  DPIU 
Project  Manager  in  preparing  overall  and  annual  work  plan  and  budgeting  of 
activities at district level; 
  Make coordination with DPIU’s procurement assistant in preparing procurement 
plan at district level. 
PIU’s Financial 
Management 
Asst 
  Support the DPIU’s Project Manager in preparing budgeting plan to enter the local 
DPA,  and  in  the  implementation  of  on-granting  system  with  refer  to  the  grant 
agreement made by Bupati and MoF; 
  Support the DPIU’s Project Manager in preparing document for disbursement to 
PIU’s 
Procurement Asst 
PIU’s Monitoring 
& Evaluation Asst 
be submitted to MoA; 
  Support  the  DPIU’s  Project  Manager  in  monitoring  and  recording  the  project 
project expenditure and disbursement status; 
  Support  the  DPIU’s  Project  Manager  in  preparing  regular  project  financial  and 
disbursement  report  to  be  submitted  to  Head  of  Distric  Agriculture  Office  and 
PMU. 
  Make  coordination  with  Pokja  Pemilihan  dalam  Pengadaan  Barang/Jasaand/or 
District-level  PPK  to  support  the  DPIUs  project  manager/PPK  in  tender  or 
selection  of  providers  of  procurement  of  good/construction  work/service 
implemented  at  district  level,  since  preparation  of  Terms  of  Reference  or  work 
specifications,  other  tender/selection  document,  announcement  and  tender 
process applying e-procurement; 
  Monitor the progress of procurement activities at district level, and prepare regular 
report to Head of District Agriculture Office and PMU Procurement Assistant; 
  Work  with  related  technical  group  and  beneficiaries  as  well  as  supervision 
consultant or  other assigned inspection staff to verify and check the  delivery of 
goods/physical works/services; 
  Make close coordination with PMU’s Procurement Assistant. 
  Make  coordination  with  PMU’s  monitoring  and  evaluation  assistants  in  the 
implementation and to conduct project monitoring and evaluation procedure; 
  Work  with  other  DPIU’s  assistants  in  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  project 
progress (pyisical and financial), and achievement of project output which refer to 
the project monitoring and evaluation guideline, including to ensure that project 
progress and achievement are recorded and documented properly; and delivered 
properly and on-time to PMU or through on-line M&E system; 
  Support  the  DPIU’s  Project  Manager  in  preparing  regular  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation report of the project. 
  Provincial  Level.  While  there  will  be  no  dedicated  structure  established  at  Provincial  level, 
provinces will focus on coordination and monitoring support and as such will not lead any activities nor 
166 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
manage  activities  in  districts.  They  are  considered  necessary  to  provide  closer  support  and 
backstopping to the District PIU during implementation. 
  Project  Management  Consultants.  The  PMU  and  PIU  will  be  supported  by  a  Project 
Management  Consultants  (PMC)  team,  on  day  to  day management  and  coordination;  a  Design  and 
Supervision Consultant (DSC) team that will specifically verify the engineer design of the infrastructure 
works and will supervise the construction works in the project area; and Technical Experts that will be 
highly focused teams in each district according to commodity needs. These experts will explicitly focus 
on  advising  and  providing  professional  support  in  specific  areas,  such  as  value  chain,  water 
management, business development, microfinance, gender and other relevant technical areas. There 
will be a small number of individually recruited national and international technical experts, primarily at 
the PMU level and weighted towards the start of the programme to help establish the new programme 
systems and approaches. 
  The Project Management Consultant will: 
  Support the PMU in project preparation, including preparation of project  implementation and 
management guideline, provide training to DPIUs in project guideline; 
  Support the PMU in making coordination with IsDB/IFAD, and the Advisory and Technical group 
regarding project preparation. 
  Support the PMU in monitoring project implementation and management at district level to be 
in accordance with applicable norms and regulations; 
  Support the PMU in preparing overall and annual work plans and budget plan; 
  Support  the  PMU  in  procurement  including  preparation  of  Terms  of  Reference  and  other 
necessary  procurement  document,  including  coordination  with  Pokja  Pemilihan  dalam 
Pengadaan Barang/Jasa and/or PPK; 
  Support  the  PMU  in  project  finance  management,  including  verification  of  disbursement 
document; monitoring and recording disbursement progress and status; 
  Support the PMU in monitoring and evaluation of project implementation, activities progress, 
financial & disbursement progress, progress of output achievement; including developing on-
line M&E system; 
  Support  the  PMU  in  preparing  required  project  management  and  implementation  reports; 
including data on project progress and achievement status; 
  Support the PMU in the IsDB/IFAD in supervision mission and mid-term review; 
  Support the PMU in preparing necessary materials as required by the DGAIF; 
  Support the PMU in preparing project completion report. 
  The Individual Technical Specialists will 
  Provide PMU with technical supports, advices, recommendation in the project implementation 
based on assessment and/or findings; 
  Provide PMU with technical concept, idea and other best practice which are applicable for the 
project implementation to get best performance of the project; 
  Provide PMU with technical skill and expertise as requested and needed by the PMU for the 
project implementation; 
  Prepare  necessary proposals to conduct  specials  studies or  assessment or other necessary 
works for review by PMU and Technical Group to enhance the project performance. 
  The Design Consultant will:  
  Conduct survey and field investigation to prepare engineering design of construction work in 
assigned districts; 
  Make coordination with farmer groups and DPIU staff as well as technical group in preparing 
detail design and specifications; 
  Produce Detail Engineering Design document applicable for construction by local contractors, 
including  technical  drawing,  technical  specification,  unit  cost  analysis  and  estimated 
construction costs, and O&M Manual as required; 
  Prepare tender document including engineering estimate. 
  The Supervision Consultant will: 
167 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Conduct construction supervision and site inspection in the construction works implemented by 
contractors or farmer groups; including joint review with contractors/farmer groups on the detail 
design and updated as necessary; 
  Conduct review and give approval of the shop drawing prepared by contractors or technicians 
of farmer groups; 
  Witness and/or conduct independent quality test of the materials, construction works; 
  Monitor  the  physical  progress  including  money  value  of  construction  progress;  conduct  field 
verification and check upon the payment claim submitted by the contractors or head of farmer 
group; and recommend to the DPIU or PMU for certification of construction progress; 
  Maintain their independency in supervising and inspection of construction works; 
  Conduct joint commissioning test (with contractors, DPIU staff, representative of beneficiaries) 
upon the completion of construction work, including review of as-built drawing and O&M manual 
prepared by the contractors; 
  Provide regular (weekly and monthly) progress report detailing construction progress, financial 
progress, quality of work, environmental and social safeguard compliance; 
  Provide recommendation to DPIU or PMU to take necessary actions regarding the performance 
of construction works. 
The Facilitators will: 
  Support the DPIU in mobilization of target beneficiaries; 
  Work at field (village) level to establish, strengthen and develop farmer groups, farmer group 
federation or association, and facilitate in developing farmer-based organization (e.g. KUBE, 
Cooperative) in implementing and developing the agribusiness development supported by the 
project; 
  Support  the  DPIU  and  facilitate  the  farmer  groups  in  implementing  community-contract  of 
construction works applying Type-III swakelola; 
  Monitor and evaluate the performance of farmer groups, farmer group federations  and other 
the  project,  and  provide  necessary 
farmer-based  organization 
recommendation  and  input  to  DPIU  in  escalating  and  enhancing  project  performance,  with 
particular attention given to the farmer-based agribusiness and value chain development; 
implementing 
in 
  Provide DPIU with regular (monthly) reports. 
  Advisory Group and Technical  Group. UPLANDs will be overseen by an Advisory Group to 
provide overall policy guidance and oversight to the Project Management Unit. The Advisory Group will 
be  composed  of  echelon  1  from  relevant  Directorate  General  (DG)  within  MoA.  Their  advice  will  be 
important given the strong linkages that the project envisages with other sectors such as horticulture or 
agricultural  extension and agri-business. For daily technical advice, there will be a national technical 
group  that  will  provide  technical  guidance  for  implementation  purposes.  At  each  district,  a  District 
Working Group (POKJA) will be established and  chaired by Setda with membership from BAPPEDA 
and other relevant technical agencies, including the procurement committee. District working groups 
are  an  effective  way  of  keeping  district  government  officials  informed  of  the  project  progress  and 
challenges  as  well  as  of  seeking the  active  support  of the  Bupati (District  Mayor),  and  any  potential 
private sector players working in the project area. It will also identify opportunities for leveraging funds 
available from other sources e.g. Village Funds and District Governments, supporting the BLUD set up 
and, most importantly, ensure that on-granting funds are properly provisioned in district budgets. Private 
sector partners working in the relevant commodity value chain in each district may also provide support 
to the small holders in extension activities, and identifying markets and building commodity alliances. 
  Ministry  of  Agricultural  covers  5  Directorate  General,  one  of  them  is  Directorate  General  of 
Infrastructure and Facilities, 4 Agencies, then a General Secretariat and a General Inspectorate. The 
Minister  of  Agricultural  also  supported  by  a  number  of  experts  such  as  show  in  the  Figure  18. 
Meanwhile, Directorate General of Infrastructure and Facilities consist of 5 Directorates, one of them is 
Directorate  of  Agricultural  Irrigation.  Besides  that,  this  directorate  is  supported  by  a  Secretariat  of 
Directorate such show in Figure 16. 
F 
168 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
igure 16. Organization Structure of Agricultural Ministry 
Figure 17:. Organization Structure of DG Infrastructure and Facilities 
  Based  on  organization  structure  of  the  project,  the  integrated  UPLANDs  project  would  be 
executed  by  Directorate  General  of  Infrastructure  and  Facilities  especially  Directorate  of Agricultural 
Irrigation. In district, this project would be executed by Field of Infrastructure and Facilities under Dinas 
Pertanian  (District Agricultural  Services).  However,  based  on  based  on  observations  during  the  field 
survey,  many  staff  do  not  ready  and  do  not  understand  the  project  model  both  technically  and 
administrative. This condition may  be caused by limited staff capacity, rotation frequency is high, too 
busy with other tasks and limited number of staffs in Dinas Pertanian. Therefore, it needs some training 
for staff to increase their capability and knowledge of the project. 
  Ministry of Agriculture  (MoA) has long experience  in implementing and  managing international 
supported projects, financed by ADB, the World Bank, IFAD, and IsDB. Particularly Directorate General 
of Infrastructure and Facilities has just completed the Agriculture component of the World Bank-funded 
WISMP-2 and IFAD-funded SOLID; in which the WISMP-2 applied on-granting mechanism. Ministry of 
Agriculture currently also manages on-going ADB-funded IPDMIP. Therefore, capacity of the MoA and 
the Directorate is no doubt. In the meanwhile, not all of District Government – particularly Agriculture 
Office – has experience on implementing and managing international-funded projects as well as familiar 
with  on-granting  system.  Agriculture  Office  of  Subang,  Magelang,  Purbalingga,  Sumenep,  Lombok 
Timur  and Sumbawa had experience in WISMP-2  which implements on-granting system. Districts of 
Cirebon, Garut, Banjarnegara, Minahasa  Selatan, and  Lombok Timur currently  are implementing the 
ADB-funded IPDMIP. Although most of districts have experience in implementing international-funded 
projects and applying on-granting system, in some extend the capacity of staff in project management 
and  on-granting  system  need  to  be  upgraded  since  mostly  there  are  staff  rotation  and  moving.  In 
addition, the capacity of decentralized extension units/institutions (previously called as BPP) that have 
169 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
responsibility in farmer extension, training and demonstration might need to be upgraded. Although staff 
of the decentralized extension institutions are mostly from the centralized BPP, but the senior staff could 
be retired  and the  new  staff  might  lack  experience  in updated training  and  extension methodologies 
such  as  farmer  field  school  and  participatory  field  trials.  In  this  regard  the  extension  workers  of 
Agriculture  Office  are  suggested  to  be  targeted  for  capacity  building  in  technical  aspects  of  farmer 
training and extension. 
Implementation Schedule 
  The Project is expected to be implemented within 5 years from the effective date of signing of the 
financing  agreement  within  the  period  of  2019  to  2025.  This  expectation  is  based  on  the  following 
assumptions: (i) The initial stage (assessment until the loan agreement) will be completed by the end 
of 2018; and (ii) Project implementation is expected to begin in early 2019, and the project is expected 
to be completed by mid of 2025.Tentative of project implementation schedule is shown in table below. 
  On Farm Location and Farmer Selection. The location of the project is prioritized in one stretch 
with an area adjusted to the availability of land in each region. The status of the land to be included in 
the location of the project must have clear ownership, in the form of community land and land owned 
by the local government such as village/crooked land that has been completed with official statements 
from the village head to be included in this program. For ex-plantation/forestry land has been completed 
with a land release letter. 
In addition to the selection of program locations also need to be considered in the selection of 
farmers participating in the project, selected farmers are landowners and other farmers who are willing 
to manage village/crooked land and former plantation/ forestry land. Farmers participating in the project 
are required to join farmer groups/farmer groups combined to facilitate coaching by extension agents 
and other government officials. 
  The  land  that  will  be  used  for  the  construction  site  of  physical  facilities  such  as  embung, 
warehouse, drying floor, etc. is a land that is free from disputes and no compensation for the use of this 
land.  The  land  that  will  be  used  for  the  construction  site  of  physical  facilities  such  as  embung, 
warehouse, drying floor, etc. is a land that is free from disputes and no compensation for the use of this 
land. 
170 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Implementation On-Farm Activities. The implementation of on-farm activities is carried out by 
farmers, accompanied by extension workers under the guidance  of the local Agriculture Service  and 
PMDSC consultant staff. The applied cultivation techniques refer to environmentally friendly cultivation 
techniques as well as the application of modern farming systems, which will be introduced to farmers 
through training to be carried out in this project. The pattern of implementation of on-farm activities is 
the provision of assistance for inputs and tools and agricultural machinery. Management of Tools and 
Machines at the on-farm level is carried out by the Joint Business Group (KUBE) using the mechanism 
of Alsintan Service Business (UPJA), where members of the farmer group can rent the Alsintan with an 
agreed rental fee. 
Table 8: Project Implementation Schedule 
171 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Post-Harvest Management and Marketing Results. By providing post-harvest equipment and 
processing the results, it is expected that the products produced are processed goods so that the added 
value of the products can be enjoyed by farmers/farmer groups. By providing post-harvest equipment 
and processing the results, it is expected that the products produced are processed goods so that the 
added  value  of  the  products  can  be  enjoyed  by  farmers/farmer  groups.  In  its  implementation,  the 
Cooperative  accommodates  the  harvested  products  by  the  Joint  Business  Group/Kelompok  Usaha 
Bersama (KUBE) to process the harvests through product sorting, packaging, marketing, etc. 
  Management  of  Agricultural  Cooperatives  is  accompanied  and  fostered  by  the  Agriculture 
Services of each Regency. To increase the capacity of farmers and management officers, training and 
comparative  studies  need  to  be  carried  out  to  other  regions  that  have  advanced  in  post-harvest 
handling. Through  the  comparative  study,  a product  marketing  network  can  be  established  between 
farmer groups/farmer groups combined, thus commodity prices can be maintained. Marketing of these 
results can also be done online, such as marketing organic rice, shallots/white etc. 
PLANNING, M&E, LEARNING AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
  Planning  processes  and  schedules  within  UPLANDs  will  be  harmonized  with  the  mainstream 
planning process of GoI, both at national and at district level. 
  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  Approval  Process:  Using  log-frame  indicators, 
AWPBs will be the primary basis for project monitoring. The PMU will prepare a consolidated Annual 
Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and corresponding procurement plans for the project. Although  each 
District would have to prepare its own AWPB considering the on-granting requirements to ensure the 
allocation of funds to be made available in their annual budget process (APBD). The AWPB would be 
used  as  a  tool  for  specifying  implementation  priorities,  identifying  the  financial  and  procurement 
requirements and establishing a work plan with specific targets at the district, provincial and national 
level. The AWPB would constitute the basis for release of funds and for financial management. Together 
with  the  quantified  results-based  indicators  (log-frame),  AWPBs  would  be  the  primary  basis  for 
monitoring the project. 
  The AWPB will be prepared by consolidating (i) the plans from each district, primarily covering 
Component  1;  (ii)  plans  associated  with  each  of  the  sub-components  under  Component  2  both  at 
National and District level (iii) plans for overall management of UPLANDs; (iv) for Component 3 will be 
included in the PMU AWPB. 
  The programme monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM) system will 
draw  on  the  experiences  of  two  IFAD  funded  projects  (Coastal  Community  Development  Project 
(CCDP) and SOLID) to learn about effective monitoring of key, specific performance indicators without 
collecting excessive data that can never be effectively analysed. The M&E and KM will be developed in 
line with IFAD, IsDB and GoI requirements. The system will be setup and managed by the PMU and be 
connected and inter-linked at all levels. It will consider the effects/impacts of project investments on all 
project  beneficiaries  and  key  stakeholders.  The  system  will  use  the  UPLANDs  logframe  as  the  key 
document for establishing the monitoring and reporting system. A monthly dashboard will be established 
to report progress on the key outputs and objectives, disaggregated by gender and integrating physical 
progress and financial progress including procurement processes. AWPB-based progress monitoring 
will be used as a starting point to monitor progress at activity level. The project will hire M&E specialist 
who will be part of the PMC. This person will draw on the M&E experiences of other IFAD and IsDB 
funded projects e.g. CCDP and SOLID. 
  Learning and knowledge management (KM). The project will prepare a KM plan that is linked 
to the M&E and MIS system. The objective of KM is to ensure the project units are able to generate and 
document  that  knowledge  that  are  useful  to  build  practical  knowledge  and  know-how  that  leads  to 
improve project performance and results. The knowledge generated within the project is systematically 
identified, analysed, documented and shared, and should be used to: (i) improve project performance 
and delivery; (ii) allow flexibility to changing circumstances; (iii) document and share innovations, best 
practices,  including  project's  successes  and  failures  to  improve  project  intervention  (iv)  support 
innovations and up-scaling; and (v) support country level policy engagement. Particular attention will 
be given to documenting innovative models that are being tested through the project. The concept of 
“Reverse  Linkage”  which  is  a  technical  cooperation  mechanism  enabled  by  the  IsDB  whereby  the 
Bank’s Member Countries exchange their knowledge, expertise, technology and resources to develop 
172 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
capacities and devise solutions for the sake of their development in a mutually beneficial arrangement 
would also be used where required. 
  The MIS system will be gender-disaggregated on all outcomes, outputs and indicators related to 
individuals  or  households. The  project  will  establish  a tablet-based  electronic  data collection  system 
from which field data would be directly input into a centrally maintained MIS system. This will reduce 
the time burden of M&E data collection and also improve timeliness and reliability of data, making the 
M&E  system  more  robust  and  useful  as  a  management  tool.  The  project  will  produce  one  annual 
consolidated report for IFAD, the IsDB and Government. This report will highlight the key achievements 
of the project. The baseline survey to be completed early in the first year will provide the foundation for 
subsequent evaluations and for the Mid-Term Review and Project Completion Review. Thematic studies 
would be conducted on a needs basis to support programme activities, policy dialogue and scaling up. 
The project will conduct an annual outcome survey to show progress. 
Financial Management, Audit and Governance 
  Financial Management System: The project’s financial management arrangements follow the 
government system, especially on budgeting, flow of funds, and the auditing mechanism. Overall, the 
financial  management  risk  is  rated  as  ‘substantial’  and  ‘moderate’  before  and  after  mitigation 
respectively.  The  project  faces  a  major  risk  in  staff  capacity  to  manage  project  implementation, 
especially  in  managing  the  on-granting  mechanism.  To  minimize  the  risks,  financial  management 
consultants  will  be  hired  to  assist  PMU/PIUs  in  financial  management  and  conduct  FM  training  for 
project staff at district level in particular. 
  The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), through the Directorate General of Agricultural Infrastructure 
and Facilities (DGAIF) will have overall accountability for the project, including fiduciary aspects. The 
project will use On-Granting” mechanisms to finance activities at the district level. DGAIF has extensive 
experience in managing similar programs using this particular fund flow mechanism (e.g. WISMP-2). 
Some of the selected districts are currently implementing IPDMIP or READSI projects (IFAD funded) 
which also apply the On-Granting mechanism. The government agrees that this mechanism is better 
suited to meet the objectives of supporting large decentralized investment delivery,  and creating and 
enabling higher district level ownership. 
  Funds Flow. The fund flow of the project is described below. The project is applying 2 financing 
arrangement for the implementation at the district level. On Granting mechanism for the main activities 
and TP (Tugas Pembantuan) for other activities including training and management support.  
  Designated  - Account. After  loan  entry  into  force,  the  Government will  open  two  Designated 
Accounts in USD, in the name of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) at Bank Indonesia (BI). One account for 
the IFAD loan funds and another account for the IsDB loan funds. Funds in these accounts will be used 
to pay the eligible Project expenditures incurred by PMU and PIUs. The modalities of the designated 
account for the IFAD resources will be detailed in the Letter to the Borrower, which would be issued by 
IFAD.  In  general,  there  will  be  three  types  of  disbursement  mechanisms  for  the  programme  which 
consist  of  (i) Advance  Withdrawal;  (ii)  Direct  Payment;  (iii)  Reimbursement.  The  IFAD  loan  will  be 
disbursed  in  accordance  with  IFAD  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook.  Considering  the  activities,  the 
project  will  adapt  imprest  account  arrangement,  with  advance  payment  and  then  followed  by 
replenishment to the DA. Details of the specific names, titles and signature(s) of the persons authorized 
to operate these accounts must reach IFAD and IsDB before withdrawals are initiated. The flow of fund 
is described in the figure below: 
  “On-Granting”  Mechanism.  In  conformance  with  Minister  of  Finance’s  Regulation  (PERMEN 
KEU No. 188/PMK.07/2012), fund proceeds of subnational levels will be made available through “On-
Granting Agreements” (OGA) or Perjanjian Hibah between the Ministry of Finance and the head of the 
relevant district administration. For this project, these OGAs will cover the funding of the majority of the 
activities at the district level. There would be separate OGAs based on the funding sources, one for the 
IFAD-funded activities, and one for the IsDB funded  activities. Under this mechanism, the district will 
have  to  pre-finance  the  project  activities  using  their  own  financial  resources  and  through  PMU. 
Systematic requests for reimbursement will be made to MoF. 
  The following procedures will be applied for entering into an OGA: 
173 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  With the amended OGA, the participating administrative units have a guarantee that activities as 
foreseen  in  the  OWPB  and  included  in  the  approved AWPB  for  the  pre-agreed  percentages  to  be 
reimbursed for under the loan after having been verified.  
  After the effectiveness of OGA, the OPD will start implementing their activities. The first step is 
to include the AWPB activities in the local DPA programme (APBD) for endorsement by the local DPRD 
as the  activities  have  to  be  pre-financed  by the  local  governments  using  their  own  resources  (Dana 
Talangan). The local government will then request their local treasurer to use the budget available in 
the local government’s general account (RKUD) 
On-Granting Budgeting 
  On-granting mechanism is used for activities at district level. It includes the following steps: (i) 
following  financing  agreement  signing,  DGAIF  requests  the  DG  FB,  MOF  to  issue  a  decree  by  the 
Minister  of  Finance  on  loan  allocation  to  be  transferred  to  districts  based  on  evaluation;  (ii(  after 
issuance  of  the  degree,  DGFB  prepares  the  formal  on  granting  agreements  between  MOF  and  the 
district governments, which describes activities and settles the budget allocation to be transferred every 
year during the project period; (iii) relevant district agencies assign their Organisasi Perangkat Daerah 
(OPD) to implement the project. (iv) DGFB, in close coordination with NPMU will prepare the work plan 
and budget of on-granting (RKA-HPD), which then will  be  submitted to DGT, MOF to  produce DIPA-
HPD; and (v) in parallel the district government will issue their own DPA-SKPD. 
174 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Figure 18: Designed Fund Flow 
  Financial Management Organization & Staffing. Overall, the project financial management will 
be responsibility of Project Management Unit (PMU) hosted by The Directorate General of Agricultural 
Infrastructure  and  Facilities  (DGAIF),  Ministry  of Agriculture  (MoA)  in  Jakarta. At  the  district  level,  a 
Project Implementation Unit will be based at the District Agriculture Agency (Dinas Pertanian) in the 14 
selected districts in 7 Provinces. The financial management officers will be appointed at national level 
as  part  of  PMU,  assisted  by  a  financial  management  specialist  and  two  assistants  from  Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) team.  
  Planning  and  Budgeting.  The  NPMU  and  each  DPIU  will  prepare  annual  work  plans  and 
budgets (AWPB), including procurement plan, showing supporting (general) and sub-project activities, 
which will be consolidated by the NPMU, to be submitted to IFAD and IsDB for review and no objection. 
The  AWPB  shall  include  the  activities,  respective  costs,  source  of  funds,  schedules,  and  also 
procurement  plan.  The  annual  budget  (DIPA)  preparation  will  follow  the  annual  government  budget 
processing procedures and schedules including those for local areas.  
  The process and timeline for preparation of the local budget (APBD) is shown in Table below: 
Table 9: Local Budget Preparation 
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Description 
Preparation of RKPD 
Submission of KUA and PPAS by the head of 
TAPD to Head of District 
Submission  of  KUA  by  Head  of  District  to 
DPRD 
KUA and PPAS agreed by Head of the District 
and DPRD 
Head  of  District’s  form  letter  regarding  RKA-
SKPD guideline 
Preparation  and  discussion  of  RKA-SKPD, 
RKA-PPKD and draft APBD 
Submission of draft APBD to DPRD 
Collective approval between DPRD and Head 
of District 
Evaluation result of draft APBD 
Stipulation of local regulation and APBD 
elaboration in accordance with the evaluation 
result 
Period 
End of May 
First week of June 
Mid-June 
End of July 
Duration 
1 week 
6 weeks 
Early of August 
1 week 
Early August – End Sept 
7 weeks 
2 months 
First week of October 
One  month  before 
relevant fiscal year 
15 working days (Dec) 
End of December 
the 
APBD: Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Daerah (Local Government Budget) 
175 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
DPRD: Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah (Regional representative assembly) 
KUA: Kebijakan Umum Anggaran (General budgetary policies) 
PPAS: Prioritas Plafon Anggaran Sementara (Interim budget priorities and funding ceilings) 
RKPD: Rencana Kerja Pemerintah Daerah (Local Government Work Plan) 
RKA-PPKD: Rencana Kerja dan Anggaran Pejabat Pengelola Keuangan Daerah (Work Plan and Budget of 
Local Government Financial Authority) 
RKA-SKPD: Rencana Kerja dan Anggaran Satuan Kerja Perangkat Daerah (Local Government Agency 
Budget and Work Plan) 
TAPD: Tim Anggaran Pemerintah Daerah (Local Government Budget Team) 
For preparation of State Budget (APBN), the process and timelines is described in the figure 1 below: 
  Eligibility of Expenditure. The eligibility of expenditure should require: 
  Before disbursement can begin, IFAD must receive from the designated representative specified 
in  the  LTB,  Section  C  a  letter  designating  the  name(s)  of  official(s)  authorized  to  sign  withdrawal 
applications, which includes their authenticated specimen signature(s). A sample form is provided in the 
LTB, Annex 1. 
  Start-up costs: The Borrower may request an advance withdrawal up to USD 300,000 from the 
Loan, to incur project start-up expenditures before the satisfaction of the additional (general/specific) 
conditions precedent to withdrawal, in accordance with FA, General Conditions, Section 4.02(b)  and 
FA, Schedule 2. Any unused balance of the start-up advance will be treated as part of the initial advance 
under the authorized allocation. 
  Withdrawal Applications for Advance Withdrawal and Reimbursements may be submitted once 
ninety (90) days have lapsed from the submission of the previous withdrawal application. If, however, 
the  requested  withdrawal  amount  is  at  least  thirty  per  cent  (30%)  of  the  advance  described  in  LTB, 
paragraph 16, a withdrawal application may be submitted even if ninety (90) days have not lapsed. 
  The Direct Payment procedure should be used only for  payments of more than  USD  100 000 
equivalent. Project expenditures below this threshold should be paid from the Project’s Designated or 
operational accounts. 
  Withdrawal applications will be processed by the Accounting and Controller's Division (ACD) of 
IFAD. An application for withdrawal, accompanied  by  a summary  of expenditure  by  category and by 
relevant forms and supporting documents, should be sent in original to IFAD. 
  Refund of Withdrawals. Any amount withdrawn from the project loan to finance any expenditure 
other than the eligible expenditure or will not be needed thereafter to finance the eligible expenditures, 
shall be promptly refunded to IFAD/IsDB. The refund shall be made in the currency used to disburse 
such withdrawal.  
  Supporting  Documents,  Statement  of  Expenditures  (SOE)  and  SOE  Thresholds.  LDH, 
Section 4 provides details regarding the use of the Statements of Expenditures (SOE) facility to justify 
advances or seek reimbursement. The format for the SOE to be used for financing is attached as Annex 
1. The applicable SOE threshold for withdrawal application, under procedure (i)"Advance Withdrawal", 
and  under  procedure  (IV)  "Reimbursement",  is  USD  50,000  for  all  expenditure  categories.  SOE 
thresholds  can  be  changed  by  IFAD  during  the  project  implementation  period  by  notification  to  the 
Borrower and Project Management. 
176 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Withdrawal applications for contracts or invoices with amounts higher than these SOE thresholds 
must  be  accompanied  by  copies  of  relevant  supporting  documents  evidencing  eligible  expenditure 
(Refer  to  LDH,  Section  3).  The  SOE  and  other  documentation  shall  state  amounts  requested  for 
withdrawal after excluding amounts financed from other financing sources or counterpart funds. 
  Withdrawal  applications  for  Direct  Payments  must  be  accompanied  by  a  signed  copy  of  the 
contract  and  relevant  supporting  documents  evidencing  eligible  expenditure  (e.g.  invoices,  receipts, 
documentary  evidence  of  completion  of  contracted  goods  and  services,  payee’s  bank  identity 
certificate). 
  Withdrawal  applications  will  be  verified  against  the  approved/agreed AWPB  and  Procurement 
Plan. 
  Records Management. The Project shall maintain separate accounts and records in accordance 
with  consistently  maintained  appropriate  accounting  practices  adequate  to  reflect  the  operations, 
resources and expenditures related to the Project until the Financing Closing Date, and shall retain such 
accounts and records for at least ten (10) years thereafter. 
  Fixed  Asset  Management.  All  assets  procured  under  the  project  funds  shall  be  registered 
following  government  system  and  procedures  (SIMAK-BMN).  Information  on  the  assets  should  be 
included in the annual audit reports. 
  Financial Reporting. All financial transactions for the Project will be recorded in the government 
accounting system as well as included in the government accountability reports. In addition, the Project 
will prepare a separate set of Project financial reports that are suitable for project monitoring purposes. 
The project will prepare a separate consolidated project financial statement reports suitable for project 
monitoring purposes by extracting the data from the government accounting system and modified it to 
meet the project needs. Example of the financial report is attached in Annex 3 of this section. 
  The  NPMU  will  be  responsible  to  prepare  the  aggregate  Interim  Financial  Reports  (IFR)  and 
submit them to IFAD and IsDB biannually on an agreed format within 45 days after the period end. The 
Project will also submit annual financial statement for each fiscal year that states all project operation, 
resources and expenditures. All financing resources (IFAD, IsDB, counterpart contribution, beneficiary 
contribution) shall be accounted in the report.  
  For joint supervision mission, NPMU should prepare consolidated financial reports for the mission 
review  which  include  information  on  the:  (i)  annual  approved/agreed  AWPB;  (ii)  approved  annual 
budget; (iii) annual budget expenditures; (iv) cumulative AWPB; (v) cumulative approved budget to date 
  Special  Considerations  for  Financing  Arrangements.  For  a  selected  number  of  activities, 
alternative/optional  financing  arrangements  other  than  the  OGAs  may  be  applied,  viz.  (i)  for 
infrastructure work where specific knowledge/technology is required; and/or those requiring multi-year 
contracts  and/or  those  requiring  large  amounts  of  financial  resources.  These  activities  may  be 
implemented  by  using APBN  funds  instead  of  “On-Granting”  funds;  (ii)  for  “soft”  activities  including 
training  and  several  activities  during  the  initial  planning  year,  certain  activities  may  be  implemented 
using central budget (APBN) with Tugas Pembantuan (TP) procedures. 
  Funding Plan In terms of project funding, the Government of Indonesia through the Ministry of 
Agriculture  proposed  that  projects  could  be  funded  from  loans  from  the  Islamic  Development  Bank 
(IsDB)  and  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  with  a  total  amount  of  IDR 
1,533,884,452,000  or  USD  108,786,000.  Repayment  of  the  loan  will  exceed  a  period  of  25  years 
including a grace period of 7 years. The loan is in the form of a lump sum that does not exceed 1.25% 
of the loan amount if calculated on an annual basis. Indonesia will contribute in the form of goods and 
money for the project to cover costs related to project administration, monitoring and evaluation at the 
central and district levels. 
  The total project cost is estimated at IDR 1,533,884,452,000 or USD 108,786,000 will cover 4 
components main activities and 14 districts. Summaries of project funding per component are shown in 
Table 10. While Table 11 shows estimate the project cost based on participant district. The highest cost 
of  the  project  is  for  Production  and  Farm  Management  component  (IDR.  522,681,100,000  or  USD 
37,070,000).  Based  on  district,  the  highest  cost  of  the  project  is  in  District  Sumbawa  IDR. 
238,539,376,000 for 3,000 Ha areas.  
177 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Table 10: Summary of Proposed Fund for UPLANDs per Component 
No. 
1 
Components 
Infrastructure Development for Productivity Enhancement &Resilience 
Building 
Land and Infrastructure Development  
1.1. 
1.2.  Production and Farm Management  
2.  Agri-business and Livelihoods Facilitation 
2.1. 
Farmer Institutional Development 
2.2.  Market Infrastructure & Equipment 
2.3.  Strengthening Market Linkage & Alliances 
2.4.  Access to Financial Services 
3.  Strengthening Institutional Delivery Systems 
3.1.  Capacity building and institutional development of MOA & Districts 
3.2.  Adaptive Researc4h 
4.  Project Management Support 
4.1.  Project Management and Implementation Units 
4.2. 
Project Management Consultant; Design and Supervision Consultants; 
Technical Specialist (individual) 
Total Base Cost 
IDR 
USD 
938,496,065 
66,560 
415,814,965 
522,681,100 
403,733,197 
107,218,958 
233,849,603 
13,784,000 
48,880,636 
32,242,300 
28,242,300 
4,000,000 
159,412,890 
44,982,250 
29,490 
37,070 
28,634 
7,604 
16,585 
978 
3,467 
2,287 
2,003 
284 
11,306 
3,190 
114,430,640 
8,116 
1,533,884,452 
108,786 
Table 11: Summary of Proposed Fund for UPLANDs Areas Project per District 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
District 
Lebak 
Tasikmalaya 
Subang 
Cirebon 
Garut 
Banjarnegara 
Purbalingga 
Magelang 
Malang 
Sumenep 
Lombok Timur 
Sumbawa 
Minsel 
Gorontalo 
NPMU 
Total (000) 
Ha 
421 
500 
2,000 
1,500 
200 
385 
0 
2,000 
300 
160 
1,640 
3,000 
2,000 
20 
14,329 
Commodity 
Mangosteen 
Organic Rice 
Mangosteeen 
Manggo 
Potato Seed 
Sheep, Goat, Coffee 
Goat 
Organic Rice 
Shallot 
Shallot 
Garlic 
Shallot Seed 
Potato for Industry 
Gapi Banana 
(IDR. 000,-) 
62,272,140 
41,186,580 
159,710,888 
156,315,580 
97,006,810 
74,988,250 
31,214,060 
110,091,570 
54,138,020 
50,712,180 
216,900,882 
238,539,376 
178,378,160 
13,185,100 
48,976,760 
1,533,884,452 
USD (000) 
4,416 
2,928 
11,327 
11,086 
6,879 
5,318 
2,213 
7,807 
3,839 
3,596 
15,373 
16,917 
12,650 
955 
3,473 
108,786 
  Loan Withdrawal Plan Per Year. Loan withdrawals per year for the Project until the end of 2023 
are IDR 1,533,884,452,049or USD 108,786,131. 
Internal Audit Process. The internal audit of the MoF is conducted by the Inspectorate General 
(Itjen) who is reporting to the Minister. The Itjen Region will conduct internal monitoring of the Project 
178 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
performance,  financial  management  and  administration  through  audit,  review,  evaluation  and 
supervision. The project team at national and subnational level will engage the respective inspectorate 
to have the project included in the internal audit program during the project period. 
  External Audit.  The  audit  for  the  financial  statement  of  this  Project  will  be  carried  out  by  an 
independent  auditor  acceptable  to  IFAD.  BPK  will  be  accepted  as  the  Project  auditor.  The  audit  will 
include the assertion on the reliability of the Project financial statement, review and reconciliation of the 
DAs and examination of aspects of compliance and governance, internal control, and detection of fraud 
and corruption.  
  The audit will cover the entire Project, covering all sources and application of fund at national and 
sub national level. The auditor will visit the various implementation units as considered necessary for 
the audit. The audit coverage will consider the risk of material misstatement as a result of fraud or error.  
  The coverage areas of the audit will include: 
  Audit log of annual audit reports shall be prepared by each implementing agency on the auditor’s 
findings,  and  recommendations,  and  the  actions  taken  on  the  recommendations,  including  from  the 
previous years.  
  Compliance  with  financial  reporting  and  auditing  requirements  will  be  monitored  by  review 
missions  and  during  normal  program  programme  supervision,  and  followed  up  regularly  with  all 
concerned, including the external auditors. IFAD reserves the right for additional support to be provided 
to the auditor, if the audits required are not conducted is a manner satisfactory to IFAD and IsDB, or if 
the audits are substantially delayed. 
  Governance: Indonesia has a 2017 Corruption Perception  Index (CPI) score of 37/100 and is 
ranked  96  out  of  180  countries.  This  Index  indicates  lack  of  transparency  in  certain  government 
institutions. IFAD and IsDB will apply a zero-tolerance policy on appearances of corruption. The PMU 
will,  with  assistance  from  the  financial  management  consultants,  prepare  a  program  framework  for 
transparency and public notice including (i) annual financial audits, with a random sample of community 
and farmer-group grants. This will be performed in accordance with International Standards of Auditing 
by  a  professional  external  independent  auditor;  (ii)  IFAD  and  IsDB’s  direct  supervision  process  will 
specifically  address  fiduciary  compliance  and  the  implementation  of  the  Project  framework  for 
transparency  and public notice; (iii) Project stakeholders (especially farmers and their organizations) 
will  be  directly  involved  in  programming,  implementing  and  M&E  of  the  project  activities;  and  (iv) 
evaluation and impact assessment will be outsourced to professional independent institutions. 
Procurement 
  Procedure  for  procurement  of  goods  and  services.  Procurement  of  goods,  works,  other 
services and services will refer to the Financing Agreement (FA), Letter To Borrower (LTB), and IFAD’s 
Procurement Guidelines and Handbook. The procurement of goods and services in the UPLANDs shall 
be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  Presidential  Regulation  No.  :  16/2018  with  related  Institutional 
Regulation of National Public Procurement Policy Agency (NPPA) and other related regulation to the 
extent  such  are  consistent  with  the  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines.  The  Presidential  Regulation  is 
encouraging a procurement process that can provide “value for money”, not only to procure the lowest 
prices.  To  achieve  this  objective,  Presidensial  Regulation  16/2018  now  provides  a  government  e-
179 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
marketplace  and  simplification  of  procedures  previously  stipulated  under  Presidential  Regulation 
54/2010. 
  Procurement  Principles  and  Ethics.  Principles  of  procurement 
for  goods/services. 
Procurement of goods/services should apply the following principles:  
  Procurement plan of goods and services. The initial step of the procurement process of goods 
and  services  is  procurement  planning.  This  involves  identifying  needs,  determination  of  goods  / 
services, methods, schedules and budgets. One of the procurement objectives means for creating right 
goods / services based on value for money that is measured by quality, quantity, time, cost, place and 
sourcing.  Presidential  regulation  encourages  the  value  for  money  to  be  achieved  by  improving  the 
quality  of  procurement  planning.  There  are  consultants  who  responsible  for  preparing  procurement 
planning at the national and district level or consolidating procurement of goods / services at the district 
180 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
level  which  is  then  ready  to  be  announced  through  a  general  procurement  plan  information  system 
(https://sirup.lkpp.go.id/sirup).  The  procurement  plan  should  be  developed  in  a  participatory  manner 
with all Project Implementers in Districts. The consolidated procurement plan will be submitted to IFAD 
for  review  and  granted  "no-objection".  The  first  year  of  the  procurement  plan  should  include 
procurement of goods and services for 18 (eighteen) months, then to be updated any time as required.  
  The Procurement Plan is an annex of AWPB which shall include as a minimum: 
  Methods for procurement and IFAD review. The method of procurement of goods and services 
to be used should be consistent with the Government Regulations and its implementation guidelines.  
IFAD will review the procurement of goods and services to ensure that procurement process is 
carried  out  in  conformity  with  IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines  and  LTB.  The  following  procurement 
decisions shall be subject to prior review by IFAD for the award of any contract for goods, equipment, 
works, materials, consultancy and services under the UPLANDs : 
  Prior or Post Review. Except as IFAD may otherwise agree, the prior or post which applies to 
various procurement of goods, works and consultant recruitments shall be defined as follows, see Table 
12:  
181 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Table 12: List of thresholds to define IFAD Prior or Post Review 
Procurement method 
Goods and Services (non-consulting) 
NCB (between USD 100,000 and above) 
Shopping 
Direct Goods 
Recruitment of Consulting Firms 
Quality and Cost-Based Selection (QCBS); Fixed Budget 
Selection (FBS); Least Cost Selection (LCS); Selection 
Based on Consultants Qualification (CQS) 
Sole Source Selection (Single Source Selection)  
Recruitment of Individual Consultants 
Prior or 
Post 
Comments 
Prior 
Post 
Prior 
Prior  
Prior 
All contracts as the stated 
threshold. Amount below are 
post review.  
All contracts 
Except procurement valued 
below USD 25,000 or exception 
as approved by IFAD 
Except procurement valued 
below USD 50,000 
All contracts except for exception 
as approved by IFAD  
All contracts except for exception 
as approved by IFAD 
Except procurement valued 
below USD 15,000  
Individual Consultants (Single Source Selection)  
Prior 
Individual Consultants (Competitive Selection Process)  
Prior 
The implementation of the Procurement of Goods/ Services 
It  takes  place  by  means  of  self-management;  and/or  the  selection  of  a  Provider  of 
Goods/Services. 
  Procurement  of  Goods/  Services  by  Self-Management.  At  the  implementation  level,  this 
method was technically guided by Institutional Regulation of NPPA No. 8 Year 2018: Self-Management. 
Community participatory procurement under UPLANDs will be implemented in certain areas. It will be 
included procurement for small infrastructure at village under Component 1.  
  Community participatory procurement should apply the following principles: 
(1)  Efficiency - Procurement of goods/services must be conducted by utilizing the minimum 
amount of fund and effort to meet the expected quality within the specified time frame 
or by using the specified amount of fund to achieve the procurement target and outcome 
at maximum quality;  
(2)  Effectiveness - Procurement of goods/services must be conducted in consistent with the 
specified  requirements  and target  and  must  result  in  benefits  to the maximum  extent 
possible;  
(3)  Transparency  -  All  terms  and  conditions  as  well  as  information  on  Procurement  of 
Goods/Services  are  clearly  stated  and  accessible  to  the  public  and  interested 
goods/service providers; 
(4)  Community  Empowerment  -  Procurement  of  goods/services  must  become  vehicle  of 
learning for community in managing the village; 
(5)  Team Work – Provision of labor by community for development activity implementation 
at the village; and 
(6)  Accountability - Must be conducted in accordance with the relevant rules and regulations 
on Procurement of Goods/Services in order to ensure accountability 
  Ethics of community participatory procurement should follow the following ethics: 
(1)  Responsible; 
(2)  Prevent leakage; 
182 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
(3)  Prevent financial waste; 
(4)  Comply to rules and regulations. 
  Procedures  of  procurement.  The  procuders  of  procurement  involving  the  community  should 
follow the existing government regulation (central and local). Detail technical implementtaion manual of 
procurement involving community will be prepared in a separate manual.  
  The requirement of the community (recipient): The farmer groups that will conduct procurement 
should have a legal status by registering at district government through a decree of Bupati or a relevant 
district  dinas.  Hence,  the  farmer  groups  are  legally  qualified  to  receive  the  UPLANDs  Community 
Matching Grant. In addition, the farmer groups should hava capacity in managing government grant, 
conducting procurement, and its administration in utilizing the purchased good.  
  The  UPLANDs  Community  Matching  Grant  will  be  provided  based  on  proposals  prepared  by 
eligible farmer groups of UPLANDs beneficiaries, and submitted to DSC. Each proposal should explain 
types, spec and quantity of goods to be purchased, as well as contributions of group members either in 
cash or in kind.  
  Special  requirement  on  procuring  farm  equipment  in  which  UPLANDs  will  contribute  financial 
support,  Farm Machinary  Service  Unit (UPJA) with  approved  proposal, this  UPJA  should  provide  an 
evidence of advance payment of 25% of the price which has been approved by PPIU. Based on that 
evidence, PPIU will transfer UPLAND’s financial contribution of 75% the total price, or maximum IDR 
25 millions to purchace basic equipment and IDR 50 millions to purchase approved advance equipment.  
  Responsibility  of  farmer  groups  :  Group  leaders  are  responsible  in  the  following  :  Conduct 
procurement of goods approved by PPIU, and implement principles of procurement as indicated in the 
government regulation which is in line with IFAD procurement guidelines 
  Responsibility of PPIU 
  Responsibility of Facilitators (Village and Sub district level) : 
183 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Procurement of Goods / Services by Providers 
  At  the  implementation  level,  this  method  was  technically  guided  by  Institutional  Regulation  of 
NPPA No. 9 Year 2018 : Provider. It will be included procurement for small infratructure at village under 
Component 1, 2 and 3. The methods of selecting goods/ services consist of: 
  Selection.  Each  contract  for  the  selection  of  consultancy  services  shall  be  selected  in 
accordance  with  any  one  of  the  selection  methods  as  per  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and 
Procurement  Handbook.  UPLANDs  will  procure  consulting  services  through  consulting  firm  and 
individual  consultant. The  procurement method for  procuring  consulting firm services,  UPLANDs will 
use QCBS as explained below : 
  Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS): 
184 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
185 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Selection of individual consultants.  
  All  contacts  should  be  recorded  and  systematically  monitored  the  bidding  process  until  the 
contract  completed  including  what  is  planned  and  its  implementtaion,  payment  phase,  issues  and 
solution during the contract period. 
  All  contracts  will  be  listed  in  the  Register  of  Contracts  (Annex  6  to  the  Loan  Disbursement 
Handbook) by NPMO as required by IFAD. PPSUs and DSCs should update annualy, and NPMO will 
consolidate and submit it to the IFAD Country Director every tri-semester. 
186 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Annex 1 Terms of Reference 
1.  Agricultural Technical Specialist (agronomy) 
The Agricultural Technical Specialist will report directly to the PIU Manager and work collaboratively 
with District Government and other PIU personnel. She/he will have the following main 
responsibilities: 
  Guide the development and implementation of UPLANDs agricultural training and technical 
activities for Farmers and Farmer Groups/Associations through provision of agronomic advice 
to support extension programs for farmers, including women and youth; 
 
In collaboration with Extension Workers, oversee the development of Demonstration Plots, 
researching, developing, and promoting farming practices or products that enhance farm 
productivity; 
  Visiting farms to collect seed, plant, and soil samples and testing samples for nutritional 
deficiencies, diseases, or other changes; 
  Assisting with seed and plant selection processes and the development of planting, cultivation 
and water management schedules, budgets, and timelines; 
  Researching, developing, and promoting farming Good Agricultural Practices or products that 
diminish the effects of changes in soil, climate, and weather or prevent damage from pests; 
  Assisting farmer groups and associations in the preparation of project proposals and 
Business Plans especially those related to agricultural inputs and farm machinery  
  Collaborate with the PIU and Technical Specialist team so that UPLANDs responds 
effectively to farmers’ and traders’ priority information needs and incorporates good practices; 
  Other tasks that may be assigned by the PMU or District PIU Manager 
Qualifications and Experience 
  A Bachelor or higher degree in agricultural agronomy or agricultural science; 
  Extensive knowledge of contemporary issues in production and processing systems within the 
agricultural sector;  
  A minimum of five years at a senior level in a relevant public sector, private sector or NGO, 
with proven skills in the management and coordination of agricultural/agronomic initiatives 
and programmes within the agricultural sector; 
  Computer literacy is a prerequisite, as is a very good command of spoken and written English 
and Bahasa Indonesia; 
  Fully aware of and alert to the crosscutting issues of gender, youth, and poverty targeting 
187 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
2.  Business Development Technical Specialist 
The Business Technical Specialist will report directly to the PIU Manager and work collaboratively with 
District Government and other PIU personnel. She/he will have the following main responsibilities: 
  Facilitate, guide and oversee the implementation of UPLANDs Business Development 
activities for Farmers and Farmer Groups/Associations, including farm production, processing 
and marketing; 
  Support the progressive development of farmer organisations, including those working at 
KUBE and BLUD level; 
  Provide technical support and guidance/training to assist farm business and enterprise 
development programs for farmers, including women and youth; 
  Assist farmer groups and associations in the preparation of project proposals and Business 
Plans including financial budgets and support their subsequent business activities and 
performance; 
  Assist in the formation and further development of micro SME and SME enterprises, including 
Women Farmer Groups involved in producing, processing and marketing of target 
commodities  
  Collaborate with the PIU and Technical Specialist team so that Uplands responds effectively 
to farmers’ and traders’ priority information needs and incorporates good practices; 
  Other tasks that may be assigned by the PMU or District PIU Manager 
Qualifications and Experience 
  A Bachelor or higher degree in commerce, accounting, agricultural economics, agribusiness, 
business administration, or related discipline relevant to Uplands;  
  Extensive knowledge of contemporary issues in production, processing and marketing within 
the agricultural sector;  
  A minimum of five years at a senior level in a relevant public sector, private sector or NGO, 
with proven skills in the management and coordination of agricultural business initiatives and 
programmes within the agricultural sector; 
  Computer literacy is a prerequisite, as is a very good command of spoken and written English 
and Bahasa Indonesia is essential; 
  Fully aware of and alert to the crosscutting issues of gender, youth, and poverty targeting. 
188 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
3.  Food Processing Technical Specialist 
Focus will be on assistance to micro SMEs and SMEs (less than 100 employees) already processing 
grains, fruits or vegetables, as well as farmer organisations starting new food processing/business 
enterprises.  
The Food Processing Technical Specialist will report directly to the PIU Manager and work 
collaboratively with District Government and other PIU personnel. She/he will have the following main 
responsibilities: 
  Support the establishment and progressive development of UPLANDs Food Processing 
initiatives of farmer organisations, from micro SME level through to medium scale enterprises 
operating at KUBE and BLUD level; 
  Assist the Business Management Technical Specialist in working with farmer groups and 
associations in the preparation of project proposals and Business Plans, in particular, 
recommendations and specifications for purchasing suitable Food Processing equipment and 
the description of processing systems; 
  Provide on-site technical training and support for UPLANDs beneficiary groups on; 
o  basic food microbiology and quality assessments based on physical parameters 
o  understanding and compliance with relevant food standards  
o  various methods of processing and preservation of grains, fruits and vegetables, as 
applicable 
o  packaging and storage techniques 
o  quality assessments of raw materials, packaging materials and finished products 
o  operation and maintenance of processing machineries and equipment 
o  Understanding and implementation of GMP, HACCP and QMS 
  Collaborate with the PIU and the Technical Specialist team so that UPLANDs responds 
effectively to farmers’ and traders’ priority information needs and incorporates good practices; 
  Other tasks that may be assigned by the PMU or District PIU Manager 
Qualifications and Experience 
  The Food Processing Specialist will have a Master's degree in food science or a related field; 
  Her/his background must include thorough training in food processing and engineering 
specifically related to fruits and/or vegetables and/or grains, food chemistry and plant 
sciences and experience working in the commercial food processing industry; 
  Extensive knowledge of contemporary issues in food processing systems within the 
agricultural sector; 
  Computer literacy is a prerequisite, as is a very good command of spoken and written English 
and Bahasa Indonesia; 
  Fully aware of and alert to the crosscutting issues of gender, youth, and poverty targeting.  
189 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
4.  Value Chain Technical Specialist 
The Value Chain Technical Specialist will report directly to the PIU Manager and work collaboratively 
with District Government and other PIU personnel. She/he will have the following main 
responsibilities: 
  Facilitate, oversee and guide the implementation of UPLANDs Value Chain activities from 
farm to end markets; 
  Support the progressive development of farmer organisations and their related downstream 
Value Chain activities; 
 
 
Identify Value Chain bottlenecks and constraints and provide technical guidance and capacity 
building services to make corrections for improvement; 
In collaboration with farmer organisations, maintain regular contact with end buyers and 
monitor market development and opportunities; 
  Provide guidance/training on Value Chain development and activities to assist extension and 
technical support programs for farmers, including women and youth; 
  Develop Quality Assessment procedures for the target commodity under the project MIS and 
provide training and on-the-job guidance for Quality Assessment trainees  
  Assist farmer groups and associations in the preparation of project proposals incorporating 
Value Chain development and oversee their resultant Value Chain activities and performance; 
  Collaborate with the PIU and Technical Specialist team so that UPLANDs responds 
effectively to farmers’ and traders’ priority information needs and incorporates good practices; 
  Other tasks that may be assigned by the PMU or District PIU Manager 
Qualifications and Experience 
  A Bachelor or higher degree in agricultural economics, agricultural science, agribusiness, 
marketing, business administration, or related discipline relevant to UPLANDs;  
  Extensive knowledge of contemporary issues in production and Value Chain systems within 
the agricultural sector; 
  A minimum of five years at a senior level in a relevant public sector, private sector or NGO, 
with proven skills in the management and coordination of value chain initiatives and 
programmes within the agricultural sector; 
  Computer literacy is a prerequisite, as is a very good command of spoken and written English 
and Bahasa Indonesia; 
  Fully aware of and alert to the crosscutting issues of gender, youth, and poverty targeting. 
190 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
5.  National Village Facilitation Team Director.  
1)  Oversee, detail and implement the community mobilization process as defined in the Project 
Implementation Manual in the 14 project districts 
2)  Coordinate with the Nutrition Specialist and the Value Chain Specialist to ensure that the 
community mobilization is aligned with the nutrition-sensitive value chain approach and 
gender issues are being addressed at every stage  
3)  Manage and participate in the capacity-building for the Community Mobilization Staff of the 
project 
4)  Ensure that the gender and youth strategy of the project is disseminated to project staff and 
implemented 
5)  Supervise and provide support to provincial, district, and sub district supervisors, as well as 
Village Facilitators in building their capacity and in implementing project activities;  
6)  Analyze and consolidate reports submitted by district managers and prepare 
recommendations for improvement and follow up;  
7)  Prepare reports on the results of facilitation carried out by Village Facilitators to be submitted 
to PMU.  
Qualification:  
1)  Master’s Degree in social sciences;  
2)  Experience at least five years in community empowerment  
3)  Sound understanding of gender mainstreaming concepts 
4)  Experience in managing and delivering training 
5)  Able to operate computer and MS-Office;  
6)  Good communication (written and oral) in Bahasa Indonesia and English in writing and oral;  
7)  Willing traveling to remote areas.  
191 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
6.  District Village Facilitation Team Manager  
1)  Coordinate with national facilitation team Director and Technical Specialists in the PIU 
2)  Guide and supervise the implementation of the project’s community mobilization, gender and 
nutrition sensitive value chain activities in target villages 
3)  Ensure that the mobilization process is inclusive of women, youth and ethnic minorities 
4)  Supervise, provide feedback and recommendations to sub district coordinators and VFs;  
5)  Monitor and supervise the implementation of the project’s community mobilization at sub district 
level and villages at least three times / month to ensure the project is implemented as planned, 
and provide recommendations for improvement and follow up;  
6)  Prepare consolidated monitoring progress reports (gender and youth disaggregated) on the 
implementation of project activities at district, sub district, and village level and submit to national 
facilitation director, copied to PMU.  
7)  Provide recommendations for more effective implementation of project activities. 
8)  Assist in the conduct of training, preparing technical guidelines and advocacy to local government  
9)  Facilitate the documentation of success stories and best practices of the project  
Qualification:  
1) Bachelor’s Degree in social sciences;  
2) Experience at least five years in community empowerment  
3) Experience in managing and delivering training  
3) Understanding of mainstreaming gender 
4) Able to operate computer and MS-Office;  
5) Good communication (written and oral) in Bahasa Indonesia and English  
6) Willing traveling to remote areas.  
7) At least a Bachelor’s degree in Agricultural Socio-Economy or Rural Sociology;  
8) Experience in training (preferable) 
9) Able to operate computer and MS-Office;  
5) Willing to go travelling in remote areas.  
192 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
7.  Sub-district Village Facilitation Team Coordinator.  
1)  Mentor and support VFs, providing encouragement and support as necessary; 
2)  Assist VFs in solving problems encountered during facilitation at villages;  
3)  Assist and advise VFs on establishing & maintaining productive relations with village heads; 
4)  Assist and supervise Village Facilitators in coordinating and implementing project activities 
especially streamlining farmer’s groups and forming new groups where necessary 
5)  Collaborate with relevant institutions at sub-district level to ensure the project is well supported 
and synergized  
6)  Provide technical supports to Village Facilitators in the conduct of monitoring and evaluation;  
7)  Consolidate, analyze reports submitted by Village Facilitators and prepare recommendations and 
follow up actions;  
8)  Prepare regular reports (monthly) on the progress and achievement of the assignment and submit 
it to DCM&EO.  
Qualification:  
1)  Diploma in agriculture/ socio-economic/ rural development;  
2)  Preferably from the sub-district that s/he will be supervising 
3)  Experience in rural community empowerment, at least 2-3 years  
4)  Able to operate computer and MS-Office;  
5)  Good communication in Bahasa Indonesia, written and oral;  
6)  Willing to travel to remote villages.  
193 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
8.  Village Facilitator 
Village Facilitators will work at village level as catalysts for inclusive development. They will be in 
charge of implementing the project’s community mobilization strategy and coordinating and supporting 
all the project activities that are to take place at village level. They will be involved in making farmer’s 
groups inclusive, facilitating their empowerment through GALS training and through sharing guidelines 
on group management, financial management etc. and providing basic information for M&E. 
Introduce Project to Village and establish rapport, credibility and trust in Year 1 
1) 
2)  Facilitate the inclusion of project’s target group by identify women and men farmers, youth 
who need to be included in existing farmers groups or organized into new groups  
3)  Collaborate with village extension officer to ensure formation of functional farmer extension 
groups and facilitate their ongoing engagement with FFFs and Demplots; 
4)  Ensure farmer extension groups are actively engaged as the entry point for project support 
e.g. micro-credit, crop insurance, market feedback, 
5)  Ensure active and equitable engagement with women farmers and youth wherever possible. 
6)  Facilitate the capacity building of women, men and youth farmer groups to ensure optimal 
engagement with project activities;  
7)  Coordinate with Extension Officer to organize and follow up project activities 
8)  Liaise with Village Head on a monthly basis to facilitate his/her ownership and involvement in 
project activities  
9)  Conduct regular monitoring in a participatory manner on the progress and achievement of 
project activities 
10) With extension officer, support UPLANDs M&E staff to ensure functional and timely operation 
of UPLANDs M&E systems  
11) Document village level activities per format provided and submit report to VF superiors on a 
monthly basis. 
Qualification:  
1)  Hold Senior High School Certificate,  
2)  Belong preferably to the village or sub-district they are going to work in.  
3)  Positive, enthusiastic and energetic.  
4)  1-2 years' experience in village & community activities. 
194 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
9.  Nutrition Specialist 
1.  Provide technical assistance in the design, implementation and analysis of nutrition of the 14 
Nutrition Studies to identify interventions at different stages of the Value Chain and nutritional 
challenges in each project district 
2.  Disseminate the findings of the Nutrition Studies to the Project management from National to 
District level. 
3.  Design the Nutrition Intervention Packages for the project area in close collaboration with the 
Value Chain Specialist and Extension staff with feedback from District PIUs 
4.  Design and deliver the TOT for community mobilization staff to familiarize them with content 
and strategies for implementing the Nutrition package in their district 
5.  Oversee the implementation of the nutrition packages through working closely with Value 
Chain Specialist, Extension staff and District PIUs 
6.  Support and monitor the mainstreaming of nutrition in the project through field visits, providing 
course correction.  
7.  Document lessons learnt and achievements in mainstreaming nutrition in the project. 
Educational Qualification 
1)  Postgraduate degree (or equivalent) in food security management, nutrition, public health or 
related discipline. >  
2)  Understanding of economic, cultural and gender dynamics that affect nutrition  
3)  At least 6-7 years relevant professional experience 
4)  Good writing skills in Bahasa and English 
5)  Willingness to travel to remote areas 
10.  Assistant Nutrition Specialist 
1.  Assist in designing and supervising the 14 Nutrition Studies to identify interventions at 
different stages of the Value Chain and nutritional challenges in each project district 
2.  Assist in disseminating the findings of the Nutrition Studies to the Project management from 
National to District level. 
3.  Assist in designing the Nutrition Intervention Packages for the project area in close 
collaboration with the Value Chain Specialist and Extension staff with feedback from District 
PIUs 
4.  Assist in designing and deliver the TOT for community mobilization staff to familiarize them 
with content and strategies for implementing the Nutrition package in their district 
5.  Field visits to support and monitor implementation of the nutrition packages through working 
closely with Value Chain Specialist, Extension staff and District PIUs.  
6.  Assist in documenting lessons learnt and achievements in mainstreaming nutrition in the 
project. 
Educational Qualification 
1)  Postgraduate degree (or equivalent) in food security management, nutrition, public health or 
related discipline.  
2)  Understanding of economic, cultural and gender dynamics that affect nutrition  
3)  At least 2-3 years relevant professional experience 
4)  Good writing skills in Bahasa and English 
5)  Willingness to travel to remote areas 
195 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Annex 2 Detailed District Mapping and Project Proposals 
196 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Mapping (Farm Area and Infrastructure) 
197 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Project Proposal 
Banjarnegara District – Central Java 
1. 
Agriculture’s Profile 
In Banjarnegara  land  use  divided  into  14.269  ha  of  wetland  (13.34% from the  total  area  of 
Banjarnegara) and 77.789 ha of non-wetland (68,05% from the total area of Banjarnegara). 
Than non-agriculture land is 19.913 ha (18,682%) Unemployment rate 5.05%, Poverty rate 
17,21%,  The  main  occupation  in  Banjarnegara  is  trading  accounted  for  24%  of  the  total 
occupation  in  Banjarnegara.  The  major  agricultural  product  in  Banjarnegara  are  paddy 
(292.758  ton  in  2015)  Wetland  area  in  Banjarnegara  is  63,  558  ha  and  Sweet  Potato  with 
production of 250,453 ton per year in the area of 9682 ha. 
Banjarnegara  Regency  has  tropical  climate,  rainy  season  and  dry  season  after  year.  Wet 
moons are generally more than dry months. The highest rainfall in 2016 occurred in Wanadadi 
Sub-District as many as 5,473 mm3 per year with 224 days of rainy days. While the lowest 
rainfall occurred in District Kalibening is 745 mm per year with 43 days of rain. 
In  general,  the  problems  of  agricultural  sector  development  which  include  food  crops, 
horticulture and animal husbandry in 2016, among others: 
a)  Agricultural commodities are largely influenced by climatic conditions. By 2016 the high 
rainfall intensity causes the plants to be less able to carry out the production process and 
also the cause of many plant-disturbing organisms such as those affecting corn, rice and 
soybeans; 
b)  b. The attack of plant-disturbing organisms that attack rice, corn and soybeans is a stem 
borer attacking rice crops in Sigaluh, Mandiraja, Purwanegara and Wanadad sub-districts, 
wereng in Bawang sub-district, attacks in Susukan sub-district are almost evenly caused 
pusoo  area  of  7  ha  40-50  days  after  planting,  attack  in  the  sub-district  of  Mandiraja, 
Susukan,  Purwanegara  and  Wanadadi.  Rotten  neck  and  crackle  attacks  in  Bawang 
district; 
c)   Agricultural human resources both farmers and officers both in terms of capacity and. The 
number of technicians is reduced by the capacity that still needs to be fixed. The number 
of farmers is also decreasing; the younger generation is not much interested to cultivate 
this sector. Labor in the agricultural sector in general is an old person with a level of ability; 
d)  Prices  of  fertilizer  production  facilities,  pesticides/medicines,  seeds/seeds  and fish  feed 
and livestock are relatively high; 
e)  Prices  of  agricultural  products  are  fluctuating,  but  farmers/producers  have  not  yet 
mastered market access; 
f)  Degradation  of  agricultural  resources  (land  degradation,  seed  quality/parent)  and  the 
transfer of agricultural land to non-agricultural land; 
g)  Limited business capital owned by farmers. 
2. 
Planned Commodity and Area 
  The  proposed  commodities  and  area:  Extension  area  of  coffee  plantation  (385  ha), 
sheep (1032 head of Batur sheep) and goat (3,085 head of Ettawa-breeds). Type of 
coffee are Arabica (for land with high altitude, > 1,500 from sea level) and Robusta (for 
land with lower altitude, > 1,500 from sea level); 
  Coffee will be planted in the famers’ land which is distributed in the village area; 
  The selected (participated) farmers must have their own land; 
  Except in Batur sub-district, about 25% space of coffee land area will be used for forage 
crop to produce forage for goat and sheep. The forage crop will be planted in-between 
198 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
 
coffee row. Therefore, the density of coffee tree is 1,200 trees/ha (normally 1,600 per 
ha); 
In Batur sub-district, horticulture crops - such as cabbage, carrot or potatoes -are the 
main  farming  crop  which  is  primary  source  of  farmers’  income,  and  the  sheep  is  a 
secondary  source  of  livelihood  In  Batur  sub-district,  the  coffee  trees  will  be  planted 
along the shoulder bund of terrace; 
  Goat or sheep culture will be raised at communal cage, managed by farmer group. 
Description 
# Goat  
# Sheep  
Coffee area (ha)  
Sub-District 
Batur 
Pejawaran  Kalibening  Pegentan  Wanayasa 
765 
885 
815 
620 
1032 
132 
Arabica 
92 
Arabica 
107 
Arabica 
54 
Robusta 
Total 
3085 
1032 
385 
3. 
Beneficiaries 
  The targeted beneficiaries are about 875 farmers organized in 37 farmers groups; 
  Women  groups  of  farmer  household  will  take  role  in  coffee  harvesting,  and  milking 
goat. 
Description 
Batur 
Pejawaran 
Kalibening  Pegentan  Wanayasa 
Sub-District 
Total 
26 
37 
5 
(141) 
2 
875 
6 
13 
Current situation 
# Village 
# Farmer group  
# women group 
(member) 
# Gapoktan  
# Farmer 
Current 
agriculture 
practices 
1 
258 
Vegetable 
farmer, 
sheep 
cultivation 
secondary 
income.Not 
experience 
coffee 
cultivation 
and 
as 
in 
6 
6 
- 
153 
4 
6 
5 (141) 
- 
177 
5 
5 
1 
163 
5 
7 
- 
124 
Experience 
sheep 
cultivation 
applying 
communal 
cage; 
experience 
coffee 
in 
by 
less 
in 
Best 
experience 
in coffee 
Best 
experience in 
coffee 
experience 
on  cattle  & 
goat 
cultivation 
and  have  not 
experience  in 
coffee  
199 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  From the goat/sheep raising, the farmers can get benefit from lamb produce by mature 
female goat/sheep.  Adult female goats/sheep give birth  3  times for two years,  each 
giving  birth  produces  1-2  lamb,  where  the  price  of  4-6  month  old  lamb  is  about  in 
average IDR 1.2 million; 
  A  mature  female  Ettawa-breed  can  produce  1-1.5  liters  milk  a  day,  and  its  price  is 
about IDR 15,000 – IDR 20,000 per liter fresh milk; 
  Goat/Sheep dung will be composed to produce organic fertilizers for own use or sold; 
200 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  From  the  coffee  plantation,  the  farmers  can  get  benefit  from  the  coffee  production 
and/or value added of processed coffee (green bean or roasted coffee).A productive 
Arabica coffee tree (5-7 years) can produce 7 kg cherry/year or equivalent with 1 kg 
green bean/year or equivalent with 0.8 kg roasted coffee/year. Price of Arabica cherry 
is about IDR 12,000/kg, price of green bean is about IDR 60,000 – IDR 90,000 per kg, 
and price of roasted coffee is about R. 300,000 – IDR 400,000 per kg. 
4. 
Project Concept 
  Coffee will be cultivated by each farmer, and the farmers will produce cerries coffee. 
Farmer group will collect the cerries production to be sold to Gapoktan. Gapoktan will 
be formed at village level and act as farmer-own business entity (e.g. KUBE). Gapoktan 
will  process  the  cerries  coffee  to  produce  coffee  bean  with  different  processing 
methods, and sell it to cooperative at district level; 
  Cooperative at district level will be formed, and all Farmer Group or Gapoktan is the 
shareholder of the cooperative; 
  Farmer  group  will  manage  communal  cage  of  sheep/goat.  Goat  farmer  group  will 
produce milk and young goat, whereas sheep farmer group will produce young sheep 
and sheep wool. Milk production from farmer group will be sold to Gapoktan for further 
processing and then the it is sold to District Cooperative for further process to produce 
various milk-processed products (e.g. milk powder, etc.); 
  Manure from sheep/goat will be processed by farmer group to produce organic fertilizer 
to be applied for their coffee plant and forage; 
  Farmer  group  will  raise  the  goat/sheep  until  the  female  and  male  population  & 
composition achieve optimum number (e.g. 40 head of female goat/sheep per farmer). 
Young  goat/sheep  and  post-productive  goat/sheep  will  be  sold  by  farmer  groups  to 
local market; 
  The  District  Cooperative  will  process  coffee  bean  to  produce  roasted  coffee;  do 
marketing  of  various  village-branded  roasted  and  packaged  ground  coffee;  do  milk 
processing  to  produce  milk  powder,  etc.;  do  marketing  of  processed  milk;  and  do 
marketing wool products produced by farmer groups. 
201 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 1. 
Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at 
Banjarnegara District 
FGD With Dinas 
Land of farming System 
With Bupati of Banjarnegara 
Discussion with Farmer Group 
FGD With Farmer Group 
Rusted Cofee of Banjarnegara 
Female Group In Upland 
202 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
5. 
Proposed Land Development and Agriculture Infrastructure 
  Farm road for all sub-districts, about 42 km; 
  Piping  for  irrigation  (in  sub-districts  of  Kalibening  and  Pejawaran),  Power  sprayer  + 
pipe in sub-districts of Batur and Pagentan; 
6. 
Proposed Production and Farm Management 
For Goat/Sheep Cultivation at Farmer Group: 
  Compos processing equipment (37 unit, one per farmer group); 
  Milk Processing unit (Goat) covering cooling milk can, bottle, showcase, drying (about 
24 units); 
  Goat & sheep houses & equipment; 
  Forage legume seed; 
  Goat for farmer group; 
  Sheep for farmer group. 
For Coffee cultivation at farmer group: 
  Coffee seedling for 385 ha (@1,200 plant), total about462,000 cuttings; 
  Organic fertilizer (2 tons/ha) and biological agency (10 liter/ha) for 565 ha; 
  Chemical fertilizer (used only for first seedling plant), 500 kg/ha; 
  Pruning shears. 
Facilities for farmer group and extension worker: 
  Three-wheel vehicle for each farmer group (37 units) and one unit for UPTD; 
  Motorcycle for extension workers (26units, one per village). 
7. 
Proposed Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
  Animal market at Batur sub-district; 
  Production and warehouse for Cooperative as district level; 
  Coffee  processing  unit  (grinder,  sun  ride,  weighing  scale,  sealer,  peel  machine, 
packing machine) at village level (34 units); 
  Drying houses and shelves at village level (34 units). 
8. 
Proposed training and capacity building activities 
  For government staff: 
o  Training  to  Government  staff  on  livestock  farming  (cultivation,  breeding,  product 
processing, feed processing, entrepreneurship); 
o  Training to Government staff on artificial; 
o  Training to Government staff on coffee farming (cultivation, nursery, post-harvest 
processing & packaging, entrepreneurship). 
203 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  For Farmers: 
o  Livestock  farming  (cultivation,  breeding,  product  processing,  feed  processing, 
entrepreneurship); 
o  Coffee  farming  (cultivation,  nursery,  post-harvest  processing  &  packaging, 
entrepreneurship). 
  For Youth: 
o  Training in coffee roasting; 
  Business contact/event; 
  Post-harvest processing and marketing research for coffee. 
9. 
Village Facilitation and Technical Assistance 
204 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
A.  Banjarnegara District 
Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities 
205 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
B.  Batur Sub-District 
206 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
C.  Kalibening Sub-District 
207 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Pagentan Sub-District 
208 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
D.  Pajawaran Sub-District 
209 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
10.  Risk Assessment of the program and Mitigation Measures 
Risks 
Impact on Project  L 
I 
R 
Mitigation 
The goat/sheep are 
sold  by  farmer  for 
cash 
of 
farmer 
from 
Loss 
income 
goat/sheep 
agribusiness, 
in 
turn lack of organic 
fertilizer  for  coffee 
which 
plantation 
could  reduce 
the 
coffee productivity 
P  Si  MH    Strengthen the farmer groups 
& GA-POKTAN that manage 
the communal livestock, incl. 
training in goat/sheep raising 
and milk production; and 
developing rule of communal-
managed goat/sheep. 
Inform and educate farmers 
with business plan of 
integrated farming system; 
and the importance of 
livestock assets 
 
  Develop market for goat milk 
products which benefit 
significantly felt by farmers 
Residual 
risks (R) 
LM 
P  Mo  Me 
  Strengthen GAPOKTAN and 
Lw 
Reduced 
farmer 
income from coffee  
Price  &  market 
volatility  of  coffee 
bean  due  to  high 
competition 
of 
coffee market 
cooperative to develop 
market, and produce roasted 
coffee; 
  Train farmer in continual 
improvement of efficient & 
good practices of coffee 
cultivation and processing 
  Train farmer in soil and water 
conservation practices, and 
support them to implement it 
(e.g. terracing, use cover 
crops, mulch, organic 
fertilizers, etc.) 
  Strengthen the farmer groups 
& GA-POKTAN in O&M of 
agricultural infrastructures, 
including charging farmers 
with agreed fee for O&M of 
agric. Infrastructure& 
machineries 
Lw 
Lw 
LM 
Erosion 
Reduce productivity 
of coffee 
P  Mo  Me 
Lack  of  O&M  of 
agriculture 
infrastructures 
(farm 
irrigation, etc.) 
road, 
Reduce productivity 
of 
and 
coffee 
increase 
transportation cost 
L  Mo  Me 
of 
Unfunctional 
GAPOKTAN  and 
Cooperative 
Untrusted of farmer 
to GAPOKTAN and 
Cooperatives which 
in  turn  could  treat 
business 
the 
sustainability 
P  Si  MH    Strengthen the GAPOKTAN 
and Cooperative to make it 
sustainably operational & 
functional through intensive 
facilitation and mentoring; 
including market development 
  Capacity building of extension 
workers and local partners 
Note: 
L 
I 
:  Likelihood (Very Unlikely/VU, Unlikely/U, Possible/P, Likely/L, Very Likely/VL); 
: 
Impact level (Negligible/N, Minor/Mi, Moderate/Mo, Significant/Si, Severe/Sv); 
210 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
R 
:  Risk  level  (combination  of  likelihood  and  impact  level)  =  Low  (Lw),  Low-Medium  (LM), 
Medium (Me), Medium-High (MH), High (H). 
211 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Project Proposal 
Purbalingga District – Central Java 
1.  General Condition 
  Purbalingga  has  wetland  area  of  40.366  ha  with  225.204-ton  production  per  year. 
Unemployment rate is 4,84%, Poverty rate 18,8%. The main occupation in Purbalingga 
are in the sector of Agriculture, Plantation, Forestry, and Fisheries which accounted for 
36% of the total occupation in Purbalingga; 
  Food Crops sub-sector is one of the agricultural sub-sectors. This subsector includes 
wetland  paddy  and  dry  land  paddy,  maize,  cassava,  sweet  potatoes,  peanuts  and 
soybeans. Harvested Area wetland paddy in 2015 increased by 11,67 percent when 
compared  with  2014.  Production  reached  248.332  ton  increase  when  compared  to 
2014 which only reached 172.421 ton with productivity 62,27 kw/ha. 
2.  Planned Commodity and Area 
  The proposed commodities and area: Raising of local goat (Kejobong) managed by 
farmer group through communal cage.  Each farmer group gets 150 female goats plus 
15 male goats; 
  There are 18 participated farmer groups distributed in one kecamatan Kejobong; 
  To support sustainable goat raising, an integrated goat feed processing (to produce 
feed concentrate) and compos production is proposed to be developed.  Materials for 
goat feed production is available in the kecamatan, e.g. cassava (leaf, tuber, cassava 
skin, bark) and side product of cassava industries (onggok), coffee skin; 
  Production  of  compos  is  intended  to get  value  added in goat  raising.   In  addition to 
further  increase  the  value  added,  a  Slaughterhouse  for  goat  completed  with  cold 
storage is also proposed to be established since there is no goat slaughterhouse in the 
District; 
  An animal health unit will be established to support the goat health service. 
3.  Beneficiaries and Benefit 
  About 450 farmer-households of 18 farmer group (goat-raising group) will be benefited 
from the project. They will get benefit from selling life goat, where a young goat (5-6 
months)  is  priced  at  IDR  700,000  and  an  adult  goat  is  priced  at  IDR    2-2.5  million.   
Within 2 years, mature female goat can get birth 3 times, and produce 2-3 lamb for 
each get birth; 
  Farmer group will get better access to goat feed concentrates which expectedly lower 
cost of feed concentrates; and better opportunities to get value added from selling goat 
meat rather than life goat; 
  Currently, the 17 farmer groups (goat raising group) are active conditions, and 1 farmer 
group has been just activated.  These 18 farmer groups will be benefited on improved 
goat cultivation and compos business; 
  Most farmers will also be benefited from the use of organic fertilizers for their farming 
of commercial crops (e.g. white pepper), and from selling the agricultural residues (skin 
cassava, cassava leaf, cassava bark) for goad feed processing unit. 
212 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
4.  Project Concept 
  There  are  captive  markets  for  Kejobong  goat.    Delivery  of  Kejobong  goat  from  the 
District to Jabodetabek is estimated at 15 head per day.  During the Idul Adha period, 
formal  record  shows  the  delivery  of  160  truck  to  outside  area  (including  to 
Jabodetabek), in which there are 60-70 head per truck.  In the meanwhile, the local 
need for goat Kejobong is estimated only 25 head per day; 
  The  farmer  (goat  raising)  group  will  manage  the  goat  raising  in  communal  cage.  
Forage  for  goat  feeding  will  be  obtained  from  Cressida  plant  (gamal)  that  are 
abundantly available in the area, since the farmer plant the crop for their goat and to 
propagate pepper plant.  Farmer group will also plant king grass and Indigo Vera in 
their land. Leaf of plants are source for goat forage; 
  The farmer groups will also collect the goat dung and deliver to compos processing 
unit that will be managed by cooperative own by Gapoktan; 
  The farmer group will form a Gapoktan which further establish a Cooperative at Sub-
District level.  The cooperative will be managed by professional team recruited by the 
Gapoktan, applying agreed terms and conditions; 
  The Gapoktan cooperative will organize and facilitate in marketing of goat production, 
manage and operate feed production unit to produce and sell goat feed-concentrates, 
and managed & operate UPPO to produce and sell organic fertilizers. Organic fertilizer 
will be sold to local farmers and/or farmers outside the district. 
5.  Proposed Land Development and Agriculture Infrastructure 
  Farm road for all sub-districts, about 6.5 km 
6.  Proposed Production and Farm Management 
  Sub-district  animal  Health  Centre  comprising  new  vet  building  and  completed  with 
facilities of refrigerator, scales, drug stock, veterinary equipment, and vet USG as well 
as motorcycles; 
  Production Facilities at farmer group to raise communal goat, e.g. water installation, 
goat houses/cage, forage legume seed; 
  Goat procurement for farmer groups (each farmer group will receive 150 female goats 
plus 15 male goats); 
  Three-wheel vehicle for farmer group to collect and transport goat dung to processing 
unit. 
7.  Proposed Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
  Facilities  for  the  feed  processing  and  production  unit  (concentrate  and  compos)  for 
Gapoktan/Cooperative  e.g.  feed  production  building,  equipment&  instruments,  feed 
materials, feed factory and supporting facilities; 
  Compos  processing  unit  (UPPO)  manage  by  Gapoktan/Cooperative  comprising 
building,  UPPO  equipment,  UPPO  machine,  sewing  machines  for  packaging,  sieve 
machine, sealer, packaging material; 
  Four-wheel  vehicle  for  operation  of  integrated  feed  and  compos  processing10. 
Slaughter house; 
  Slaughterhouse  managed  by  UPDT:  New  building  &  equipment  of  Goat 
Slaughterhouse,  cold  storage  for  goat  meat,  and  upgrading  IPAL  of  Cattle 
Slaughterhouse. 
213 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
8.  Proposed training and capacity building activities 
Information campaign for farmers; 
  Training in feed processing; 
  Training in dug processing; 
 
  Workshop Development of GAPOKNAK; 
  Training government staff in project management; 
  Equipping the Dinas with 4-wheel vehicle (2 units, one of them is pick-up). 
9.  Village Facilitation and Technical Assistance 
10.  Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at Purbalingga 
FGD at Distan Purbalingga 
FGD with Farmer Group 
Goat Market at Purbalingga 
Communal Cage and Access Farm Road 
at KTT Bina Usaha 
Goat Market at Kecobong Subdistrict  
RPH and IPAL Unit 
214 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
11.  Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities 
215 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
12.  Risk Assessment of the program and Mitigation Measures 
Risks 
Impact on Project 
L 
I 
R 
Mitigation 
Residual 
risks (R) 
P 
Si 
MH 
  Strengthen the farmer 
LM 
The  goats  are 
sold  by  farmer 
for cash 
of 
farmer 
from 
Loss 
income 
goat/sheep 
agribusiness,  in  turn 
organic 
lack 
for  coffee 
fertilizer 
which 
plantation 
could 
the 
coffee productivity 
reduce 
of 
groups that manage the 
communal livestock, incl. 
training in goat raising, 
developing rule of 
communal-managed goat; 
and in accessing finance 
institutions including 
developing credit-saving 
managed by farmer group 
with tight control; 
Inform and educate 
farmers with business plan 
of goat-based 
agribusiness; and the 
importance of livestock 
assets for sustainable 
income; 
 
  Develop value added goat 
through selling goat meat; 
  Strengthen Farmer Group 
to produce and develop 
market of goat meat. 
  Strengthen the farmer 
groups in O&M of 
agricultural infrastructures, 
including charging farmers 
with agreed fee for O&M of 
agric. Infrastructure & 
machineries. 
Lw 
Lw 
Price  &  market 
volatility of goat 
farmer 
Reduced 
income from coffee  
UL  Mo 
LW 
Reduce  productivity 
of goat 
L 
Mo  Me 
Lack of O&M of 
agriculture 
infrastructures 
(farm 
road, 
irrigation, etc.) 
Unfunctional  of 
GAPOKTAN 
and 
Cooperative 
Untrusted  of  farmer 
to  GAPOKTAN  and 
Cooperatives  which 
in turn could treat the 
business 
sustainability 
P 
Si 
MH 
  Strengthen the 
LM 
GAPOKTAN/Cooperative 
to make it sustainably 
operational & functional 
through intensive 
facilitation and mentoring; 
including market 
development; 
  Capacity building of 
extension workers and 
local partners; 
  Capacity building of 
Cooperative management. 
Note: 
L 
I 
:  Likelihood (Very Unlikely/VU, Unlikely/U, Possible/P, Likely/L, Very Likely/VL). 
: 
Impact level (Negligible/N, Minor/Mi, Moderate/Mo, Significant/Si, Severe/Sv). 
R 
:  Risk  level  (combination  of  likelihood  and  impact  level)  =  Low  (Lw),  Low-Medium  (LM), 
Medium (Me), Medium-High (MH), High (H). 
216 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
13. 
Proposed of Farmer Group 
No 
Name of farmer Group 
District 
Name of Village 
Number of 
Member 
1  Mendo Mulyo 
2 
Rejo Mulyo 
3  Margo Mulyo 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Sido Makmur 
Ngudi Rahayu 
Sido Dadi 
Terpadu 
Ngudi Dadi 
9  Margo Rukun 
10  Ngudi Rejeki 
11  Sri Rejeki 
12  Mugi Lestari 
13  Muji Lestari 
14  Sido Maju 
15 
Jawara 
16  Bina Usaha 
17  Maju Makmur 
18  Karya Munjul 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Kejobong 
Ds. Bandingan 
Ds. Krenceng   
Ds. Nangkasawit 
Ds. Pangempon 
Ds. Kejobong 
Ds. Langgar  
Ds. Langgar  
Ds. Kedarpan  
Ds. Langgar  
Ds. Kedarpan  
Ds. Timbang  
Ds. Timbang  
Ds. Timbang  
Ds. Nangkod  
Ds. Lamuk  
Ds. Nangkod  
Ds. Pandansari  
Ds. Sokanegara  
10 
10 
15 
15 
10 
15 
15 
225 
17 
12 
10 
10 
10 
15 
16 
13 
10 
20 
217 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Project Proposal 
Magelang District – Central Jawa 
1.  General Condition 
Kabupaten Magelang has unemployment  rate is 5,16%, Poverty rate is 12,42%, The main 
occupation in Magelang are in the  sector of Agriculture, Plantation, Forestry, and Fisheries 
which accounted for 28% of the total occupation in Magelang or about 223.266 people of the 
number  127.  898  (57.2%)  are  male  and  95.368  (42.7%)  are  female.Magelang  has  59,084 
wetland  areas  and  produce  366,981  ton  per  year  paddy  rice  another  major  production  in 
Magelang  is  Sweet  Potato  with  957  ha  area  and  21,940  ton  per  year.  Several  problems  in 
Magelang Agriculture are uneven infrastructure development and low educational level. 
2. 
Planned Commodity and Area 
  The proposed commodities and area: Organic rice in 2,000 ha distributed in 3 zones.  The 
zone basically represents 3 main sub-districts, except Bandongan zone which include 2 
villages of 2 sub-districts; 
  Of the proposed 2,000 ha there is now 1,030 ha that have got organic certification from 
Seloliman (LESOS) Mojokerto; 
  Water source of irrigation are spring, waterfall.  Some area  – especially in Grabag sub-
district - has lack of water resources for irrigation. Ground water irrigation using shallow or 
deep  well  will  be  an  alternative  to  be  developed.    For  the  location  with  good  water 
availability, the farmer plant rice 5 times in 2 years, this is estimated about 60%. The other 
is 2 times a year; 
  The rice organic farming need support of the availability of organic fertilizer and biological 
pest control practices.  Therefore, livestock raising (cattle and goat) are also proposed in 
each zone completed with livestock cage and UPPO (processing unit of organic fertilizer).  
In addition, natural pesticide production facilities and owl house are also proposed to be 
developed in each zone; 
  One farmer group in Grabag zone - namely AGRO AS SYIFA – is specialized to produce 
seed of organic rice; 
  All farmer groups has developed an association at district level which purchase dry grain 
from farmers at price IDR 4,500/kg and produce packaged organic rice.  However, due to 
capital limitation of the association, currently 80% paddy production is sold to middlemen 
in  the  form  of  dry  grain  at  price  IDR  4,000/kg,  because  of  financial  limitation  of  the 
association.    In  this  regard,  accessibility  to  financing  source  is  required  to  increase the 
financial capacity of associations. 
Description 
Paddy field Area (ha) 
# Village 
# Farmer Group 
#Farmer 
Bandongan*) 
800.08 
15 
29 
1,646 
Zone 
Grabag 
600 
11 
32 
2,103 
Sawangan 
600 
7 
33 
1,647 
Total 
2000.08 
33 
94 
5,396 
*)  include Bandongan sub-district (13 villages), 1 village from Kaliangkrik sub-district, and 1 
village from tempuran sub-district. 
218 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
3.  Beneficiaries and Benefit 
About  5,390 farmer-households will  be  benefited from the  project  through getting  value 
added through: 
  Selling  their  organic  rice  organized  through  the  association  rather  than  selling  dry 
grain.    Price  of  organic  rice  range  from  IDR  14,000/kg  (for  white  rice)  up  to  IDR 
20,000/kg (for black rice), and in average IDR 16,000/kg; 
 
Increased cropping intensity and productivity (currently 5-6 tone dry husk grain per ha) 
due to better access to irrigation water, quality of seed, and organic fertilizers.  In case 
SRI method is applied, the productivity can incredibly raise at about 9-10 tone dry husk 
grain per ha; 
  Reduced farming cost due to better access to organic fertilizers, the use of agriculture 
machineries, lower transport cost, etc. 
4. 
Project Concept 
  The association now has captive market for organic rice (e.g. PT. Boga Sarana about 
40  tones/month,  company  from  Tegal,  Kalimantan,  Jakarta,  etc.  Each  zone  has 
developed  their  own  brand,  i.e.  SekarLangit  (Grabag),  Gatos  (Sawagan),  and 
Bandongan Mitayani (Bandongan); 
  Farmer group will collect production and drying of harvested husked grain from farmer, 
and  sell  it  to  GAPOKTAN  at  zone  (sub-district)  level.    The  farmer  group  will  also 
develop  and  establish  UPJA,  and  provide  service  on  the  operation  of  agric. 
Machineries; 
  GAPOKTAN will be formed at zone level (sub-district) composed by farmer groups as 
member, with roles in: coordinating UPJA at village level including establishing Alsitan 
brigade, manages Rice Processing Facilities & RMU, purchase dry husked grain from 
farmer  groups,  produce  organic  rice,  packaging  &  branding  the  organic  rice  (Sekar 
Langit  brand  in  Grabag),  Gatos  brand  in  Sawagan,  and  Bandongan  Mitayani    in 
Bandongan);  manage  livestock  and  UPPO  and  produce  &  sell  organic  fertilizer  to 
farmers, and manage installation and produce and sell natural pesticide to farmers; 
  Existing  organic  rice  association  will  form  a  Cooperative  that  will  operate  at  district 
level.  The roles of cooperative are: organize marketing of organic rice that have been 
packed and branded at GAPOKTAN level, develop marketing/business network, and 
Education and training services. 
Value chain for Magelang district is attached. 
5. 
Proposed Land Development and Agriculture Infrastructure 
  Farm ponds for Tirto village (Kecamatan Grabag); 
  Rehabilitation of tertiary system about 18,850m3 (equivalent with 32 km) for sub-
district of Sawangan and Drabag; 
  Rehabilitation of Farm road (about 15,250m3 (equivalent to 28 km); 
  Small dam (20 unit) complete with gate; 
  Shallow/deep Ground Well (18 units consisting of 3units in Bandongan; and 15 units 
in Grabag); 
  Surface piping irrigation (about 3,500 m) complete with retention & distribution 
facilities. 
219 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
6. 
Proposed Production and Farm Management 
For rice field at farmer level: 
  Seed (20kg/ha x2000 ha x 2 years); 
  Organic fertilizer (1000kg/ha x2000hax2 years); 
  Biofertilizer (60kg/ha x2000ha x 2 years). 
Farmer group-managed machineries: 
  Hand Tractor (46 units); 
  Power weeder (90 units); 
  Paddy mower (90 units); 
  Power thresher (36 units); 
  Hand Sprayer (210 units); 
  Water Pump (30 units); 
  Water Pump 8,5 HP (3 units); 
  Mini Rice Transplant (30 units); 
  Seeding Tray (5,000 units). 
GAPOKTAN-managed machineries & facilities: 
  Power sprayer (3 unit); 
  Natural pesticide laboratory (30 m2) and equipment (3 units); 
  Owl House (200 units); 
  Organic Fertilizer Processing Unit for Cattle (24 packages), complete with cattle, 
warehouse, cages, fermentation boxes, compos processors, three-wheel vehicle; 
  Organic Fertilizer Processing Unit for Goat livestock (12 packages) complete with 
organic fertilizer processing unit, warehouse, cages, fermentation boxes, compos 
processors; 
  Cages and cattle (5 packages: 2 for Bandongan, 2 for other zones, and 1 for Agro As 
Syifa); each unit consist of 10 cattle and cage; 
  Cages and cattle (5 packages: 2 for Bandongan, 2 for other zones, and 1 for Agro As 
Syifa); each unit consist of 20 goats and cage; 
  Bio Gas Installation (2 units) in Grabag zone. 
7. 
Proposed Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
GAPOKTAN-managed processing facilities: 
  Warehouse (100 M2), 5units (2 for Bandongan, 2 for other zones, and 1 for Agro As 
Syifa); 
  2-Storey Office and Equipment Warehouse (100 M2), 4units (2 units or Bandongan). 
  Drying floors (1000 M2),4 units (2 units or Bandongan); 
  RMU House (250 M2), 3 units; 
  Vertical Dryer House (100 M2), 3 units; 
  Electrical installation, 3packages; 
  Vertical dryer (10 ton), 3units; 
  RMU& Equipment (integrated RMU 1-1.5 ton/hours), 3 packages; 
  Rice Color Sorter, 3 units; 
  Grain suction machine, 5 units; 
  Seed Cleaner + Elevator for Nursery, 1 unit (for AgroSifa); 
220 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Separator for Nursery, 2 units (for AgroSifa); 
  Packaging equipment (1 package for each Gapoktan plus Agro-sifa): seller, vacuum 
seller, packaging printing machine, sewing machine, plastic packaging (5kg), plastic 
vacuum packaging, 5 kg sacks; 
  Ancillary equipment (vacuum cleaner, compressors), 2 packages for each Gapoktan; 
  Truck, 3 units; 
  Pick-up vehicles (Mitsubishi L300), 4 units (for 3 Gapoktans plus 1 nursery/ Agrosyifa); 
  Tricycle motorcycle, 24 units (for 3 gapoktans plus 1 nursery/Agrosyifa); 
  Organic Rice Certification. 
COOPERATIVE OF ORGANIC RICE ASSOCIATION 
  Establishment of primary commodity center (600m2) – DED has been available; 
  Establish P3O (Pusat Pelatihan Pertanian Organik/Organic Farming Training Center) 
completed with training equipment, furniture, training tools; 
  Light Truck. 
8. 
Strengthening Market Linkages and Alliances 
  Events for business development and market linkages. 
9. 
Access to Financial Services 
  Establishment of finance institution services. 
10.  Proposed training and capacity building activities 
  Community Mobilization Farmer Institutions 
o 
Institutional Strengthening of Farmer Groups; 
o  Strengthening Farmer Economic Institutions; 
o 
o 
Institutional Strengthening of Organic Fertilizer Processing Units; 
Institutional Strengthening of Agricultural Machinery Equipment Services 
Management Unit; 
o  Organic Rice Field Trip; 
o  Comparative study of organic farming; 
o  English language training; 
o  Organic farming internship; 
o  Organic farming workshop; 
o  Mobilizing extension workers. 
  Farmer Trainings: 
o  Organic rice agribusiness management training; 
o  Farmer business plan training; 
o  Group Business Plan Training; 
o  Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) Field School; 
o  Good Handling Practices Field (GHP) Field School; 
o  Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) Field School; 
o  Organic Land Certification Training; 
o 
Internal Control System Training; 
o  Training in drafting a Definitive Plan for Group Needs; 
o  Field School for Controlling Plant Pest Organisms; 
221 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
o  Organic Fertilizer Making Training; 
o  Group managerial training; 
o  Administration and bookkeeping training for group administrators; 
o  Maintenance training of agricultural machinery; 
o  Agricultural machinery engineering training; 
o  Organic fertilizer processing unit management training; 
o  Seedling training; 
o  Business contact/event. 
  Training for government officials/staff (subject for discussing with Dir. PSP) 
11.  Village Facilitation and Technical Assistance 
  Sub-district facilitator; 
  District facilitator. 
Cost-tab for Magelang district is attached (subject for discussion). 
12.  Proposed of Farmer Group 
Farmer Group 
Grabag 
Tlogo Sari 
Tlogo Mulyo 
Tlogo Rejo 
Lestari Makmur 
No. 
A 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5  Rejo Muly0 
Sido Rukun 
6 
Karanglo 
7 
Sido Rejo 
8 
9  Dadi Makmur 
10  Tlogosari 
11  Sejahtera 
12  Sidodadi 
13  Loh Jinawi 
14  Sayuk Rukun 
15  Gotong Royong 
16  Sumber Rejeki 
17  Tejosari 2  
18  Tani Makmur 3 
19  Ngudi Raharjo 
20  Sri Rejeki 
21  Andong Jinawi 
22  Tekad Manunggal 
23  Sido Asri 
24  Sido Mukti 
25  Kwt Sido Arum 
26  Berkah Tani Nyiur Hijau 
27  Sugeng Makmur 
Member 
Area (Ha) 
Village 
38 
89 
88 
42 
31 
85 
67 
31 
23 
179 
97 
36 
55 
137 
97 
45 
98 
66 
75 
47 
39 
41 
41 
35 
123 
51 
13 
19.13 
18.92 
18.40 
11.60 
7.81 
13.74 
13.30 
6.19 
8.06 
19.93 
20.16 
17.90 
18.02 
46.46 
29.78 
25.00 
17.45 
25.20 
16.43 
6.03 
13.02 
11.03 
20.00 
15.07 
10.60 
10.28 
15.08 
Tlogorejo 
Tlogorejo 
Tlogorejo 
Kartoharjo 
Sambungrejo 
Sambungrejo 
Sambungrejo 
Sambungrejo 
Sambungrejo 
Ngasinan  
Ngasinan 
Kleteran 
Kleteran 
Citrosono 
Citrosono  
Citrosono 
Banyusari 
Banyusari 
Tirto 
Tirto 
Tirto 
Sidogede 
Sidogede 
Sidogede 
Sidogede 
Kartoharjo 
Kartoharjo 
222 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Farmer Group 
No. 
28  Sido Harjo 
29  Ngudi Luhur 
30  Rukun Estu Kiyat 
31  Subur 
32  Agro As Syifa 
Total 
33  Mekar Sari 
34  Tani Mulyo 
35  Pendowo Limo 
36  Loh Joyo 
37  Srigati 
38  Al Huda 
39  Sri Rejeki 
40  Al Mukmin 
41  Al Irsyad 
42  Tansah Makmur 
43  Sumber Rejeki Amanah 
44 
Jaya 
45  Karangrejo 
46  Ngudi Makmur 
47  Bangkit 
48  Mureh Rejo 
49  Bumi Lohjinawi 
50  Ngudi Makmur 
51  Guyub Rukun 
52  Subur Rahayu 
53  Karya Ngudi Rahayu 
54  Karya Bhakti 
55  Makmur Jaya 
56  Lohjinawi 
57  Bangkit Sejahtera 
58  Bina Karya 
59  Al Ikhlas 
60  Sumber Rejeki 
61  Kuppo Sumbingrejo 
62  Gapoktan Gemah Ripah  
63  Ngudi Makmur 
64  Sumber Pangan 1 
65  Sumber Makmur 
66  Permata Tani 
67  Kebokuning 
68  Margorejo 
69  Pastimulyo 
70  Sumber Pangan 2 
71  Maju Lancar 
Member 
35 
100 
117 
13 
69 
2,103  
78 
32 
64 
31 
46 
58 
69 
24 
88 
45 
65 
45 
64 
71 
90 
42 
41 
108 
92 
41 
68 
67 
34 
41 
25 
52 
25 
85 
55 
207 
31 
27 
43 
51 
31 
112 
126 
56 
41 
Village 
Kartoharjo 
Kalikuto 
Grabag 
Grabag 
Ngasinan 
Sidorejo 
Rejosari 
Rejosari 
Rejosari 
Sukosari 
Sukosari 
Sukosari 
Sukosari 
Gandusari 
Gandusari 
Bandongan 
Tonoboyo 
Tonoboyo 
Tonoboyo 
Banyuwangi 
Sukodadi 
Kebonagung 
Kebonagung 
Kebonagung 
Ngepanrejo 
Kedungsari 
Kedungsari 
Kalegen 
Kalegen 
Trasan 
Trasan 
Trasan 
Sumber  Arum,  Kecamatan 
Tempuran 
Girirejo Kecamatan Kaliangkrik 
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Area (Ha) 
10.20 
22.45 
30.35 
47.00 
35.41 
600.00 
30.00 
32.30 
44.00 
34.00 
13.00 
25.00 
25.00 
8.00 
63.30 
15.60 
27.00 
20.60 
22.40 
25.90 
63.00 
20.00 
16.90 
29.20 
29.53 
12.00 
24.80 
26.05 
15.90 
14.60 
22.00 
27.00 
16.00 
75.00 
22.00 
199.50 
9.40 
7.50 
13.25 
17.80 
11.05 
34.40 
36.50 
16.25 
11.30 
223 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Farmer Group 
No. 
72  Tirto Semaren 
73  Lohjinawi 
74  Guyup Rukun 
75  Tani Makmur 
76  Maju Makmur 
77  Karya Tani 
78  Rukun Tani 
79  Cowor 
80  Tri Rejeki 
81  Pambudi Lestari 
82  Sedyo Raharjo 
83  Sedyo Rukun 
84  Sido Mulyo 
85  Ngudi Rejeki 
86  Sediyo Utomo 
87  Suko Tulodo 
88  Rukun Lestari 
89  Sumber Rejeki 
90  Denokan 
91  Rukun Makmur 
92  Pahitan 
93  Piyungan 
94  Ngudi Rejeki 
Total 
Member 
64 
19 
23 
12 
19 
35 
37 
24 
48 
65 
32 
27 
57 
50 
66 
62 
12 
63 
66 
26 
14 
19 
82 
1,647 
Area (Ha) 
18.00 
8.80 
5.00 
2.00 
4.00 
9.00 
5.90 
4.30 
11.30 
12.25 
9.20 
15.70 
18.45 
7.60 
20.80 
15.00 
2.70 
8.00 
10.00 
9.45 
4.70 
13.00 
27.90 
600.00 
Village 
Sawangan  
Krogowanan 
Krogowanan 
Krogowanan 
Krogowanan 
Butuh 
Butuh 
Butuh 
Butuh 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Podosoko 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Kapuhan 
224 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 1. 
Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at Magelang 
Discussion with Dinas 
Access Farm Road at Village ofSawangan 
FGD and Interview with Farmer Group 
Organic Rice at Sawangan Subdistrict 
Mapping Location 
Tersier Irrigation at Village of Sawangan 
225 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 2. Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities 
226 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
227 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
228 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
229 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
14. 
Risk Assessment of the program and Mitigation Measures 
Risks 
Impact 
Project 
on 
Appearance 
of 
crops  pest  and 
diseases  
Loss 
production 
farmer income 
of 
and 
L 
I 
R  Mitigation 
UL  Si  MH 
Residual 
risks (R) 
Lw 
Lw 
  Strengthen the farmer groups 
with continual improvement 
of organic farming practices 
and better cropping pattern 
  Strengthen cooperation 
GAPOKTAN and Dinas in 
continuous actions for 
implementing participatory 
field trial  
  Strengthen the GAPOKTAN 
and Association cooperative 
to Access Financial 
Institutions; develop 
partnership with private 
sectors, and develop market 
Lw 
LM 
cooperative to develop 
market, and stock 
management 
  Strengthen the farmer groups 
& GA-POKTAN in O&M of 
agricultural infrastructures, 
including charging farmers 
with agreed fee for O&M of 
agric. Infrastructure & 
machineries 
  Strengthen the GAPOKTAN 
and Cooperative to make it 
sustainably operational & 
functional through intensive 
facilitation and mentoring; 
including market 
development 
  Capacity building of 
extension workers and local 
partners 
farmer 
in  organic 
Loss  of 
trust 
farming 
VL  Sv  H 
finance 
Lack  of 
capacity 
of 
GAPOKTAN  and 
Association 
Cooperative 
to 
purchase farmers’ 
production 
Price  &  market 
volatility of organic 
due 
high 
to 
competition  
Lack  of  O&M  of 
agriculture 
infrastructures 
(farm 
road, 
etc.) 
irrigation, 
and machineries  
Reduce 
production 
of 
organic  rice  and 
increase 
transportation 
cost 
L 
Mo  Me 
P 
Si  MH 
of 
Untrusted 
farmer 
to 
GAPOKTAN  and 
Cooperatives 
which 
could 
business 
sustainability 
in 
treat 
turn 
the 
of 
Unfunctional 
GAPOKTAN  and 
Cooperative 
Note: 
Reduced 
income  
farmer 
P 
Mo  Me 
  Strengthen GAPOKTAN and 
Lw 
L  :  Likelihood (Very Unlikely/VU, Unlikely/U, Possible/P, Likely/L, Very Likely/VL). 
I 
Impact level (Negligible/N, Minor/Mi, Moderate/Mo, Significant/Si, Severe/Sv). 
R  :  Risk level (combination of likelihood and impact level) = Low (Lw), Low-Medium (LM), Medium 
: 
(Me), Medium-High (MH), High (H). 
230 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
15.  Farmer Group 
Farmer Group 
Lestari Makmur 
No 
A  Grabag 
1  Tlogo Sari 
2  Tlogo Mulyo 
3  Tlogo Rejo 
4 
5  Rejo Muly0 
6  Sido Rukun 
7  Karanglo 
8  Sido Rejo 
9  Dadi Makmur 
10  Tlogosari 
11  Sejahtera 
12  Sidodadi 
13  Loh Jinawi 
14  Sayuk Rukun 
15  Gotong Royong 
16  Sumber Rejeki 
17  Tejosari 2  
18  Tani Makmur 3 
19  Ngudi Raharjo 
20  Sri Rejeki 
21  Andong Jinawi 
22  Tekad Manunggal 
23  Sido Asri 
24  Sido Mukti 
25  Kwt Sido Arum 
26  Berkah Tani Nyiur Hijau 
27  Sugeng Makmur 
28  Sido Harjo 
29  Ngudi Luhur 
30  Rukun Estu Kiyat 
31  Subur 
32  Agro As Syifa 
Jumlah 
33  Mekar Sari 
34  Tani Mulyo 
35  Pendowo Limo 
36  Loh Joyo 
37  Srigati 
38  Al Huda 
39  Sri Rejeki 
40  Al Mukmin 
41  Al Irsyad 
42  Tansah Makmur 
43  Sumber Rejeki Amanah 
44  Jaya 
45  Karangrejo 
46  Ngudi Makmur 
47  Bangkit 
48  Mureh Rejo 
49  Bumi Lohjinawi 
50  Ngudi Makmur 
51  Guyub Rukun 
52  Subur Rahayu 
Member  Area (Ha) 
Village 
Tlogorejo 
Tlogorejo 
Tlogorejo 
Kartoharjo 
Sambungrejo 
Sambungrejo 
Sambungrejo 
Sambungrejo 
Sambungrejo 
Ngasinan  
Ngasinan 
Kleteran 
Kleteran 
Citrosono 
Citrosono  
Citrosono 
Banyusari 
Banyusari 
Tirto 
Tirto 
Tirto 
Sidogede 
Sidogede 
Sidogede 
Sidogede 
Kartoharjo 
Kartoharjo 
Kartoharjo 
Kalikuto 
Grabag 
Grabag 
Ngasinan 
Sidorejo 
Rejosari 
Rejosari 
Rejosari 
Sukosari 
Sukosari 
Sukosari 
Sukosari 
Gandusari 
Gandusari 
Bandongan 
Tonoboyo 
Tonoboyo 
Tonoboyo 
Banyuwangi 
Sukodadi 
Kebonagung 
Kebonagung 
Kebonagung 
Ngepanrejo 
38 
89 
88 
42 
31 
85 
67 
31 
23 
179 
97 
36 
55 
137 
97 
45 
98 
66 
75 
47 
39 
41 
41 
35 
123 
51 
13 
35 
100 
117 
13 
69 
2,103 
78 
32 
64 
31 
46 
58 
69 
24 
88 
45 
65 
45 
64 
71 
90 
42 
41 
108 
92 
41 
19.13 
18.92 
18.40 
11.60 
7.81 
13.74 
13.30 
6.19 
8.06 
19.93 
20.16 
17.90 
18.02 
46.46 
29.78 
25.00 
17.45 
25.20 
16.43 
6.03 
13.02 
11.03 
20.00 
15.07 
10.60 
10.28 
15.08 
10.20 
22.45 
30.35 
47.00 
35.41 
600.00 
30.00 
32.30 
44.00 
34.00 
13.00 
25.00 
25.00 
8.00 
63.30 
15.60 
27.00 
20.60 
22.40 
25.90 
63.00 
20.00 
16.90 
29.20 
29.53 
12.00 
231 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Farmer Group 
No 
53  Karya Ngudi Rahayu 
54  Karya Bhakti 
55  Makmur Jaya 
56  Lohjinawi 
57  Bangkit Sejahtera 
58  Bina Karya 
59  Al Ikhlas 
60  Sumber Rejeki 
61  Kuppo Sumbingrejo 
Total 
62  Gapoktan Gemah Ripah  
63  Ngudi Makmur 
64  Sumber Pangan 1 
65  Sumber Makmur 
66  Permata Tani 
67  Kebokuning 
68  Margorejo 
69  Pastimulyo 
70  Sumber Pangan 2 
71  Maju Lancar 
72  Tirto Semaren 
73  Lohjinawi 
74  Guyup Rukun 
75  Tani Makmur 
76  Maju Makmur 
77  Karya Tani 
78  Rukun Tani 
79  Cowor 
80  Tri Rejeki 
81  Pambudi Lestari 
82  Sedyo Raharjo 
83  Sedyo Rukun 
84  Sido Mulyo 
85  Ngudi Rejeki 
86  Sediyo Utomo 
87  Suko Tulodo 
88  Rukun Lestari 
89  Sumber Rejeki 
90  Denokan 
91  Rukun Makmur 
92  Pahitan 
93  Piyungan 
94  Ngudi Rejeki 
Total 
Member  Area (Ha) 
Village 
Kedungsari 
Kedungsari 
Kalegen 
Kalegen 
Trasan 
Trasan 
Trasan 
Sumber Arum, Kecamatan Tempuran 
Girirejo Kecamatan Kaliangkrik 
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Sawangan  
Krogowanan 
Krogowanan 
Krogowanan 
Krogowanan 
Butuh 
Butuh 
Butuh 
Butuh 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Mangunsari 
Podosoko 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Tirtosari 
Kapuhan 
68 
67 
34 
41 
25 
52 
25 
85 
55 
1,646 
207 
31 
27 
43 
51 
31 
112 
126 
56 
41 
64 
19 
23 
12 
19 
35 
37 
24 
48 
65 
32 
27 
57 
50 
66 
62 
12 
63 
66 
26 
14 
19 
82 
1,647 
24.80 
26.05 
15.90 
14.60 
22.00 
27.00 
16.00 
75.00 
22.00 
800.08 
199.50 
9.40 
7.50 
13.25 
17.80 
11.05 
34.40 
36.50 
16.25 
11.30 
18.00 
8.80 
5.00 
2.00 
4.00 
9.00 
5.90 
4.30 
11.30 
12.25 
9.20 
15.70 
18.45 
7.60 
20.80 
15.00 
2.70 
8.00 
10.00 
9.45 
4.70 
13.00 
27.90 
600.00 
232 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Project Proposal 
Malang District – East Java 
1.  General Condition 
  Malang Regency is an area located in the center south region of East Java Province. 
With an area of about 2,977.05 km2 (source: Division of Village Government of Malang 
Regency),  Malang  Regency  is  located  on  the  sequence  of  the  second  largest  area 
after  Banyuwangi  Regency  of  the  38  districts  in  East  Java  Province.  Based  on 
monitoring results of three. Climatology station post-monitoring, Karangploso Malang, 
in 2016 the average air temperature is relatively medium, ranging between 23,3o C to 
27.1oC. 
  Farming sector  is  the main sector  in Malang Regency  economy.  According  to  Food 
Crops,  Horticulture  and  Plantation  Service  of  Malang  Regency,  most  of  the  area  of 
Malang Regency is a farming field, which is about 14.31 percent (45,888 ha) is wet 
land field,35.45 percent (113,664 ha) is dry field, 7.06 percent (22,643 ha) is plantation 
area and 12.50 percent (40,079 ha) is forest. The facility of irrigation system has been 
build  include  dam,  water  source  sluice  gate,  and  drainage  ditch  for  completing  the 
needs  of  field  irrigation  of  46,033  ha  (Department  of  Irrigation).  Most  of  irrigation 
system is technical irrigation that irrigate about 28,228ha (61,32 percent) fields. While 
semi  technical  irrigation  is  about  11,319  ha  (24.59  percent)  and  simple  irrigation  is 
about 6,486 ha (14.09 percent). 
  Based on the note of Department of Irrigation, during 2016, there was no field mutation. 
Food production, especially rice at 2016 reached 505,138 tons, increase from the last 
year, even compared than 2015. Corn, cassava, peanut and soybean production as 
substitution commodities increase from the last year. While the other commodities of 
secondary crop like sweet potatoes decrease. Unemployment rate in Malang is 4,95% 
and  Poverty  rate  is  11,04%,  The  main  occupation  in  Malang  are  in  the  sector  of 
Agriculture, Plantation, Forestry, and Fisheries which accounted for 33% of the total 
occupation in Malang. 
2.  Planned Commodity and Area 
  The proposed commodity is shallot in 2 sub-districts, namely Pujon and Ngantang. In 
Pujon, there are 2 villages, namely Pujon Kidul and Ngabab, which is chosen to be 
included in this Project. While in Ngantang only one village: Purworejo. Total area of 
the project is 300 hectares (optimization) which distributed to 3 villages, 100 hectares 
each. Shallot variety that mostly planted by farmer in Pujon and Ngantang is Batu ijo 
variety (released by BPTP East Java, 368/Kpts/Lb.240/6/2004).This is a local variety 
that suitable with upland agro climate. 
  Besides planting shallot, farmer in Malang is also cultivating horticulture such as chili, 
maize,  carrot,  cabbage,  mustard  greens.  Some  of  them  are  also  raise  dairy  and 
fattening cattle for livelihood. 
3.  Beneficiaries 
  The targeted beneficiaries are about 778 farmers organized in 11 farmers groups. 
There are 3 beneficiaries Gapoktan in the project area, 1 Gapoktan in each village. 
According to Dinas staff, so far, only 1 Women Farmer Group exists, in Pujon Kidul. 
233 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Besides assisting in cultivating shallot, women farmer takes main role in planting, 
weed control, and post-harvest processing. 
Table 1. 
Name of Poktan and Its Members in Kecamatan Pujon and Kecamatan Ngantang, 
Kabupaten Malang 
No. 
Village 
Name of Poktan 
Number of Members 
Male 
Female 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Pujon Kidul, Pujon 
Sari Agung I 
Pujon KIdul, Pujon 
Sari Agung II 
Pujon Kidul, Pujon 
Sari Agung III 
Ngabab, Pujon 
Sumber Makmur I 
Ngabab, Pujon 
Sumber Makmur II 
Ngabab, Pujon 
Sumber Makmur III 
Ngabab, Pujon 
Sumber Makmur IV 
Purworejo, Ngantang 
Karya Bakti I 
Purworejo, Ngantang 
Karya Bakti II 
10  Purworejo, Ngantang 
Karya Bakti III 
11  Purworejo, Ngantang 
Karya Bakti IV 
T O T AL  
49 
37 
30 
25 
20 
15 
25 
151 
83 
160 
126 
721 
0 
1 
20 
8 
5 
5 
3 
4 
3 
3 
5 
57 
Source: Dinas Tanaman Pangan, Hortikultura, dan Perkebunan, Kabupaten Malang, 2018. 
4.  Project Concept 
Gapoktan  will  play  important  role  in  the  smoothness  and  sustainability  of  the  project 
implementation. 
  Gapoktan will manage distribution of agricultural inputs such as (fertilizer, 
pesticides/fungicides, etc); 
  Gapoktan will manage the infrastructure that will be built under this project such as 
farm ponds, warehouse, agricultural machinery etc. Farmer will use these facilities 
and of course he/she will pay fee for operation and maintenance of these facilities; 
  Gapoktan will assist farmer in practicing good agriculture practice, farm production, 
processing, farm product marketing, and channeling micro-finance; 
  Since water availability and sustainability is important factors in farming system, 
farmer will be trained on how to conserve water for agricultural purposes. 
234 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
5.  Proposed Land Development and Agriculture Infrastructure 
  Under this Upland project, farm road within 3 villages will be built. 
  Besides farm road they also plan to build farm ponds in the project area. 
6.  Proposed Production and Farm Management 
  As typical agriculture in upland area, water shortage is a challenge especially in long 
dry season. Farmer in Pujon and Ngantang, planting shallot in rainy season as well 
as in dry season. This is because Pujon and Ngantang variety is resistant to 
Fusarium wilt which usually attack shallot. 
7.  Proposed training and capacity building activities 
  For Farmer: 
o  Good practices of shallot farming (cultivation, product processing, 
entrepreneurship). 
  For Women Farmer Group: 
o  Training in shallot post-harvest practices, processing, and marketing. 
  Business contact/event. 
8.  Risk Assassment and Mitigation Plan 
Risk 
Impact 
Severity  Likelihood 
Productivity  Moderate 
Very 
Unlikely 
Water 
securitydue to 
encroachment 
of the water 
catchment 
area 
Risk 
Level 
Low 
Med 
to 
Moderate 
Possible 
Medium 
Injury 
farmers 
Workplace 
safety, 
equipment 
and  pest  and 
disease 
control 
Land 
/collapse 
slide 
to 
Damage 
farming 
environment 
Moderate 
Possible 
Medium 
235 
Mitigation 
  Protect the 
catchment 
area 
  Famer 
education and 
participation to 
protect the 
catchment 
area 
  Training for 
farmers on 
operating 
equipment 
  Training for 
farmers on 
integrated 
pest and 
disease 
management 
(IPDM) 
  Training on 
Organic 
Farming 
  Protection of 
catchment 
area 
Residual 
Risk 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Risk 
Impact 
Severity  Likelihood 
Risk 
Level 
Erosion 
Reducing 
Productivity 
Moderate  Unlikely 
(because 
land 
hasbeen 
terracing) 
Market 
volatility 
Farmers 
lose  interest 
in the crops 
Minor 
Likely 
Low 
Med 
Low 
Med 
in 
Changes 
government 
policy. 
Impacts  on 
the  market 
and price 
Moderate 
Possible 
Medium 
Residual 
Risk 
Low 
Mitigation 
  Training for 
farmers on 
prepared-ness 
  Mapping the 
risk area 
  To strengthen 
the terrace 
  Use organic 
fertilizer 
  Protection of 
catchment 
area 
  Storage of 
Low 
product to be 
sold in the off 
season 
(higher prices) 
  Process 
product 
  Train the 
farmer 
concerning to 
market 
information  
  Strengthen 
Gapoktan and 
Poktan on the 
marketing 
  Training on 
Good 
Agriculture 
Practice 
(efficient dan 
competitive) 
Low 
Lack  O&M  of 
Agriculture 
Infrastructure 
and 
Machinery 
Reducing 
Production 
and 
Productivity 
Significant  Likely 
Med Hi 
  Strengthen 
Low 
Gapoktan and 
Poktan on 
O&M 
(Financing 
and farmer fee 
etc) 
236 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 1. 
Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at Malang District 
Field Discuss 
Discuss with Farmer 
Shallot Farmer in Purworedjo 
Pujon Kidul at Malang 
Pujon Kidul 
Pujon Kidul 
237 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 2. Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities 
238 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Project Proposal 
Sumenep District – East Java 
1.  General Condition 
  Unemployment rate 2,07%, Poverty rate 19,62%, The main occupation in Sumenep 
are in the sector of Agriculture, Plantation, Forestry and Fisheries which accounted for 
44%  of  the  total  occupation  in  Sumenep.  Sumenep  Regency  territory  consists  of 
mainland and islands. There are 126 islands (according to synchronized results wide 
Sumenep  regency  2002).  The  weather  condition  in  Sumenep  are  between  25ᵒC-
30ᵒC.s; 
  The  Broad  fields  in  Sumenep  25,681.69  ha.  Consists  of  an  area  of  4,650.44  ha 
irrigation technical, semi technical irrigation area of 1,837.95 ha, simple irrigation area 
of 2,028.73 ha, 173.00 ha area of the village irrigation, and rain-fed area of 16,991.84 
ha. Fields including land use rather than the yard, dry land, plantation, farm, field for 
dry rice cultivation, grassland, while the cultivated land, forests, state forests, marshes, 
ponds,  pools.  Production  according  to  the  district.  Include  paddy  rice,  upland  rice, 
maize,  cassava,  sweet  potatoes,  peanuts,  soybeans,  green  beans,  and  vegetable 
crops.  The  main  commodity  is  coconut  with  the  wide  area  of  51,120.170  ha  and 
43,075,760 ton per year. 
2.  Planned Commodity and Area 
  The  proposed  commodity  is  shallot  in  Rubaru  sub-district  with  total  area  of  160 
hectares (optimization). There are four villages that will include in the project, namely: 
Mandala, Basoka, Karangnangka, and Bunbarat. Shallot variety that mostly planted by 
farmer is Rubaru. This variety is suitable with upland agro climate; 
  The Land status owned by farmers. It is in the range 0,75 – 1 hectare per farmer; 
  Planting shallot in upland area is different compare to lowland area such as in Brebes, 
Nganjuk,  or  Probolinggo.  Shallot  is  planted  in rainy  season  in  upland  area,  while  in 
lowland shallot is planted in dry season. In Rubaru Sumenep (upland area), shallot is 
planted in rainy season; 
  Besides  planting  shallot,  farmer  in  Rubaru  is  also  cultivating  horticulture  such  as 
tobacco, chili, maize. Some of them are also raise cattle for livelihood. 
3.  Beneficiaries and Benefit 
  The targeted beneficiaries are about 1,713 farmers organized in 80 farmers groups.  
This has included 27 Women Farmer Group (581 members); 
  Besides assisting in cultivating shallot, women farmer takes main role in post-harvest 
processing; 
  Farmer in Rubaru planting shallot twice a year. Cropping pattern is as follows, starting 
from  rainy  season  (November/December):  shallot  –  shallot  –  tobacco/temporary 
palawija. Water availability is a constraint for farmer in their on-farm activity. They do 
hope that, if water is available during dry season, they are able to grow shallot 3 times 
a year; 
  Main activity of this Project is to build irrigation infrastructure that will enable farmer 
grow shallot 3 times a year. (shallot – shallot – shallot – tobacco/temporary palawija); 
239 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  Based on data provided by Dinas Pertanian Kabupaten Sumenep, dried shallot price 
at farmer level (2017) is IDR 23,000/kg that bought by local trader. Local trader sells 
shallot to market in Surabaya with price of IDR 28,000/kg. When price of fresh shallot 
falls down such as that occurred in 2014 which was IDR 7,000/kg, farmer reacted with 
processing 40% harvested shallot to be fried shallot which can be stored longer, and 
the rest was stored to be used as seedlings; 
  Average of shallot production per hectare in normal condition (no planting delay and 
controlled plant pests and disease) is 8 tons. Meanwhile, cost production of shallot per 
hectare  is  in  the  amount  of  IDR  58,639,000,  which  consist  of:(i)  IDR40million  for 
seedling, (ii) IDR 7,425,000 for farm labor (land preparation, planting, weed control, 
and  harvesting),  (iii)  IDR  8,014,000  for  fertilizer,  pesticide/fungicide,  and  (iv)  IDR 
3,200,000 for transportation cost; 
  By this project investment, farmer will get benefit in the form of: 
1.  Increase production as well as increase in cropping intensity; 
2.  Decrease in transportation cost from IDR 3.2 million per ton to be IDR 2,4 million 
per ton; 
3.  By procuring agriculture machinery, it will reduce delay in planting and harvest fail, 
thus 8 – 10 tons/ha can be achieved; 
  Women farmer will get benefit from this project in the form of: 
1.  To be trained in post-harvest processing (fried shallot). If 1 kg fresh ia processed 
to be fried shallot, the conversion is 33.33%. It means that 1 kg fresh shallot to be 
3 ounce fried shallot. Price of 1 ounce fried shallot at farmer level is IDR 11,000. 
Table 1. 
Name of Poktan/Gapoktan and Number of Its Members in KecamatanRubaru, 
Sumenep 
No. 
Village 
Bunbarat 
1 
Mandala 
2 
Mandala 
3 
Mandala 
4 
Mandala 
5 
Mandala 
6 
Mandala 
7 
Mandala 
8 
9 
Mandala 
10  Mandala 
11  Mandala 
12  Mandala 
13  Mandala 
14  Mandala 
15  Mandala 
16  Mandala 
17  Mandala 
18  Mandala 
19  Mandala 
20  Mandala 
Number 
of 
Members 
(persons) 
20 
27 
20 
30 
20 
22 
26 
22 
24 
26 
19 
22 
20 
20 
21 
25 
21 
20 
22 
22 
Area 
(ha) 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Name of Poktan/ 
Gapoktan 
Serbaguna III 
Sumber Rejeki Sinar  Madura 
Surya Mandala 
Haromain 
Al Hidayah 
Putra Agung Mandala 
Tumpeng Mas 
Mekar Sari 
Suka Makmur 
Batu Kencana 
Sumber Bumi 
Banyu Urip Mandala 
Anugerah 
Al Jihad 
Cahaya Mandala 
Cakrawala 
Jaya Mulya Mandala 
Karang Jati 
Karang Abadi 
Tunas Muda Mandala 
240 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
No. 
Village 
Name of Poktan/ 
Gapoktan 
21  Mandala 
22  Mandala 
23  Mandala 
24  Mandala 
25  Mandala 
26  Mandala 
27  Basoka 
28  Basoka 
29  Basoka 
30  Basoka 
31  Basoka 
32  Basoka 
33  Basoka 
34  Basoka 
35  Basoka 
36  Basoka 
37  Basoka 
38  Basoka 
39  Basoka 
40  Basoka 
41  Basoka 
42  Basoka 
43  Basoka 
44  Basoka 
45  Karangnangka 
46  Karangnangka 
47  Karangnangka 
48  Karangnangka 
49  Karangnangka 
50  Karangnangka 
51  Karangnangka 
52  Karangnangka 
T O T A L 
ZamZamTzani 
IvomaPermai 
Sari Rejeki Mandala 
La Tanza 
Mandala Putra 
NailulAmwal 
Jokotole Basoka 
Samurai 
Berkah Basoka 
Putra Mandala 
Putra Toguluk 
An Nur 
AdiPoday 
Budiman 
Perintis 
Putra Basoka 
Al HikmahBasoka 
Syafaah 
Adi Rasa 
SumberUrip 
Jaya Abadi 
Naga Sari 
Tunas MudaTani 
Daun Emas 
Sumber Rejeki 
Gemar Tani 
Surya Abadi 
Telaga Biru 
Bunga Melati 
Ampal Agung 
Rejeki 
Rampak Naong 
Number 
of 
Members 
(persons) 
23 
21 
21 
25 
24 
26 
24 
20 
23 
22 
21 
21 
26 
22 
19 
20 
20 
20 
20 
20 
21 
20 
20 
20 
20 
22 
20 
20 
20 
22 
20 
20 
1,132 
Area 
(ha) 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
104 
Source:  Dinas  Pertanian  Tanaman  Pangan,  Hortikultura,  dan  Perkebunan,  Kabupaten 
Sumenep, 2018 
Table 2. 
Name of Women Farmer Group and Number of Its Members in Kecamatan Rubaru, 
Sumenep District 
No. 
Village 
Name of KWT 
(KelompokWanitaTani/Women 
Farmer Group) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Mandala 
Mandala 
Mandala 
Mandala 
Mandala 
Mandala 
Mandala 
Ash Shafa 
PutriTumpeng 
Bunga Jaya 
PutriAbadi 
MulyaSafitri 
Primadona 
Lestari Mandala 
Number of 
Members 
(persons) 
22 
21 
29 
20 
20 
20 
20 
Area (ha) 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
241 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
No. 
Village 
8 
Mandala 
Mandala 
9 
10  Mandala 
11  Mandala 
12  Mandala 
13  Mandala 
14  Mandala 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
Basoka 
Basoka 
Basoka 
Basoka 
Basoka 
Basoka 
Basoka 
Basoka 
Karangnangka 
Karangnangka 
Karangnangka 
Karangnangka 
Karangnangka 
T o t a l 
Name of KWT 
(KelompokWanitaTani/Women 
Farmer Group) 
Teratai 
Tunas Mekar Mandala 
Melati Mandala 
Bunga Citra Lestari 
BungaHarapan 
MerpatiPutih 
SekarTanjung 
Nabila 
PutriKendedesBasoka 
NurulHidayah 
PutriKenanga 
Mukarromah 
Al Barokah 
Cemara 
Putri Madura 
BungaMakmur 
An Nur 
ArRizqi 
TelagaTani 
Tunas Harapan 
Number of 
Members 
(persons) 
21 
21 
20 
25 
20 
21 
25 
20 
20 
20 
22 
21 
23 
22 
20 
19 
22 
20 
21 
26 
581 
Area (ha) 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
54 
Source: Dinas  Pertanian  Tanaman  Pangan,  Hortikultura,  dan  Perkebunan,  Kabupaten 
Sumenep, 2018 
4.  Project Concept 
Gapoktan  will  play  important  role  in  the  smoothness  and  sustainability  of  the  project 
implementation. 
  Gapoktan  will  manage  distribution  of  agricultural 
inputs  such  as  (fertilizer, 
pesticides/fungicides, etc); 
  Gapoktan  will  manage the  infrastructure that  will  be  built  under this  project  such  as 
farm ponds, warehouse, agricultural machinery etc. Farmer will use these facilities and 
of course he/she will pay fee for operation and maintenance of these facilities; 
  Gapoktan  will  assist  farmer  in  practicing  good  agriculture  practice,  farm  production, 
processing, farm product marketing, and channeling micro-finance. 
5.  Proposed Land Development and Agriculture Infrastructure 
  Under this Upland project, farm road within 4 villages will be built; 
  Besides  farm  road  they  also  plan  to  build  farm  ponds  and  small  farm  ponds  in  the 
project area. 
6.  Proposed Production and Farm Management 
  As typical agriculture in upland area, water shortage is a challenge especially in long 
dry season. Farmer in Rubaru, planting shallot in rainy season as well as in dry season. 
This  is  because  Rubaru  variety  is  resistant  to  Fusarium  wilt  which  usually  attack 
shallot. 
242 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
7.  Proposed Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
  Since shallot planting areas is mainly hilly, the project will procure mini truck to collect 
shallot from field to be brought to drying floor; 
  The project will build 2 warehouses and 1 processing and warehouse for Cooperative 
as sub-district level; 
  These ware houses will be equipped with wheel barrow, tarpaulin, electric scale, and 
hand sewing machine. 
8.  Proposed training and capacity building activities 
  For Farmer: 
o  Good  agricultural  practices  of  shallot  farming  (cultivation,  product  processing, 
entrepreneurship). 
  For Women Farmer Group: 
o  Training in shallot post-harvest practices, processing, and marketing. 
  Business contact/event. 
243 
Residual 
Risk 
Low 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
9.  Risk Assessment and Mitigation Plan 
Risk 
Impact 
Severity 
Likelihood 
Risk Level 
Mitigation 
Water securitydue to 
encroachment of the water 
catchment area 
Workplace 
safety, 
equipment  and  pest  and 
disease control 
Land slide /collapse 
Erosion 
Damage 
farming 
environment 
Reducing 
Productivity 
Productivity 
Moderate 
Very Unlikely 
Low Med 
  Protect the catchment area; 
  Famer education and participation to 
protect the catchment area; 
Injury to farmers  Moderate 
Possible 
Medium 
  Training for farmers on operating 
Low 
to 
Moderate 
Possible 
Medium 
equipment; 
  Training for farmers on integrated pest 
and disease management (IPDM); 
  Training on Organic Farming. 
  Protection of catchment area; 
  Training for farmers on prepared-ness; 
  Mapping the risk area. 
Moderate 
Unlikely 
(because 
land  hasbeen 
terracing) 
Low Med 
  To strengthen the terrace. 
  Use organic fertilizer. 
  Protection of catchment area. 
Low 
Low 
Market volatility 
Farmers 
interest 
crops 
lose 
the 
in 
Changes 
policy 
in  government 
Impacts  on  the 
market and price 
Minor 
Likely 
Low Med 
  Storage of product to be sold in the off 
Low 
season (higher prices); 
  Process product.; 
  Train the farmer concerning to market 
information. 
Moderate 
Possible 
Medium 
  Strengthen Gapoktan and Poktan on 
Low 
the marketing; 
  Training on Good Agriculture Practice 
(efficient dan competitive). 
  Strengthen Gapoktan and Poktan on 
O&M (Financing and farmer fee etc). 
Low 
Lack  O&M  of  Agriculture 
Infrastructure 
and 
Machinery 
Reducing 
Production  and 
Productivity 
Significant 
Likely 
Med Hi 
244 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 1. 
Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at Sumenep District 
Focus Group Disscusion (FGD) 
Mapping Location 
Rubaru Village at Sumenep 
Traditional water basket in Rubaru 
Basoka village at Sumenep 
Mandala Village at Sumenep 
245 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 2. Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities 
246 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Project Proposal 
East Lombok District – NTB 
1. 
Socio-Economic Condition 
Unemployment rate 6,46%, Poverty rate 18,28%, The main occupation in East Lombok are in 
the sector of Agriculture, Plantation, Forestry, and Fisheries which accounted for 46% of the 
total occupation in East Lombok. 
The surface area of Lombok Timur Regency covers 33.88 percentofthe islandof Lombok, or 
7.97  percentofthe  land  area  of  Nusa  Tenggara  Barat.  Utilization  of  land  in  East  Lombok 
Regency is mostly used for agriculture. Total rice area in 2016 covering an area of 4,7763ha, 
whichisabout 30,02 percent from total areas of regency. The rice field saremostly planted with 
rice  (93.64%),eitheronce,twice,orthree  times  a  year.  Wetland  in  Lombok  Timur  regency 
reached 47,763 ha, about 29.7 percent of the land area. Almost the garlic land are holticultures 
land  (wetland).  There  are  planted  with  garlic  two  or  three  time  a  year,  another  time  for 
strawbery,  tomato,  vegetables  or  corn.  The  garlic  production  in  Sembalun  is  15  -  20 
ton/ha/time season. 
2. 
Planned Commodity and Area 
  The proposed commodities area: Extension area of Seed Garlic Cultivation (1,640 ha); 
  Garlic will be planted in the famers’ land which is distributed in the village area; 
  The location of the land is in 7 sub-districts, consisting of 26 villages, 92 farmer groups 
and 2,902farmers; 
  All  reserved  land  is  non-forestry  land,  in  the  form  of  flat  to  sloping  land  designated  as 
horticultural agricultural land. 
Sub-District 
Village 
Area 
(ha) 
Farmer 
Group 
Member 
of 
Farmer 
Group 
MenFar
mer 
Wome
n 
Farmer 
Current 
agriculture 
practices 
1.  Aikmel 
2.  Suela 
3.  Montong 
Gading 
4.  Pringgasela 
5.  Sikur 
6.  Wanasaba 
7.  Sembalun 
4 
2 
3 
2 
4 
4 
5 
46 
43 
15 
118 
35 
5 
2 
3 
6 
4 
65 
89 
71 
44 
21 
63 
26 
49 
22 
202 
138 
64 
97 
71 
26 
29 
12 
138 
101 
37 
1.354 
TOTAL 
24 
1.640 
60 
92 
2.240 
1.661 
579 
2.902 
2.127 
775 
247 
Rice, corn 
and 
horticulture 
corn 
corn 
corn 
corn 
Rice, 
and 
horticulture 
Rice, 
and 
horticulture 
Rice, 
and 
horticulture 
Rice, 
and 
horticulture 
Rice, 
and 
horticulture 
vegetable 
and 
horticulture 
corn 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
3. 
Beneficiaries 
  The targeted beneficiaries are about 2,902farmersorganized in 92farmers groups; 
  Women groups of farmer household will take role in shallots planting, garlic grading, 
and garlic processing unit; 
 
In  Sembalun  district  there  are  already  home  industries  that  produce  “black  garlic”. 
This business is managed by a women's farmer group. But since the earthquake, all 
production stopped. 
4. 
Project Concept 
  Garlics will be cultivated by each farmer, and the farmers will produce seeds.  Farmer 
group will collect the seeds production to be sold to Gapoktan. Gapoktan will be formed 
at village level and act as farmer-own business entity (e.g. KUBE); 
  The association at the district level will be formed, and all Farmer Groups or Gapoktan 
are cooperative shareholders; 
  The  association  at  the  district  level  will  foster  farmers,  provide  seeds,  fertilizers, 
pesticides, assistance, and buy results. 
Value chain for East Lombok district is attached 
5. 
ProposedLand Development and Agriculture Infrastructure 
  Land Development (preparation), about 1.640 ha; 
  Piping for irrigation, about 50 km for 7 Sub district; 
  Farm Ponds (embung), about 5 unit (1 unit for Aikmel, 3 unit for Sembalun, and 1 unit 
for Wanasaba); shallow wells, about 16 unit (1 unit for Aikmel, 14 unit for Sembalun, 
1 unit for Pringgasela); and water ponds 14 unit (2 unit for each sub-district); 
  Farm road for all sub-districts, about 35 km. 
6. 
Proposed Production and Farm Management 
  Extension, Demonstration & Support (1 unit for each sub district); 
o  Seed, fertilizer & pesticides for 1.640 ha; 
  Agriculture Machinery: 
o  Cultivator, about 656 unit (1 unit for 3 ha); 
o  Powersprayer (840 unit); 
o  Hands tractor (50 unit); 
o  Water Pump 5,5 HP (52 unit); 
  Class A and B will be sold in markets, supermarkets and exported; 
  Class C is used for seeds; 
  Class D is used for Black Garlic. 
248 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
7. 
Proposed Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
  Farmer Federation development (KUBE), 1 unit for each sub district; 
  Building & Storage; 
o  Warehouse, about 7 unit (1 unit for KUBE/sub district); 
o  Primary commodity center (1 unit for district level); 
o  Flexible Drying Unit (120 Unit at farmer group level); 
  Harvesting Garlic at KUBE / sub district level; 
  Fermenter Black Garlic Unit at district level; 
  Transportation (truck 4 unit, pick up 7 unit and 3-wheeled vehicles 100 unit); 
  Certification, patent rights and packaging; 
  Need to redevelop black garlic home industries; 
  The Garlic Commodity Center Building in Aikmel as the center of the management of 
garlic commodities which will be managed by Accociation; 
  There are processing and drying warehouses in KUBE. 
8. 
Proposed training and capacity building activities 
  For government staff: 
o  Training for trainer to Government staff and Facilitators. 
  For Farmers: 
o  Garlic farming/cultivations. 
o  Technology of Black Garlic processing. 
9. 
Village Facilitation and Technical Assistance 
Cost-tab for East Lombok district is attached (subject for discussion). 
249 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Profile of Farmer Group at East Lombok 
250 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Profile of Farmer Group at East Lombok (Continued) 
251 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 1. 
Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at East Lombok District 
FGD at Distan East Lombok 
Garlic Warehouse Plan 
Interview with Farmer Group 
Garlic Area at Sembalun 
Garlic Product (“Black Garlic”) 
252 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 2. Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities 
253 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
10.  Risk Assessment of the program and Mitigation Measures 
Risks 
Impact on Project 
L 
I 
R  Mitigation 
Reduce  production 
and farmer income 
L 
Mo  Me 
  It is necessary to 
calculate the weight 
depreciation of 
production. 
is 
there 
a 
decrease  in  the 
weight  of 
the 
Garlic,  between 
the weight of the 
harvest  and  the 
sale 
Residual 
risks (R) 
LM 
Weakness 
of  
O&M of building, 
infrastructure, 
transportation 
and machineris 
of 
Disfunction 
building, 
infrastructures, 
transportation  and 
machineris 
Uncontrolled  price 
stability 
Unfunctional  of 
Association/UPT 
(Primary 
Comodity 
Centre) 
P/L  Mo  LM 
  clear SOP’s and 
Lw 
implemented with 
discipline. 
P 
Si  MH    strengthening alliances 
Lw 
institutional development. 
  need for guidance and 
close supervision. 
  strengthening market 
linkages. 
254 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Project Proposal 
Sumbawa District – West of Nusa Tenggara 
1. 
Socio-Economic Condition 
Sumbawa’s unemployment rate is 4,20% and Poverty rate is 15,31%, The main occupation in 
Sumbawa are in the sector of Agriculture, Plantation, Forestry, and Fisheries which accounted 
for  53%  of  the  total  occupation  in  Sumbawa  which  consist  of  46,81  %  female  and  56,12% 
male. 
Sumbawa  Regency  is  a  tropical  area  that  is  affected  by  the  rainy  season  and  dry  season. 
Rainy  season  in  December  to  March,  and  dry  season  in  April  to  November.  In  2015  the 
maximum  temperature  reached  35,5°C  which  occurred  in  November  and  minimum 
temperature were 20,7ᵒC occurred in August. Shallots are grown on dry land or holticulture 
land in dry season. Irrigation needs are met from shallow wells or ponds. There are planted 
with  Shallots  two  time  a  year,  another  time  for  paddy  or  corn.  The  shallots  production  in 
Sumbawa is 12 ton/ha/time season. 
2. 
Planned Commodity and Area 
 
 
 
In  generally,  the  Sumbawa  district  reserved  as  shallots  is  dry  land  that  does  not  have 
technical irrigation; 
In the rainy season between December and March the land is planted with rice; 
In the dry season in April to October the land is planted with horticulture including shallot. 
This season the need for irrigation of shallots is filled with ground water by pumping from 
wells, rivers or ponds; 
  The proposed commodities area: Extension area of shallots seed center (3.000 ha).  Type 
of shallot seed is Super Philips Sumbawa (for land with high altitude 100-250 from sea 
level); 
  The selected (participated) farmers must have their own land. 
Sub-District 
Village  Area(ha) 
Farmer 
Group 
1.  Empang 
2.  Tarano 
3.  Plampang 
4.  Moyo Hulu 
5.  Lape 
6.  Moyo Utara 
7.  Maronge 
8.  Moyo Hilir 
9.  Utan 
10.  Lunyuk 
11.  Ropang 
12.  Alas 
13.  Sumbawa 
TOTAL 
4 
3 
4 
2 
3 
1 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
26 
265 
255 
1925 
115 
105 
30 
20 
60 
125 
20 
30 
30 
20 
3.000 
9 
10 
17 
4 
5 
1 
1 
3 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
59 
Women 
Farmer Group 
House 
Hold (HH) 
Current 
agriculture 
practices 
6 
5 
6 
1 
3 
- 
1 
2 
2 
1 
- 
1 
1 
29 
292 
298 
111 
107 
114 
21 
31 
80 
113 
28 
18 
45 
24 
2285 
Member of 
Farmer 
Group 
316 
321 
1393 
127 
119 
34 
31 
112 
126 
28 
18 
51 
24 
2.700 
255 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
3. 
Beneficiaries 
  The  targeted  beneficiaries  are  about  2,700  farmers  (Male:  2.581  and  Female:  115) 
organized in 59 farmers groups; 
  Women groups of farmer household will take role in shallots maintenance, harvesting 
and processing unit (off farm); 
  The processed shallots products include fried shallots and wet seasonings. 
4. 
Project Concept 
  Shallots seed will be cultivated by each farmer, and the farmers will produce shallots 
seed.  Farmer group will collect the seed production to be sold to Gapoktan. Gapoktan 
will be formed at one or two sub-district level and act as farmer-own business entity 
(e.g. KUBE); 
  Cooperative at district level will be formed, and all Farmer Group or Gapoktan is the 
shareholder of the cooperative. 
Value chain for Shallots Seed Center at Sumbawa district is attached 
5. 
Proposed Land Development and Agriculture Infrastructure 
  Land Development (preparation), about 3.000 ha; 
  Piping for irrigation, about 50 unit (1 unit for 60 ha); 
  Ponds, about 50 unit (1 unit for 60 ha); and shallow wells, about 300 unit (1 unit for 
10 ha); 
  Farm road for all sub-districts, about 70 km. 
6. 
Proposed Production and Farm Management 
  Extension, Demonstration & Support (3 unit of demfarm); 
o  Shallow Seed (white label - G0) (600 ton); 
o  Shallow Seed (G1 farmers) (1.800 ton); 
o  Fertilizer & pesticides for 3.000 ha; 
  Agriculture Machinery: 
o  Cultivator (100 unit); 
o  Small scale precision seed planters (12 unit); 
o  Hands sprayer (300 unit); 
o  Hands tractor (50 unit); 
o  Terpal (300 unit); 
o  Mist Blower (300 unit); 
  Organic Fertilizer Processing Unit (UPPO) (8 unit). 
7. 
Proposed Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
  Building & Storage; 
o  Warehouse, about 30 unit (1 unit for 100 ha); 
o  Central Warehouse, about 5 unit (4 unit for KUBE, 1 unit for district level); 
o  Primary commodity center (1 unit for district level); 
  Shallots processing, about 30 unit; 
  Transportation (truck 10 unit and 3-wheeled vehicles 30 unit). 
256 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
8. 
Proposed training and capacity building activities 
  For government staff: 
o  Training to Government staff on seed breeding, product processing, seed 
certification and entrepreneurship; 
o  Training to Government staff on project management. 
  For Farmers: 
o  Training to farmer on seed breeding, cultivation, product processing, and 
entrepreneurship. 
  For Women Farmers and Youth: 
o  Training in shallots processing and packaging. 
  Post-harvest processing and marketing research for shallots. 
9. 
Village Facilitation and Technical Assistance 
Cost-tab for Sumbawa district is attached (subject for discussion). 
257 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Profile FG Upland at Sumbawa District 
258 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Profile FG Upland at Sumbawa District (Continued) 
259 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachment  1. 
Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at Sumbawa District 
Focus Group Disscusion (FGD) at Dinas 
Discuss with Dinas 
Deep Well at Muer Village 
Alas Sub District 
Discuss with Farmer 
Pump Irrigation 
260 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 2. Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities 
261 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
262 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
263 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
264 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
265 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
266 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
267 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
268 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
269 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
270 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
271 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
272 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
273 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Risks 
Impact on Project 
L 
I 
R  Mitigation 
Residual 
risks (R) 
price 
fluctuations 
affected  by  the 
market 
Loss  of  production 
and  defisit  farmer 
income 
L/VL  Si  MH    The supply of seeds, 
Lw - LM 
fertilizers and pesticides 
and purchase of 
production is controlled 
by the same institution; 
  The association 
(institution) seeks price 
stability. 
is 
there 
a 
decrease  in  the 
the 
weight  of 
shallot,  between 
the weight of the 
harvest  and  the 
sale 
not  all  regions 
qualified 
have 
in 
farmers 
shallot farming 
Reduce  production 
and  farmer income  
L  Mo  Me 
  It is necessary to 
LM 
calculate the weight 
depreciation of 
production. 
Production  is  not 
optimal  
P  Mi 
LM 
  There needs to be 
Lw 
assistance in processing 
land and farming 
systems. 
Weakness 
of  
O&M of building, 
infrastructures, 
transportation 
and machineris 
of 
Disfunction 
building, 
infrastructures, 
transportation    and 
machineris 
Unfunctional  of 
Association/UPT 
(Balai Benih) 
Uncontrolled  price 
stability 
P/L  Mo  LM 
  clear SOP’s and 
Lw 
implemented with 
discipline 
P 
Si  MH    strengthening alliances 
Lw 
institutional development; 
  need for guidance and 
close supervision; 
  strengthening market 
linkages. 
274 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Project Proposal 
Minahasa Selatan District – North Sulawesi 
1. 
Socio Economic Condition 
South Minahasa District is one district in North 
Sulawesi  Provincewith  capital  in  Amurang, 
covers  area  1.454,64  km2  consist  of  17  sub-
district  and  177  villages.  In  2016  average 
temperature  was  26,67OC,  humidity  84.17% 
and rain fall 207.75 mm. 
The  population  in  2016  was  206,603  people 
with  sex  ratio  106,65  and  population  density 
was 142 people/km2.The working population is 
89,811 people, consist of 710 whom are male 
and 26,101 female. 
South Minahasa District 
Labor force in 2015 was 96.420 people consist 
of  who  worked 
89.811  people  and 
unemployment  6.609  people.  Related  this 
data, Labor Force Participation Rate (LFPR) in 
2015 was 63,34% and unemployment rate was 
6,65, 
the  number  of 
forceswork.Meanwhile,  poverty  line  in  2016  was  Rp  283,561  per  capita  per  month  and 
percentage of poor people was 9,92%. 
the  number  of  unemployment 
is  comparison  of 
that 
to 
Wetland area of South Minahasa District in 2016 was 5,491 hectares consist of half technical 
irrigation  3,572  hectares,  village  irrigation  1,490  hectares  and  rainfed  429  hectares. 
Furthermore,  area  of  yard  was  10,422  ha,  dryland/upland  was  54,473  ha  and  estate  was 
30,355 ha. 
Harvested area of wetland paddy in 2016 was 11,432 ha with total production 60,938 tons and 
dryland paddy 395 ha with total production 1,032 tons. Harvested area of corn was 20,671 ha 
with total production 81,511 tons. Meanwhile, shallot, potato, cabbage and chinesecabbage 
only produced by Modoinding Sub-district cover total harvested area was 4,328 ha with total 
production 100,988 tons. 
Modoinding Subdistrict is one of seventeen subdistricts in South Minahasa District that located 
in  southern  of  the  district  area  with  elevation  1,000  –  1,200  meters  above  sea  level.  No 
irrigated area in this subdistrict, only upland area that produced vegetables for whole South 
Minahasa Area and other region such as Minahasa, Manado, Gorontalo, even Kalimantan, 
South and Central Sulawesi and Papua.  
Modoinding Subdistrict consist of 10 villages with total area 7122,25 ha, while total agriculture 
area in 2015 was 4,782 ha cover upland area 4.446 ha, forest area 240 ha, swamp 46 ha and 
others 50 ha.   
2. 
Planned Commodity and Area 
  The  proposed  commodity  is  Potato  for  industry  on  area  2,000  Ha  with  elevation 
1,000  –  1,200  m  above  sea  level.  The  location  cover  10  villages  in  Modoinding 
Subdistrict; 
275 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
  The project is on existing area 4,446 Ha of vegetables including SupeJohn Potato 
(local variety). Kind of vegetables that already farmed by farmers, mainly are potato, 
carrot, cabbage, spring onion and garlic; 
  Seed of potato for industry will be supplied from Garut District. 
3. 
Beneficiaries 
  The targeted beneficiaries are about 2.179 farmers organized in 118 farmers groups 
and 321 women organized in 31 Women Farmer Groups (see Attachment of Farmer 
Groups); 
  Women groups of farmer household will take role in potato processing. 
4. 
Project Concept 
Farmer Group and Kube 
  118  Farmer  Group  of  project  participants  will  be  organized  in  10  Gapoktan 
(Gabungan Kelompok Tani). One village one Gapoktan. Each Gapoktan consist of 
10  –  15  Farmer  Group,  each  Farmer  Group  consist  of  10  –  25  Farmers  (see 
Attachment of Farmer Groups); 
  This  Kube  is  a  part  of  Bumdes  (Badan  Usaha  Milik  Desa)  that  now  already 
established.  In  Indonesia,  Bumdes  is  a  program  of  Government  especially 
Kementerian  Desa,  Pembangunan  Daerah  Tertinggal  dan  Transmigrasibased  on 
UU Desa No. 6 Tahun 2014 tentang Desa; 
  At the present, all of 10 project participant villages already have Bumdes with a little 
activity. 
Commodity Flow 
  Potato of project will be cultivated by participant farmers, then the farmers will sell 
all of the product through Kube. Furthermore, Kube will grades those potatoes. It is 
estimated that 80% of project potatoes are High Grade dan 20% are Low Grade; 
  High grade  potato  will  be  sold  to  industry  through  BLUD  (Badan  Layanan  Umum 
Daerah); 
  Meanwhile, the low grade of potato would be processed by KUBE to be potato chips 
or other processed products; 
  Most of those processed potatoes, would be sold to local market, modern retailer 
(Indomart, Alfamart, etc) and tourism market through cooperative Sub District level 
and small part would be directly sold by KUBE to the above markets. 
276 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Table 1. The Number of Participants 
No 
Sub-
District 
Village 
No. 
Name 
1 
Modoinding 
1.  Pinasungkulan 
Utara 
Total 
2. Pinasungkulan 
Total 
3. Makaaruyen 
Total 
4. Palelon 
Farmers Group 
Number 
of 
Members 
15 
12 
10 
20 
22 
25 
20 
25 
20 
15 
15 
199 
15 
20 
25 
20 
20 
15 
15 
15 
15 
20 
20 
15 
15 
20 
20 
270 
20 
21 
12 
15 
20 
25 
20 
25 
20 
15 
12 
25 
25 
24 
279 
20 
19 
17 
18 
25 
18 
20 
25 
Tani Jaya 
Sanubari 
1  Matuari 
2 
3 
4  Makapetor 
5 
Triko Jaya 
6  Matuari Waya 
Serba Bisa 
7 
8  Maesaan 
9 
Suka Maju 
10  Tumou Tou 
11  Maju Bersama 
11 
Anugera 
1 
2 
Karya Bersama 
3  Maju Bersama 
4  Matuari 
Prisma 
5 
Syalom 
6 
Bersinar 
7 
Tunas Muda 
8 
9 
Suka Maju 
10  Prisma Tani 
11  Esa Waya 
12  Citra Abadi 
13  Kembang Tani 
14  Tiberias 
15  Sinar Harapan 
15 
Sejahtera 
Syalom 
Karaya Sejahtera 
1  Makaruyen Indah 
2 
3  Didian 
4  Modopolag 
5  Maesaan 
6 
7 
8  Matuari  
9  Mawar  
10  Permata 
11  Anugera 
12  Bunga Kentang 
13  Wuata 
14  Makaaroyen II 
14 
1  Malilian 
2  Masawangan 
3  Maesaan 
4 
5 
6 
7  Mandiri 
8  Cahaya Pelita 
Esa Kamang 
Penabur 
Esa Waya 4 
277 
Area (ha) 
18,00 
15,00 
15,00 
18,00 
20,00 
20,00 
18,00 
20,00 
20,00 
18,00 
18,00 
200,00 
15,00 
18,00 
20,00 
18,00 
18,00 
15,00 
15,00 
14,00 
15,00 
18,00 
18,00 
15,00 
15,00 
18,00 
18,00 
250,00 
17,00 
17,00 
15,00 
15,00 
18,00 
20,00 
18,00 
20,00 
18,00 
17,00 
15,00 
20,00 
20,00 
20,00 
250,00 
20,00 
20,00 
20,00 
20,00 
24,00 
20,00 
20,00 
24,00 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
No 
Sub-
District 
Village 
No. 
Name 
Total 
5. Wulurmaatus 
Total 
6. Mokobang 
Total 
7. Sinsir 
Total 
8. Kakenturan Barat 
Teguh Bersinar Jaya 
Farmers Group 
Number 
of 
Members 
20 
20 
20 
24 
246 
23 
25 
21 
16 
18 
18 
25 
24 
15 
23 
16 
20 
244 
23 
23 
25 
20 
21 
20 
21 
20 
23 
16 
212 
15 
15 
20 
20 
15 
15 
15 
15 
20 
20 
170 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
180 
Tani Abadi 
9 
10  Bunga Kentang 
11  Palelon Jaya 
12  Boswisen 
12 
1 
Sibow 
2  Waya 
Esa Waya 1 
3 
Esa Waya 2 
4 
Esa Waya 3 
5 
6 
Esa Waya 4 
7  Cita Waya  
8  Matuari Waya 
9 
Imanuel 
10  Bunga Kentang 
11  Esa Genang 
12  Narwastu 
12 
Karya 
Teguh Bersinar 
1  Masawangan 
2 
3 
4  Usaha Maju 
5 
6  Mitra Tani 
7  Maesaan 
8  Melati 
9 
10  Maando 
Sinar Tani 
10 
Esa Genang 
1 
2  Matuari  
3  Wiraswasta 
4 
Penabur 
5  Doluong 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  Karya Usaha 
Anugerah 
Berkarya 
Buah Hati 
Esa Karya 
10 
Kakenturan Indah 
Karya Usaha 
1 
2  Doluong 
3 
4  Rejeki 
5  Mapalus Jaya 
6  Moyobua 
7  Madu 
8 
9 
10  Usaha Bersama 
11  Tumoutou I 
12  Berkarya 
Tumoutou 
Lobo 
Area (ha) 
20,00 
20,00 
20,00 
22,00 
250,00 
22,00 
24,00 
20,00 
18,00 
20,00 
20,00 
25,00 
25,00 
16,00 
22,00 
18,00 
20,00 
250,00 
10,00 
10,00 
12,00 
10,00 
10,00 
10,00 
10,00 
10,00 
10,00 
8,00 
100,00 
14,00 
14,00 
16,00 
16,00 
14,00 
14,00 
14,00 
14,00 
16,00 
18,00 
150,00 
14,00 
18,00 
10,00 
12,00 
12,00 
12,00 
14,00 
12,00 
12,00 
12,00 
12,00 
10,00 
150,00 
Total 
12 
278 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
No 
Sub-
District 
Village 
No. 
Name 
9. Kakenturan  
Total 
10. Linelean 
1  Mapalus 
Saruntawaya 
2 
3 
Bersama 
4  Ma'Tawoi 
5  Mawar 
6 
Bolang 
7  Gunung Payung 
8 
Berkarya 
9  Masawangan 
10  Mawali-wali 
10 
Kemala 
Tagoy 
Anugrah 
1 
2 
3  Melati 
4 
5  Maesaan 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  Tani Jaya 
11  Donata 
12  Anggora 
Betania 
Barito 
Permata 
Pinawali-Walian 
Farmers Group 
Number 
of 
Members 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
25 
24 
25 
179 
20 
15 
15 
15 
15 
20 
20 
15 
15 
15 
20 
15 
200 
2.179 
Area (ha) 
14,00 
12,00 
14,00 
12,00 
14,00 
12,00 
14,00 
20,00 
18,00 
20,00 
150,00 
22,00 
20,00 
20,00 
21,00 
20,00 
22,00 
22,00 
20,00 
20,00 
20,00 
22,00 
21,00 
250,00 
2.000,00 
Total 
1 
Total 
10 
12 
118 
Value chain for Minahasa SelatanDistrict is at Attachement-1 
5. 
Proposed Land &Infrastructure Development 
5.1.  Construction of Terraces 500 Ha 
5.2.  Physical Infrastructure 
Proposed physical infrastructures is in Table below. 
Table 2. Proposed Infrastructures for Industry Potato, South Minahasa District 
No, 
Village 
1.  Mokobang 
2.  Wulurmaatus 
3.  Palelon 
4.  Makaaroyen 
5. 
Pinasungkulan 
Utara 
6.  Pinasungkulan 
7.  Sinisir 
8.  Kakenturan Barat 
9.  Kakenturan 
10.  Linelean 
Total 
Access 
Road 
(Km) 
2 
1 
- 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
13 
Farm 
Pond/ 
Embung 
(Unit) 
3 
2 
2 
2 
3 
2 
2 
1 
2 
1 
20 
Deep 
Well 
(Unit) 
5 
1 
9 
1 
2 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
26 
Small 
dam/ 
Reservoir 
(Unit) 
3 
1 
2 
3 
Warehouse+ 
Processing 
house of 
KUBE (Unit) 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Warehouse/ 
Packing/ 
Grading of 
BLUD (Unit) 
- 
1 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
10 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
2 
279 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
6. 
Proposed Production and Farm Management 
6.1.  Crop input of potato 2.000 Ha 
6.2.  Agricultural Machinery 
a.  Cultivator 500 units; 
b.  Power sprayer/hand power sprayer electric 2.197 units; 
c.  Powered hand harvesting equipment 100 units; 
d.  Post-harvest handling equipment 10 package; 
e.  Tractors & trailers 10 units. 
6.3.  Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
a. Building/Storage 
-  Warehouse (of KUBE) 10 units; 
-  Processing House (of KUBE) 10 units; 
-  Central warehouse (of BLUD) 1 unit; 
-  Central Grading and Packing House (of BLUD) 1 unit; 
-  Primary commodity centre (office, display room, meeting room) of BLUD 1 unit. 
b. Processing Facilities 
-  Post-Harvest Handling; 
  50-ton weigh bridge 2 units; 
  Containers (bins) 11,000; 
  Packaging machines 22 units; 
-  Processing of Potato; 
  Processing equipment 10 packages. 
c.  Transportation Units; 
-  Truck (of KUBE) 10 units; 
-  Truck (of BLUD) 1 unit; 
-  3-wheeled vehicles (of KUBE) 20 units; 
7. 
Proposed Training and Capacity Building Activities 
-  Extension, Demonstration & Support 4 packages; 
-  Farmer Federation Development including KUBE and BLUD 4 packages; 
-  Capacity Building for Government Staff 4 packages. 
8.  Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities  
Map  of  proposed  agriculture  infrastructure  and  facilities  for  Minahasa  Selatan  District  is 
present on Attachement-2. 
9. 
Cost-tab for Minahasa Selatan District  
Cost-tab of the project for Minahasa Selatan District is shown on Attachement-3 
280 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
10.  Risk  Assessment  of  the  program  and  Mitigation  Measures  –  POTATO  FOR 
INDUSTRY 
Risks 
Land 
security 
Impact on Project  L 
I 
R  Mitigation 
tenufre 
Access to finance 
P  Si  Me 
Water security 
  Impacting on 
productivity 
L  Si  Me 
  Village title and statement of 
commercial arrangement 
  Focus on existing schemes 
with authorized offtake 
  Concentration on water use 
efficiency based on GAP 
Residual 
risks (R) 
Lw 
Me 
Irrigation 
supply 
water 
Grower uptake 
  Impacting on 
productivity 
would be 
decreased 
  Impacting on 
processing 
viability 
Private 
involvement 
sector 
  Management 
capacity for 
processing 
  Limited 
investment 
from private 
sector 
farming 
environment 
  Farmers lose 
interest in the 
crop 
  Impact on the 
market and 
price 
  Financing, who 
will invest in the 
facility. 
  Insufficient 
quality and 
quantity of 
potato to supply 
the facility 
Market volatility 
Change 
goverment policy 
in 
of 
Viability 
marketing 
infrastructure  and 
equipment 
Note: 
L  Si  Me 
  Provide irrigation water 
Me 
infrastructure according to the 
potential of the project location 
P  Mo  Me 
  Good basis of crop production 
Lw 
 
and market 
Improved profitability due to 
GAP 
  Extension officers and 
farmers trained 
P  Mo  Me 
 
Implementation of BLUD 
system 
  Management training 
Lw 
Lw 
Lw 
P  Me  Me 
  Production of high value end 
Me 
products 
  Development of new markets 
  Shorten VC to increase return 
P  Me  Me 
  Farmers supported to be 
competitive in the market 
L  Me  Me 
  Indepth feasibility and 
business assessment before 
processing. 
  Expand the supply base of 
quality potato. 
Me 
Me 
Workplace  safety, 
equipment 
  Injury to 
farmers 
P  Mi  Me 
  Training for operator 
Landslips 
erotion 
and 
  Damage to the 
P  Mi  Me 
  Land development strategies 
  Selection of suitable, existing 
farm land 
L  :  Likelihood (Very Unlikely/VU, Unlikely/U, Possible/P, Likely/L, Very Likely/VL); 
I 
: 
Impact level (Negligible/N, Minor/Mi, Moderate/Mo, Significant/Si, Severe/Sv); 
281 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
R  :  Risk level (combination of likelihood and impact level) = Low (Lw), Low-Medium (LM), 
Medium (Me), Medium-High (MH), High (H). 
282 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 1. 
Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at South Minahasa District 
FGD at Dinas Minahasa Selatan 
Water Spring for Dam 
Potato Land (Project Area) 
Potato Farm 
Potato Land 
Water Spring for Dam 
283 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 2. Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities of Minahasa Selatan District 
284 
Gorontalo District 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Summary Pilot Project Proposal 
Gorontalo District 
1. 
Socio Economic Condition 
Land area of Gorontalo District is 2,125.47 Km2 consist 
of  19  sub-district  and  205  villages  with  capital  in 
Limboto. Average height is 50 meters above sea level. 
During 2016, average temperature was 27.3OC, number 
of rainy days was 174 days/year and the humidity was 
79.4%. The population in 2016 was 392,673 people with 
sex  ratio  101,30  and  population  density  was  185 
peple/Km2.  Number  of  head  of  family  was  117,183 
persons  with  the  average  number  of  family  members 
was  3,35  persons/family.  Meanwhile,  poverty  line  in 
2016 was Rp 368,863/capita/ month and percentage of poor people was 21,03%. Related to 
employment,  Economically  Active  Participation  Rate  in  2015  was    61,63  and  the  Open 
Unemployment Rate was 3.62. 
Potential land or wetland area of Gorontalo District in 2016 was 17,008 hectares consist of 
irrigation  land  11,588  hectares,  rainfed  2,700  hetares  and  tidal  land  10  hectares.  Main 
commodities  in  Gorontalo  District  are  paddy,  corn,  and  coconut.  Paddy  onlly  planted  in 
irrigation  area  with  frequency  2  –  3  times  a  year,  harvesting  area  in  2016  was  29,817.3 
hectares. Corn was planted both in wetland and rainfed area with harvesting area in same 
year was 60,896.5 hectares. Meanwhile, most of coconut was be planted in upland with plant 
area in 2016 was 31,596.50 hectares. 
Pulubala Sub-district is one of nineteen sub-districts in Gorontalo District with area 240,57 km2 
and 26,196 people of population. This sub-district has 11 villages, one of them is Bakti Village 
with population 3.130 people in area 39 km2. 
2. 
Planned Commodity and Area 
  The proposed pilot project commodity is Gapi Banana (local variety) on area 20 Ha 
in Bakti Village, Pulubala Sub-district, Gorontalo District; 
  Gapi Banana is local variety that has begun to be promoted by district government 
on  each  event  because  they  thought  has  good  market  prospect,  both  local  dan 
export market. 
3. 
Beneficiaries 
  The targeted beneficiaries of the pilot project are26 participant farmers; 
  Some women will be involve in banana processing activities. 
4. 
Project Concept 
Farmer Group and BLUD 
  26participant farmers will be organized in 6 Farmer Groups; 
  For post-harvest handling and marketing purpose, each the Farmers Groups would 
be directly work with the BLUD. 
285 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Commodity Flow 
  Banana of pilot project will be cultivated by participant farmers, then the farmers will sell 
all of the product directly to BLUD through Farmer Group; 
  Furthermore, BLUD will handle, grade, and packing of those fresh bananas. It is estimated 
that high grade of banana about 80% and low grade is 20%; 
  As much as 50% of high-grade banana would be sold to inter-island market and export, 
then  30% for  local market  such  as modern retail  (Indomart,  Alfamart,  etc),  local market 
(Gorontalo, Manado, Ambon and Ternate) and Tourism Market; 
  Meanwhile, 20% low grade banana would be processed to be banana chips, Banana Sale, 
or others potato processed. This activity would involve Women Farmer Groups (WFG); 
  Those bananas processed would be sold at local market; 
  To  ensure  that  banana  marketing  running  well,  it  would  be  supported  by  A  Successful 
Team For Gapi Banana Marketing. 
Value chain for Gorontalo District is at Attachement-1 
5. 
Proposed Land &Infrastructure Development 
5.1.  Construction of Terraces: 
5.2.  Physical Infrastructure 
a.  Farm pond/embung: 2 units; 
b.  Main reservoir tanks 2 unit; 
c.  Secondary reservoir tanks 8 units; 
d.  Connector pipes 3,600 m; 
e.  Access/farm road 3,000 meters. 
6. 
Proposed Production and Farm Management 
6.1.  Crop input of Gapi Baanana 20 Ha. 
5.2.  Agricultural Machinery 
Cultivator:8 units; 
f. 
g.  Power sprayer/hand power sprayer electric:26 units; 
h.  Hoe/Cangkul: 26 units; 
i. 
j.  Water pump of Embung: 2 units. 
Sickle/sabit: 26 unit; 
5.3.  Marketing Infrastructure & Equipment 
a. Building/Storage 
-  Packinghouse &Warehouse :1unit; 
-  Cold storage/ripening house: 1units; 
-  Cold storage unit: 1 unit; 
-  Ripening unit: 1 unit; 
-  Processing house: 1 unit; 
-  Shallow wells: 1 unit; 
-  Stand Room (display room). 
286 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
b. Processing Facilities 
-  Post-Harvest Handling; 
  Banana covers: 20.000 units; 
  Barrow/gerobak dorong: 26 units; 
-  Processing of Potato; 
  Processing equipment 1 packages. 
c.  Transportation Units 
-  Truck: 1 unit; 
-  3-wheeled vehicles FG: 8 units; 
-  Trail bike (to monitor banana farm): 2 units. 
7. 
Extension Services and Training 
-  Extension worker: 36 months; 
-  Comparative study: 35 persons. 
8.  Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities  
Map  of  proposed agriculture  infrastructure  and facilities for  Gorontalo District  is  present  on 
Attachement-2. 
9. 
Cost-tab for Minahasa Selatan District 
Cost-tab of the project for Gorontalo District is shown on Attachement-3 
287 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 1. 
Documentation of Assessment and Validation Project Location at Gorontalo District 
FGD at Village of Bakti 
Project Area (Banana Demplot) 
Interview with Farmer Group 
Access Farm Road 
Project Area (Banana Demplot) 
GAPI Banana 
288 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Attachement 2. Map of Proposed Agriculture Infrastructure and Facilities of Gorontalo District 
289 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
290 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
291 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
292 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
293 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
294 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
295 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
296 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
297 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
298 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
299 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
300 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
301 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
302 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
303 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
304 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
305 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
306 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
307 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
308 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
309 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
310 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
311 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
312 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
313 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
314 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
315 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
316 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
317 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 8: 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
318 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/3
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Low
Medium
2. Macroeconomic
Low
Medium
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Low
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Low
Medium
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Low
Medium
Indonesia is a stable democracy and has worked to
reduce the legacy of poor governance of the past. The
project aligns closely with national development policy and
is therefore not expected to face any any key risk during
implementation.
Provide facilitation and support to the farmer-based
agribusiness organization and management in developing
innovative technologies and practices in post-harvest
product development, marketing development and
expansion.
The project aligns closely with Indonesia's medium term
development plan and agricultural sector strategies. In
particular the project seeks to develop a replicable model
for promoting more sustainable development and
productivity in UPLANDs areas. This is in line with
Government policy.
Activities will focus on strengthening demand-driven
support of the extension system, combined with an
upgrading of extension staff capacities and training
facilities. 
Specialist TA recruited to mitigate major staffing skill
deficiencies.
Provision of Institutional Specialist TA support to help
establishment of proposed 6 BLUDs. 
Activities will focus on strengthening demand-driven
support of the extension system, combined with an
upgrading of extension staff capacities and training
facilities. 
Specialist TA recruited to mitigate major staffing skill
deficiencies.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/3
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
The assessment was conducted by reviewing government
regulations and documents, interview several government
officials at national and district and visited 3 targeted
districts. 2. The significant strengths are DG AIF has
extensive experience in implementing several project
funded by the World bank, ADB and IDB. Some of the
targeted districts currently are implementing IFAD funded
projects, IPDMIP and READSI which are also applying on
granting and TP mechanism. The weaknesses are that: (i)
some districts have no prior experience in using on-
granting mechanism; (ii)DG AIF have no experience with
IFAD financial procedures which may affect the process of
preparation of Withdrawal Applications (WAs), hence the
disbursements. Under these circumstances, the overall
FM risk rating is Medium (M). 3. Major capacity constraint
needs to be addressed is the capacity of the financial
management staff at national and district level to manage
on granting mechanism and produce a timeline financial
report especially at the early stage of the implementation.
4. Indonesian inherent risk is medium. Based on the
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
2017 report, Indonesia made steady improvement in the
quality of PFM including: (i) Aligning the legislative and
regulatory framework to the latest international budget,
accounting and reporting standards with the adoption of
the COFOG classification and accrual accounting
standards; (2) Establishing a multi-year budgeting
framework and a robust macroeconomic fiscal framework
to optimize expenditure management in line with revenue
mobilization; (iii) Rolling out the FMIS SPAN as a platform
for the integration of the Treasury system and the
consolidation of cash management operations at the
central government level; and (iv) Strengthening the
effectiveness of the oversight function by the internal audit
and external audit institutions. 5. The Indonesian
Corruption Perception Index (CPI) score for 2017
according to Transparency International website is 38
(2016: 38; 2015: 36; 2014: 34; 2013: 32), scale 0-high and
100-low risk). 6. The appropriate mitigation measures
proposed to reduce the risk are identified
Good planning, training and support for the procurement
processes. Procurement initiatives will include; (i)
strengthening of procurement planning and strengthening
of e-procurement, e-monitoring systems; (ii) setting
performance targets to improve procurement planning; (iii)
implementing measures to increase competition, such as
better procurement and capacity development; (iv)
providing technical support for documentation quality
especially for terms of reference prior to tendering;(vi)
ensure access to the highest quality consultants including
international experts; and (vii) conducting a procurement
audits.
6. Financial management
Medium
Medium
7. Procurement
Low
Medium
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
3/3
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
8. Stakeholders
Low
Medium
9. Environment and social
Low
Medium
Provision of consistent support to NPIU by both IFAD and
IsDB in supervision and advice, especially in establishing
functional project management, supervision and
monitoring systems for all 14 value chain sub-projects.
Climate change adaptation will be carefully planned and
implemented including; (i) implementing a climate change
analysis and preparing viable and effective programs of
climate adaptation; (ii) developing plans and climate
resilient designs for soil and water conservation and
irrigation; (iii) improving access to appropriate seed to
meet climate impacts; (iv) improving access to climate
information including weather and el Nino forecasts. 
Most district schemes are in areas of seismic and volcanic
risks; impacts to small scale infrastructure and agriculture
would however be minimal.
Overall
Low
Medium
The overall risk assessment is medium, that may be
lowered to low as a result of the mitigating measured
mainstreamed through the project design.
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
The  development  plan  for  each  of  the  ten  commodities  across  14  districts  in  the  UPLANDs 
1. 
Project is based on a detailed analysis and firm understanding of the current status and development 
opportunities for each of the value chains associated with each commodity. This includes the roles of 
the Project and the various institutions (some proposed) in the delivery of the development of each VC. 
2. 
The  key  elements  of  sustainability  and  as  a  result,  of  developing  a  viable  exit  strategy  for 
UPLANDs will be: (i) training; (ii) business planning; (iii) market linkages and alliances; (iv) access to 
credit; and (v) on-granting. 
3. 
Training will be an important element of UPLANDs sustainability  and associated exit strategy, 
and will include: (i) farmer training to ensure the technical skills are learned to enable uptake of new 
technology.  In  this  respect  the  Project  will  specifically  track  the  adoption  rates  by  farmers  of  new 
technologies required to improve product outputs and quality – 80% of beneficiaries are expected to 
have taken up new technologies by Project close; (ii) 231 farmer extension workers will be re-trained to 
ensure they have the skills required to support farmers; (iii) farmers will be trained in financial analysis 
to enable them to understand gross margins and general farm profitability; (iv) post-harvest training will 
be delivered to farmers and market specialists. UPLANDs will train 22,000 farmers of whom 4,000 will 
be  women.  A  cadre  of  youth  and  women  will  be  trained  as  market  assessors  to  ensure  continuing 
emphasis of product quality; and (v) business training will be essential to ensure UPLANDs supported 
businesses (including BumDes,  KUBE  and BLUD) are established and  strengthened on the basis  of 
sound  business  practices.  All  training  will  be  supported  by  technical  assistance  personnel  with  the 
necessary skill and experience. 
4. 
Ensuring  businesses  formed  or  strengthened  (at  village,  sub-district  or  district  level)  have  an 
approved comprehensive business plan will be a vital element of ensuring sustainability. Business will 
not be established or strengthened just to undertake a required process or service - rather they will be 
carefully costed to ensure all costs are accounted for and that a detailed understanding of profits, costs, 
risks  and  opportunities  are  identified  and  measured.  As  a  result,  strong  sustainable  business 
development is also a key element of the UPLANDs Exit Strategy. 
Access to credit (both seasonal and development finance) is critical in value chain development. 
5. 
UPLANDs will ensure that all enterprises have access to sufficient financial support to enable them to 
operate to optimal potential. Over the life of UPLANDs, businesses will be required to build sufficient 
resources to enable them to stand alone in terms of seasonal finance as well as to build greater equity 
which in turn will support use of greater investment borrowing to enable continued growth. In summary, 
farmers  and  businesses  will  be  encouraged  to  build  both  their  own  seasonal  finance  and  a  strong 
balance sheet where equity and debt are in balance. Strong balance sheets and limited overdrafts are 
the hallmarks of sustainability and in UPLANDs will also be a clear factor in the Project exit strategy.  
6. 
Market awareness for all value chain participants will also be a key aspect of sustainability and 
therefore a realistic exit strategy. All elements of production, post-harvest processing and marketing will 
be based on a full and clear awareness of the requirements, demand levels and potential returns in the 
market place. While this may be a part of any business plan, market awareness in commercial value 
chain development is a key sustainability and exit strategy for UPLANDs. 
In the social context, women and youth will be  strongly encouraged and in fact required to be 
7. 
part of the Project. Young people and women will be required to have strong representation in training 
and encouraged to participate in a number of UPLANDs activities. 
8. 
There are risks associated with ensuring successful exit in a manner that ensures sustainability 
of UPLANDs beyond project closure. In addition to the elements outlined above, UPLANDs will adopt 
an on-granting approach to Project implementation. This will require districts to pre-finance budgeted 
activities,  and  as  such  will  involve  considerable  awareness  training  for  District  Bupati  (Mayors), 
Treasurers and other finance staff. But in the long run, on-granting will provide district staff with greater 
authority to demand services and delivery from national government agencies. As such, on-granting is 
a strategy to empower district governments, in the process building greater sustainability. Hence, a fully 
operational on-granting mechanism is an integral part of the UPLANDs Exit Strategy. 
322 
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
9. 
UPLANDs will monitor the successful achievement of both sustainability and therefore the exit 
strategy by tracking the key indicators in the logical framework analysis. This can be supplemented by 
tracking  supervision  mission  reports  in  respect  of  business  development  and  progress  in  building 
financial resources to fund seasonal finance and debt repayment. 
323 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex 12: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Indonesia 
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs) 
Design completion report 
Annex 13: 
Contents of the Project Life File 
Annex 11: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS  
1.  At this stage it is not expected that UPLANDs will access FIPs 
324 
Indonesia
The Development of Integrated Farming Systems in Upland Areas (UPLANDs)
Project Design Report
Annex: Fiduciary Summary
Document Date:
03/12/2019
Project No.
2000002234
Report No.
5108-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
 FIDUCIARY SUMMARY OF COUNTRY PORTFOLIO 
 COUNTRY 
   Indonesia  
  CONCEPT NOTE 
  UPLANDS 
MEDIUM 
Public Financial Management 
COUNTRY – Fiduciary KPIs: 
Fiduciary Inherent Risk: 
-2018 Disbursement Ratio1 
- Year to Date 2019 
Disbursement Profile 
Pending Obligations 
Counterpart Funding - Profile 
5.1 % (divisional target: 17.1%) 
0.8% ( divisional annual target 17%) 
Unsatisfactory 
• 
• 
Ineligible  expenditure  SOLID);  refund 
processes  ongoing  for  SOLID)  around 
USD 29,000.  
Ineligible  expenditure  for  CCDP  ,  (past 
closure  IDR  131  580  000  (USD  9 
expenditure 
ineligible 
398.57) 
identified  in  2017  audits  has  not  been 
refunded. 
of 
Ranges 
satisfactory 
from  Mod.  unsatisfactory 
to 
PBAS – project's cycle coverage: 
IFAD 11  
PBAS – allocation (IFAD 11) :  
USD 84 355 555 
The  inherent  risk  is  deemed  to  be  medium.  Indonesia 
was  ranked  89th  out  of  180  countries  in  the  2018  TI 
Corruption Perception Index, with a medium score of 38.  
time 
over 
shows 
assessment 
The  latest  PEFA    report  for  Indonesia  was  published  in 
2017.  It  described  a  reasonably  well-functioning  PFM 
system, with significant improvements from 2011 to 2016. 
The 
significant 
improvements in the quality of PFM including: (i) Aligning 
the  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  to  the  latest 
international budget, accounting and reporting standards 
with the adoption of the COFOG classification and accrual 
accounting  standards;  (2)  Establishing  a  multi-year 
budgeting framework and a robust macroeconomic fiscal 
framework  to  optimize  expenditure  management  in  line 
with revenue mobilization; (iii) Rolling out the FMIS SPAN 
as  a  platform  for  the  integration  of  the  Treasury  system 
and the consolidation of cash management operations at 
the central government level; and  (iv) Strengthening  the 
effectiveness of the oversight function by the internal audit 
and external audit institutions.  in  PFM systems linked to 
predictability  and  control  over  budget  execution, 
particularly PEFA performance scores are slightly below 
B, which is above the basic level of performance broadly 
consistent with good international practices.   
According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
Indonesia’s public sector debt remains moderate. The debt 
dynamics have been also favourable, with strong real GDP 
growth and moderate real interest rates。 
Indonesia’s  external  debt 
remains  moderate  and 
sustainable  at  34.4%  of  GDP  in  2017  after  steady 
increase  in  recent  years;  however;  the  downward  trend 
was projected at end-2017 with external debt declining to 
34  percent  of  GDP.  Furthermore,  IMF  alarmed  that 
potentially  weaker-than  expected  revenue,  contingent 
liabilities  from  SOEs  and  PPPs  should  be  carefully 
monitored to avoid the fiscal risk exposures; though total 
government  debt  was  forecasted  to  be  stabilized  at  36 
percent of GDP or 258 percent of revenue by 2022. 
Indonesia  portfolio  consists  of  six 
The 
investment 
projects, with a disbursement ratio of 5.1% in 2018 (USD 
8.19 Million out of USD 162 Million). Three projects are in 
completion or closing stage (CCDP, VDP &SOLID). Three 
projects  are  on  the  second  year  of  implementation 
(IPDMIP,  co-financed  with  ADB,  READSI  and  SMPEI) 
and  one  project  in  preparation  stage  of  implementation 
(YESS).  The  disbursement  performance  of  IPDMIP  & 
READSI are unsatisfactory. 
Replenishment contributions 
IFAD10 pledge = USD 9.972 paid 10 million 
 IFAD11 pledge = USD 10 million 
 PROJECT– Observations: 
Project FM risk 
Duration: 
Medium  
5 years 
The lead agency (DG AIF) is new to implementing IFAD 
projects and will be assessed for FM risk as part of design. 
1 Disbursement RATIO = Disbursement during reporting period/ disbursable (available at beginning of reporting period) 
Financing Sources: 
- 
IFAD  
- 
Islamic Bank 
- 
Government 
- 
Beneficiaries 
Proposed size:   
(USD millions) 
50 
70 
17  
              14 
(%) 
30% 
17% 
42% 
11% 
USD 151 million 
Lending Terms: 
- 
- 
Current 2018 
Expected terms 2019 (IFAD11) 
- 
- 
Ordinary   
Ordinary  
lessons 
Like  other  projects  in  Indonesia,  Uplands  will  be  highly 
decentralised, with a central PMU and a large number of 
implementing entities (21) at provincial and district level. 
Based  on 
from  ongoing  projects,  strong 
management  and  effective  coordination  systems  will  be 
essential  to  ensure  efficient  financial  reporting  and 
fund-flows,  which  will  be  key  to  successful  project 
implementation.  Uplands  will  be  APR's  first  co-financing 
experience  with  IDB.  During  design  FMD  will  liaise  with 
IDB 
to  ensure  coordinated  and  harmonised  donor 
practices for project FM and loan management.  
- 
The overall project cost is estimated at USD 151million, of which IFAD would provide a loan of USD 50 million (33%) and Islamic Bank 
 a loan of USD 70 million (46%). Beneficiary contribution 14 million (9.3%) and Government's foreseen contribution of 11% to the project . 
Lending Terms 
Currency 
Amount 
(million) 
Completion 
date 
  Ongoing Portfolio: 
Project 
 VDP (ex PNPM) 
 SOLID 
 CCDP 
Financing 
instrument 
G-I-C-1053- 
L-I--755- 
G-I-C-835- 
L-I--835- 
G-I-C-1392- 
L-E--16- 
L-I--880- 
FLX 
Status 
DSBL 
DSBL 
DSBL 
DSBL 
EXPD 
EXPD 
EXPD 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
HIGHLY CONCESSIONAL TERMS 0.75 pc 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
INTERMEDIARY TERMS SDR 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
ORDINARY TERMS EUR 
ORDINARY TERMS SDR 
 IPDMIP 
200000144500 
DSBL 
ORDINARY TERMS EUR 
200000144600 
DSBL 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
 SMPEI (GEF5) 
200000095600 
DSBL 
ECD GRANTS 
 READSI 
200000195900 
DSBL 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
200000196000 
DSBL 
ORDINARY TERMS USD 
YESS 
200000260300 
APPR 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
200000260400 
APPR 
ORDINARY TERMS USD 
IMPLI (GEF 6) 
2000000957 
QE 
Approved 
ECD GRANTS 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
EUR 
XDR 
EUR 
EUR 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
0.25   30/12/2018 
42.03   30/12/2018 
0.68   30/01/2019 
30.30   30/01/2019 
1.19   30/12/2017 
6.29   30/12/2017 
15.87   30/12/2017 
93.15   30/03/2023 
1.41   30/03/2023 
4.77   29/09/2021 
1.00   30/03/2023 
39.89   30/03/2023 
2.00  09/12/2023 
55.3  09/12/2023 
4.895  10/05/2023 
B.  PORTFOLIO, FM RISK & PERFORMANCE  
Project 
 Financing 
 instrument 
Curr.  Amount 
(million) 
Project 
risk 
rating 
PSR quality of FM 
PSR audit 
PSR disb. rate 
VDP (ex PNPM) 
G-I-C-1053- 
SOLID 
L-I--755- 
G-I-C-835- 
L-I--835- 
CCDP 
G-I-C-1392- 
L-E--16- 
L-I--880- 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
EUR 
XDR 
0.25  Medium 
Mod. unsatisfactory 
Mod. satisfactory 
Mod. satisfactory 
42.03 
0.68 
Low 
Mod. satisfactory 
Mod. satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
30.30 
1.19  High 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Mod. satisfactory 
6.29 
15.87 
Disbursed 
to 
approved 
76 % 
100% 
94 % 
97 % 
94 % 
100 % 
83 % 
IPDMIP 
200000144500  EUR 
93.15  Medium 
Mod. unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Highly Unsatisfactory 
4 % 
200000144600  EUR 
1.41 
SMPEI (GEF5) 
200000095600  USD 
4.77  Medium 
Mod. Satisfactory 
READSI 
200000195900  USD 
1.00  Medium 
Mod. satisfactory 
  Not yet assessed 
  Unsatisfactory 
  Not yet assessed 
  Unsatisfactory 
200000196000  USD 
39.89 
YESS 
2000002603 
2000002604 
IMPLI – GEF 6 
2000000957 
USD 
USD 
USD 
2.00  Medium 
Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
55.3 
4.895 
Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
32 % 
9% 
30 % 
6 % 
0% 
0% 
0% 
VDP (ex-PNPM) was administered by the World Bank from 2009 to 2014, under a co-financing arrangement. In early 2017, implementation 
was resumed with remaining IFAD funding under modified arrangements and IFAD supervision. The project's closing date is 30th June 2019. 
The  2017  audit  was  qualified  with  audit  observations  including  poor  contract  management,  overpayments  and  weak  internal  controls. 
Ineligible expenditure was resolved for VDP with the last transfer from Ministry of Finance to Designated Account in Q1, 2019.  
Sufficient internal control system should be set up . Risk identification and risk analysis needed to be conducted in a structured, formal, and 
comprehensive manner for the new project.  
SOLID is jointly funded by an IFAD loan of US$49.11 million, an IFAD grant of US$1.08 million and a Government of Indonesia contribution 
of $14.81 million.  It is implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and has been effective since 2011. FM and disbursement performance have 
picked up since 2016.  FM risk, high in 2015, is now assessed to be low based on positive feedback from ACD and supervision mission in 
2017 and 2018. The project closing date is 31th July 2019.  Ineligible expenditure from audit prior to FY 2017 has been cleared and been 
transferred to Designated Account (DA). Current DA balance for Loan is USD 612,514.39 and for Grant USD 7,353.60.  
CCDP, (with PCD 30/12/2017) managed by the Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries, completed in December 2017 and passed closing 
date on 30 June 2018. Some delays with the account closure due to pending obligation on ineligible expenditures in the amount of  IDR 128.4 
million (USD 9,171). Two closure letters were sent on 02 October 2017 and 15 May 2018 on the pending obligation. The risk has been raised 
to high in view of the potential negative  impact from the pending obligation on the portfolio. 
IPDMIP, co-financed by ADB, was approved in December 2015.  The main executing agency for IFAD's portion of the funding is the Ministry 
of Agriculture, with oversight from the Ministry of Works on the entire programme. Start-up has been slow with a two year gap from the date 
of  approval  to  the  first  disbursement  date  (Dec  2017),  due  in  large  part  to  the  complexity  of  implementing  through  the  Government's 
on-granting mechanism for the decentralisation of resources to sub-national levels which is new to IFAD-funded projects, and disbursement 
performance is  highly  unsatisfactory with  only 3.75% for  the loan and 31.62% for the grant including the initial  advances. The  project 
closing date is 30th September 2023.  
READSI, implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture was approved by the September 2017 EB. The project's closing date is 30th September 
2023.The  project  has  not  fully  started  up  yet  although  preparatory  activities  are  ongoing.  However,  the  disbursement  rate  was  rated  as 
unsatisfactory as of 28 February 2019, total cumulative disbursement was USD 2.99 million (5%) with USD 2.5 million (6%) for loan and USD 
0.3 million (30%) for grant, which are outstanding initial deposit for the project. Like IPDMIP, READSI is implemented through on-granting 
systems. The first audit submission is due in 30 June 2019. Disbursement performance is not satisfactory.   
SMPEI is implemented by the Ministry of Environment with GEF funding. The financing agreement was signed in July 2017, the project is in 
the initial phases of implementation. 
IMPLI  is  implemented  by  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Forestry  with  GEF  funding.  The  project  has  been  approved  by  both  IFAD  and 
Government of Indonesia. Financing agreement is expected to be signed in 2019. 
YESS is implemented by Ministry of Agriculture (Executing Agency). The Financing Agreement was signed in March 2019. The project is 
currently under start-up preparation period.  
Overall, all IFAD-funded projects in Indonesia are fully mainstreamed through national public financial management systems (budget, treasury, 
accounting, asset management, audit).  Based on lessons from ongoing projects, strong management and effective coordination systems will 
be essential to ensure efficient financial reporting and fund-flows, which will be key to successful project implementation.  
Due to a change in Government policy, there has been a rapid deterioration in country disbursement performance and project implementation . 
The current mechanism allows the national level to reimburse only based on output delivery. However, the local government is often not 
sufficiently confident to pre- finance the project activities thereby creating a bottleneck. Implementation progress and disbursement could  be 
improved by providing advance payments based on some key indicators. To speed up the project implementation progress, the project design 
mission needs to agree on eligibility criteria showing certain activities have been completed prior to main activities. The mechanism for providing 
advance should be clearly described in the PIM, that should be properly translated and distributed to DPIUs and local government.  
Delay in disbursement due to on granting agreement process • Delay in disbursement due to delay in submitting withdrawal application mitigation
action : Financial management consultants recruited need to assist project financial management at national and district level. 
PMU work with MoF provides on granting mechanism training.  IFAD needs to provide training on financial management procedures, including 
disbursement requirements 
Sufficient internal control system should be set up . Risk identification and risk analysis needed to be conducted in a structured, formal, and 
comprehensive manner for the new project.  
The  project will be audited by BPK (SAI), in contrast to the situation to date  as IFAD-funded projects have always been audited by BPKP (GoI 
Internal Audit) except READSI.    Adopting a  harmonised  approach  with other IFIs, BPK (SAI)   as a  member of  INTOSAI, should be the 
external auditors for IFAD Projects and it should be. 
Prepared by: Irene Li 
Date: June 2019 
_________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
