Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ASBANDA
Association of Regional Development Banks
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
BAPPENAS
Badan Perencanaan Pembangunan Nasional
National Development Planning Agency
BDS
BDSP
BPK
BPKP
BRI
CCDP
DA
DNRAT
DPIU
FA
FM
FMA
GDP       
GESI
GoI
IDM
KM
M&E
LDH
LTB
MoF
MoHA
MoU
MoV
NGO
NPMU
OJK
P3PD
P4S
PDR
PIM
PLUT
PNPM
Business Development Services
Business Development Service Provider
Regional Development Bank
Badan Pemeriksa Keuangan
Supreme Audit Agency
Badan Pemeriksa Keuangan dan Pembangunan
Financial and Development Audit Agency
Bank Rakyat Indonesia
Coastal Community Development Project 
Designated Account
Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technologies
District Programme Implementation Unit
Financing Agreement
Financial Management
Financial Management Assessment
Gross Development Product
Gender Equity and Social Inclusion
Government of Indonesia
Indeks Desa Membangun
Village Development Index
Knowledge Management
Monitoring and Evaluation
Loan Disbursement Handbook
Letter to the Borrower
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Home Affairs
Memorandum of Understanding
Ministry of Village, Underdeveloped Regions and Transmigration
Non-Governmental Organisation
National Programme Management Unit
Otoritas Jasa Keuangan
Financial Services Authority
Program Penguatan Pemerintahan dan Pembagunan Desa
Improved Village Service Delivery Programme
Pusat Pelatihan Pertanian dan Perdesaan Swadaya
Farmer Agricultural Self-Help Training Centres
Programme Design Report
Programme Implementation Manual
Pusat Layanan Usaha Terpadu
Centres for Integrated Business Services
Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM)
POSYANTEK
National Program for Community Empowerment
Pos Pelayanan Teknologi Desa
PPIU
Rural Technology Center
Province Programme Implementation Unit
PSC
PY
SDG
SOE
ToR
ToT
TSA
UKPBJ
VDP
VIS
WA
Programme Steering Committee
Project Year
Sustainable Development Goals
Statements of Expenditure
Terms of Reference
Training of Trainers
Treasury Single Account
Unit Kerja Pengadaan Barang Jasa
Procurement Service Unit
Village Development Programme
Village Information System
Withdrawal Application
Executive Summary
1/39
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu – Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD) project aims at empowering village
communities so they can contribute to rural transformation and inclusive growth in Eastern Indonesia. The programme development
objective is to enable rural households to develop sustainable livelihoods, taking advantage of strengthened village and district level
governance.
TEKAD will operate in twenty-five districts in the five eastern provinces of Indonesia - Papua, West Papua, Maluku, North Maluku, and
East Nusa Tenggara. In these districts, TEKAD will target 1,720 villages and around 412,300 households, benefiting approximately
1,855,350 people.
It builds on the experience gained from GoI’s National Program for Community Empowerment - Program Nasional Pemberdayaan
Masyarakat (PNPM), and from IFAD’s past projects supporting PNPM (PNPM Pertanian/Agriculture) and the implementation of the
2014 Village Law (Village Development Programme) in Papua and West Papua.
TEKAD will assist Ministry of Village, Underdeveloped Regions and Transmigration (MoV) in developing an evidence-based approach
for empowering villages to better benefit from the Village Law and to make a better use of the Village Fund and other resources in
support of economic development by: (i) building village and household capacities in planning, implementing and monitoring a
significant share of Village Fund resources for inclusive economic initiatives bringing sustainable revenues; (ii) developing an enabling
environment whereby districts/sub-districts will provide support services and better integrate village needs into district economic
development planning; market players will be linked to village-based producers; and financial and non-financial service providers will
extend services meeting the needs of villages; and (iii) raising MoV capacities to implement TEKAD’s innovative approach and to
develop evidence-based replicable models for village economic development in Eastern Indonesia.
TEKAD support is conceived as an accelerator of village economic development in underprivileged areas of Indonesia – a temporary
intervention that aims at boosting the capacities of existing players, in the villages and in their environment, so they can build on
economic opportunities and leverage village resources to generate growth at village level. The programme strategy and activities are
therefore driven by the primary concern that, by the end of project implementation, sustainable mechanisms have been established to
ensure sustainable planning and implementation of village resources for economic growth. TEKAD includes three interrelated
components:
Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment will be rooted in the Village Law and will aim at strengthening village
governance and developing village economic initiatives. This component will improve the abilities of village governments and
communities to promote inclusive and sustainable economic development, building on the local potential and using resources
from the Village Fund and from other sources. The expected outcome is that village communities implement profitable
economic initiatives, prioritized through participatory planning to ensure that strategic choices rest on broad participation of
social and economic groups. Most of the activities under this component will take place at village level and will be
complementary to others implemented at district and provincial level.
Component 2 – Partnerships for Village Economic Development will promote an enabling environment for inclusive and
sustainable local economic development, by facilitating access of village households and economic organizations to
production support services, markets and commercial financing necessary for their economic initiatives. This component will:
(i) strengthen the capacities of districts and sub-districts to provide support services to village governments and better
integrate village needs into district economic development planning; (ii) promote villagers’ access to qualified technical and
business development services; (iii) support linkages with financial services providers, so that villagers access financing to
complement public resources. This component will have a key role in ensuring that, by the end of the project, villages keep
accessing services, markets and financing to ensure profitable and sustainable economic initiatives.
Component 3 – Innovation, Learning and Policy Development will promote evidence-based learning, policy development and
institutional strengthening in support of village economic development by: (1) documenting innovative practices and
achievements from TEKAD implementation, and generating replicable models based on successful experiences; (2) providing
evidence-based information to support the consolidation of the policy and regulatory framework for village economic
development; and (3) strengthening capacities of the Ministry of Villages to promote village economic development, taking
advantage of the positive environment set by Village Law and the Village Fund. The expected outcome is that an enabling
policy and institutional environment facilitate village economic development.
TEKAD will be implemented by MoV. The Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technologies (DNRAT) will have direct
responsibility for programme implementation, under the authority of MoV’s Director General of Village Development and Community
Empowerment, the Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technologies (DNRAT) will have direct responsibility for programme
implementation. A National Project Management Unit (NPMU) will have overall responsibility for project coordination and
implementation. A Provincial Project Implementation Unit will be established in each of the five target provinces and will be
responsible for overall implementation, guidance and coordination support in the province. Every target district will have a District
Project Implementation Unit, that will be embedded into the district administration and will work in close collaboration with the District
Head and staff involved in the promotion of economic development at district and village level. At both the provincial and district level,
multi-stakeholder platforms (Province/District Coordination Teams) will be set up, building on existing systems, to facilitate
coordination and knowledge management. Facilitation services will be organised at the sub-district level, in line with current MoV
systems.
The total programme cost amounts to US$ 702.03 million over a six-year implementation period. Out of this costs Component 1 –
Village Economic Empowerment absorbs 86.5%, Component 2 – Partnerships for Village Economic Development 10.4%, and
Component 3 – Innovation, Learning and Policy Development 3.1%. These costs are going to be financed by an IFAD loan of US$
32.85 million, an IFAD grant of US$ 1.50 million, beneficiary contribution estimated at US$ 27.08 million, GoI contribution under the
Village Fund estimated at US$ 541.60 million, and GoI contribution in taxes and staff salaries of US$ 18.99 million. The programme
has a financing gap of US$ 80 million, which will be financed by IFAD with resources from its next funding cycle or by a co-financier
willing to partner and acceptable to the GoI.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
2/39
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
A fast-growing country. A member of the G-20, Indonesia is a fast-growing middle-income country, hosting a population of
about 265 million and close to 300 ethnic groups speaking 652 languages. Youth make up 65 million or 26% of the total
population, resulting in a median age of 28 years. The country has a stable democracy and an economy that has grown fivefold
since the mid-90s, boosted by a rapidly growing middle class pulling domestic consumption, strong investment flows and a boom
in commodity exports.
Rising inequalities. Steady economic growth has led to significant poverty reduction, with the number of poor dropping from
24% of the population in 1999 to 9.66% in September 2018, or 25.67 million people. However, about 20.78% of the population
remain vulnerable to falling into poverty, as their income is only marginally above the national poverty line, leaving them
extremely vulnerable to shocks such as illness, extreme weather events or price volatility. Moreover, rising inequalities, with a
Gini coefficient of 0.384, threatens recent progress in reducing poverty. Poverty is lower in the cities (6.89%) and higher in the
rural areas (13.1%), where a majority of smallholders lacking access to services and markets are unable to fully benefit from the
strong economic growth. Pronounced regional disparities exist and are accentuating, with the highest poverty rates in Eastern
Indonesia, where despite the vast potential of natural resources, lack of connectivity, internally and with the rest of the country,
poor logistics and energy shortfalls hamper economic diversification.
Agriculture. While the GDP share of agriculture has come down to 13%, it is still the main source of income for one third of the
population and for 64% of the poor. With rich volcanic soils and a tropical climate suitable for growing a variety of crops,
Indonesia is a major global producer of tropical products such as palm oil, rubber and, to a lesser extent, copra, cocoa, coffee
and spices. There is enormous potential for increasing crop productivity as a majority of smallholders still operate close to
subsistence level. Low availability of modern inputs, competition for land, vulnerability to increasing extreme weather events
induced by climate change, lack of appropriate technologies, low access to irrigation, high post-harvest losses and limited access
to finance, extension and other support services contribute to low yields and volumes of production, and low returns. In Eastern
Indonesia, difficult access to markets due to limited connectivity in remote areas, high transaction costs, lack of farmers’
organisations, lack of storage and cold chain infrastructure, and limited access to support services further affect productivity and
earnings. ICT can play a major role to improve service delivery to farmers and offset remoteness in areas such as market
information, technical advice, deals on input supply or weather forecasting. The recent launch of a new Indonesian satellite is
expected to dramatically increase mobile and internet connectivity in Eastern Indonesia.
Fisheries. Around 6.4 million people in Indonesia are engaged in inland and marine fishing and in aquaculture. Artisanal
producers using traditional means account for 95% of the production of 22.31 million tons (2015), of which aquaculture accounts
for 72% with a steep annual growth. Aside from constituting an important source of proteins that the government is promoting to
improve food security, marine products have considerable potential for exports, which have been steadily growing over the last
years. Limited access to boats and fishing gear, practices of destructive and illegal fishing, and poor management by aquaculture
operators leave considerable scope for modernising and improving production. Eastern Indonesia also suffers from a lack of
infrastructure such as port facilities, electricity, transport facilities and fuel supply for vessels. Furthermore, climate change
threatens the livelihoods of people living in low-lying coastal zones - major climate change risks in Papua and Maluku are
associated with coastal inundation and the spread of diseases.
Financial inclusion. Inclusive financial systems are a key ingredient for equitable economic growth, enhanced productive
capacity and poverty alleviation. Besides the Regional Development Banks (Bank Pembangunan Daerah), the Indonesian state-
owned bank, Bank Rakyat Indonesia (BRI) through its village units (unit desa) by far has the largest outreach in rural areas to
more than 40 million rural micro savers and more than 6 million rural micro borrowers. However, despite the rapid development
of Indonesia’s financial sector and a vast range of rural finance products, service delivery and business models, increased use of
technology and a pretty conducive legal and regulatory environment, it is estimated that less than half of the population have
access to banking services, particularly in the rural areas. In 2014, only 5.88% of the total bank lending benefitted agriculture and
most of it went to larger, commercial plantations. While the microfinance sector is growing fast, the majority of smallholders do
not have access to finance, due to inappropriate financial products, outreach, financial literacy and conditionality. At the same
time, Indonesia is known for its history as a "living laboratory" that has created numerous types of village savings and loan self-
help groups, group lending, savings and credit associations, financial cooperatives, linkage banking and hybrids of these, both in
conventional and increasingly sharia-based forms.
National policies
6.
National development plan and poverty reduction. The current five-year Medium-Term National Development Plan (2015-
2019) projects a reduction of the poverty rate from 11% to 7-8% and an annual economic growth rate of 8%. The agricultural,
fisheries and forestry sector should grow by 4.5% over the same period. The plan targets four priority areas: food sovereignty,
energy sovereignty, marine and maritime development and improved livelihoods for the poor through better access to basic
services and to the productive economy. It also promotes a more balanced regional development and gives decentralisation and
the strengthening of village empowerment a priority role in addressing poverty. President Joko Widodo’s policy ‘Develop from the
periphery (membangun dari pinggiran)’ further aims at reducing regional disparities by building up regions and rural areas that
are lagging behind, particularly in Eastern Indonesia, and in Papua more specifically. Low capacities at local government level,
insufficient targeting, remoteness, limited resources allocated to credit and cooperative empowerment and to promote an
enabling environment for productive activities and small-scale businesses still explain low cost-effectiveness.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
PNPM and Village Law. The Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM) or National Program for Community
Empowerment was the Government of Indonesia’s (GoI) flagship poverty alleviation program, covering 60,000 villages and
benefitting over 100 million people. PNPM Rural was launched in 2008, with co-financing from the World Bank and IFAD, and
aimed at empowering communities so they could access and implement block grants to improve basic infrastructure. In 2014,
GoI closed PNPM, following the approval of the 2014 Village Law, which delegated new responsibilities and resources to villages,
which became autonomous legal entities. Building on PNPM lessons, the law incorporates good governance principles of
community participation, transparency and downward accountability. It also creates the Ministry of Village, Underdeveloped
Regions and Transmigration (MoV), whose role includes the empowerment of rural communities. At the local level, Village and
Community Empowerment Offices (Dinas Pemberdayaan Masyarakat dan Desa) are responsible for providing guidance,
coordination and facilitation, and for recommending technical policies to implement village development programs.
3/39
Village Fund and IDM. The Village Law stipulates seven different sources of revenues available to villages. This includes the
Village Fund, which was created in 2015 to channel public resources directly to the village level and meet village basic needs,
build rural infrastructure development, and develop the village economic potential. While it amounted to IDR 20 trillion in its first
year of operation, it has reached IDR 70 trillion in 2019 (or US$ 4.95 billion), representing an average amount of US$ 66,083 per
village. The President of Indonesia has recently committed to further significantly this amount during his second presidential
mandate (2019-2024). Although the Village Fund has allowed the fast building of infrastructure meeting village needs (including
housing, roads, bridges and irrigation schemes), the effective use of Village Fund resources to support poverty alleviation and
village growth remains a major challenge. It is estimated that less than 10% of the Village Fund resources are allocated to
economic development.
In 2016, MoV created the Village Development Index or IDM (Indeks Desa Membangun), a composite index that is used to
measure village progress and to rank the 74,000 Indonesian villages against five categories, from Highly Disadvantaged to
Independent[1]. West Papua is the province that has the highest rate of Highly Disadvantaged and Disadvantaged Villages –
(96.6%), as compared to the country’s average of 64%.
Papua Desk. In recognition of the special developmental challenges facing the remote provinces Papua and West Papua, a
Presidential Instruction 9/2017 ‘Accelerating Welfare Development in Papua Province and West Papua Province’ was issued to
promote coordination across 25 GoI departments, including MoV, for improved health and education, local economic
development, basic infrastructure, digital infrastructure and connectivity, in the respect of Papua culture and social traditions and
building on Papua’s rich potential. Bappenas, the National Development Planning Agency, is responsible for leading the process,
through the establishment of the Papua Desk and a new Roadmap for accelerating the development of the Papua provinces.
P3PD. GoI and the World Bank are finalising the design of the Institutional Strengthening for Improved Village Service Delivery
Project (Program Penguatan Pemerintahan dan Pembangunan Desa or P3PD), which aims at strengthening the capacities of
village institutions for improved quality of spending, through better support and information systems, under the leadership of the
Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA). P3PD programmes will be essential to build governance capacities at district, sub-district and
village level, in partnership with MoV at the community level. However, other important requirements to boost village-based
economic development will not be covered, such as building household capacities to undertake profitable activities, developing
village linkages to market and services, or improving the capacity of market players and service providers to engage with villages.
Besides, P3PD is not planning to cover Papua or West Papua, but for one district in each province. Programme implementation
will be closely coordinated with MoHA and P3PD and capacity building for strengthened local will use P3PD tools and guidelines,
which will be adapted to the specificities of the target provinces as needed.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
12.
13.
TEKAD scales up the GoI and IFAD's experience from the implementation of the earlier PNPM and Village Development
Programme. It builds on results and lessons learned of these earlier investments related to IFAD four key thematic priorities:
gender, youth, climate and nutrition
Gender equity and social inclusion. Gender equity and social inclusion (GESI) remain a difficult challenge in TEKAD’s five
target provinces. Major efforts are required particularly in the Papuan highlands, home to some of the most remote of the
Melanesian societies of Eastern Indonesia. There, women are far from having equal opportunities, have limited access to assets
and services on their own terms, and are largely excluded from community decision-making. In the rest of Papua, and in the other
four target provinces, GESI issues are different and the situation is very heterogeneous. The programme will be able to respond
to this diversity by using household methodologies (only in Papua and West Papua) and the in-depth knowledge and community
trust of facilitators to empower women and youth, as well as other marginalized groups. During the first three years, facilitators
should not be rushed to produce results, but be given time to develop their own well thought out and informed strategies for
GESI, targeting and the avoidance of élite capture. Besides, IFAD’s strategy of empowering women through economic activities
will need to be preceded by assessments of women’s daily chores, their role in intra-household decision-making, and their
access to assets.
14.
Youth. Indonesia has a young population, and like in many countries, young people in Indonesia seek to migrate to urban areas
without prospects for being able to generate and sustain the livelihood they envisage. Whilst digital agriculture and
industrialization 4.0 are powerful attractors of youth, internet access in the five provinces is still low, especially in Papua. TEKAD
will gradually build a strategy for agri-business development that should be of interest to youth, with backward linkages to
production that can be enhanced with improved technologies. Production linkages should lead to more business opportunities
downstream in the value chains, in which young people may engage. TEKAD will be expected to develop potential pathways for
young women, especially through engagement being with women groups.
15.
Climate. Indonesia is highly vulnerable to the impact of climate variation. Prolonged droughts, increased frequency of extreme
weather events with heavy rainfall leading to large-scale flooding are likely. As an archipelago with more than 17,000 islands,
Indonesia is also very vulnerable to rising sea levels. These impacts will affect the agriculture, fishery and forestry sectors,
reducing food security and damage the livelihoods of the population and in particular the rural poor. Besides, Indonesia is the
third greatest polluting country and 60% of Indonesia’s greenhouse gas emissions are due to deforestation and forest
degradation. The integration of climate smart agricultural practices and measures to increase resilience and reduce risks of
natural disasters will be a mainstreamed priority throughout programme activities.
4/39
16.
Nutrition. Although food security has improved in Indonesia, malnutrition remains significant – 37% of the children under five are
stunted. The deterioration of the nutritional status is more severe in the rural areas, where access to social and economic
infrastructure is lower. Nutrition goals set forth in the government medium-term plan aim for the reduction of stunting among
children under five to 28% by 2019. TEKAD will pursue opportunities to support small producers’ inclusion in value chains,
promote crop diversification to support balanced food consumption, ensure improved storage and processing, and empower
communities’ to support behaviour changes.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
17.
TEKAD replicates and scales up results achieved under IFAD's earlier investment in the National Programme for Community
Empowerment (PNPM)/Village Development Programme (VDP) (2008-2019).
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
Strategic engagement. The GoI and IFAD recognize the importance of sustainable rural transformation and promoting equitable
and socially inclusive growth in pursuit of the 2030 Agenda and Sustainable Development Goals. In Indonesia, growing inequality
and a widening social and geographic divide between rural-urban and east-west, potentially threatens the country's overall
stability and longer-term development. Despite an intensified strategic and policy focus, coupled with a significant increase in
public investment, the remote provinces in Eastern Indonesia continue to regress against most key development indices and
characteristics. Within these geographic areas, agriculture and fisheries remain the main source of income and livelihoods for the
poor. The GoI has therefore requested IFAD's support for developing a longer-term vision and approach to promote the
advancement of rural areas in Eastern Indonesia.
Impact and policy engagement. The 2017 Village Law recognizes the importance of promoting local economic growth and
leveraging Indonesia's shift towards decentralization. Through the implementation of the Village Law and distribution of the
projected US$ 40 billion Village Fund, the GoI seeks to empower villages and promote sustainable rural transformation. However,
despite the Village Fund's significant success and impact in some parts of Indonesia, the allocation of resources to supporting
economic activities remains minimal, particularly in Eastern Indonesia where village-based delivery systems are weaker, villages
lack linkages to markets and public/private support services, there is sub-optimal coordination with district-level investment
planning, and there is more risk of elite capture due to traditional power systems. As the Village Law represents a long-term
commitment to developing an effective policy framework for rural transformation, IFAD's engagement with TEKAD strategically
positions it to directly assist Government with its national policy agenda and leverage its potential national impact on marginalized
and vulnerable rural people in Indonesia.
Replication and scaling up. Since 2008, IFAD has supported Government's flagship rural poverty reduction programmes.
Through its financing of the PNPM and its successor, the Village Development Programme, which closed in December 2018,
IFAD has successfully piloted activities aimed at empowering rural communities and promoting local socio-economic
development. Building on these results, and in line with the GoI's objective to expand the distribution of the Village Fund and its
strategic focus on eastern Indonesia, there is a distinct opportunity to replicate and scale up IFAD's experience to more of
Indonesia's 74,000 villages. There is a strong rationale for IFAD to support livelihoods improvement in the target provinces as
they have the highest rate of rural poverty in Indonesia, with low agricultural productivity and market access, and have
insufficiently benefitted from investment in agricultural development despite the overall increase in development expenditure.
PNPM and VDP. Chief among them is the experience gained through PNPM and its successor, VDP. Aside to contributing to
PNPM Rural in Sulawesi provinces, IFAD financed a pilot within PNPM Rural, called PNPM Pertanian, or PNPM Agriculture,
which focused on Papua and West Papua and aimed at empowering communities to invest PNPM block grants into developing
primary productions – agriculture and fisheries. When the Village Law was passed and PNPM was terminated, GoI decided to
promote PNPM Pertanian as a model to implement the new legal framework for village development and community
empowerment. It requested IFAD to use the remaining funds to redesign a two-year project, the Village Development Programme
(VDP), to be implemented in the Papua provinces with that objective. Because of the short duration, which was dictated by the
available balance of funds, it was agreed that VDP would only be the start of a longer-term effort and that a full-fledged
programme would follow, building on lessons learnt from VDP implementation.
Accelerating village development. GoI plans to move villages up the IDM scale, mainly by channelling the Village Fund to
villages and empowering them to use Village Fund resources in support of local welfare. However, the amount of village
resources currently going to supporting economic activities is minimal, mainly because: villages lack market and other strategic
information to best exploit their potential and market their productions; the allocation of Village Fund resources in support of
economic activities often goes to purchasing short-term inputs, which are not sufficient to improve family’s revenues; and
households lack knowledge about technologies and receive little technical advisory or other business development services. In
fact, village development is envisaged as an issue to be solved at village level through village-based delivery systems
exclusively, whereas it requires coordinated strategies and investments at village level and beyond. More generally, village
capacities for inclusive and accountable programming of resources are limited and villages lack linkages to markets and
public/private support services. In addition, the planning of Village Fund resources is not coordinated with district-level
investment planning, and the various technical departments involved in supporting local economic development at district and
provincial level also lack coordination. These challenges are further exacerbated by isolation and remoteness in Eastern
Indonesia. Furthermore, the risk of elite capture of Village Funds resources and the benefits deriving from their allocation, while
present in all of Indonesia, is particularly strong in Eastern Indonesia, because of traditional power systems.
23.
24.
25.
TEKAD’s goal. Against this background, TEKAD’s goal is that empowered village communities contribute to rural transformation
and inclusive growth in Eastern Indonesia by leveraging the potential of the Village Law and the Village Fund. To this effect,
TEKAD will adopt an approach aimed at empowering and building the resilience of village communities, by combining specific
support at village level with interventions aimed at fostering an ecosystem whereby villages are connected to knowledge, markets
and support services.
5/39
TEKAD’s value proposition. TEKAD will assist in developing an evidence-based approach for empowering villages to make a
better use of Village Fund and other village resources in support of economic development by: (i) building village and household
capacities in planning, implementing and monitoring a significant share of Village Fund resources for inclusive economic
initiatives bringing sustainable revenues; (ii) developing an enabling environment, whereby: districts/sub-districts will provide
support services and better integrate village needs into district economic development planning; market players will be linked to
village-based producers; and financial and non-financial service providers will extend services (including digital ones) meeting the
needs of villages; and (iii) raising MoV capacities to implement TEKAD’s innovative approach and to develop evidence-based
replicable models for village economic development in Eastern Indonesia.
A programmatic approach. The design of the Village Law built on PNPM achievements to strengthen village governance and
autonomy. TEKAD offers an opportunity to build on the specific achievements of PNPM Pertanian and VDP to develop an MoV-
owned, replicable approach for promoting village-centered economic development in Eastern Indonesia. TEKAD is conceived as
the first stage of a longer-term effort, which will establish the building blocks of a village-centered approach to boost local
economic development in under-privileged areas facing specific challenges such as isolation, scattered populations and the
weight of traditional social structures. A second phase is already envisaged to support replication at a larger scale, building on
innovative models developed in different locations with sufficient scale to demonstrate feasibility and success.
B. Lessons learned
26.
27.
28.
29.
The Village Law and the Village Fund. TEKAD’s design builds on two fully interconnected dimensions: the existing Village Law
and Village Fund, and the experience gathered from VDP and PNPM projects. The Village Law, approved in 2014, delegates new
responsibilities and resources to villages which became autonomous legal entities, incorporates governance principles of
community participation and downward accountability and stipulates different sources of revenues available to villages, one of
which is the Village Fund created in 2015 to channel public resources directly to the village level, meet village basic needs, build
rural infrastructure and develop the village economic potential. Thanks to the Village Law and through the Village Fund, in 2019
each of the 74,000 Indonesian villages was entitled to receive US$ 66,83, for a total of US$ 4.95 billion for all villages;
furthermore, the President of Indonesia committed to significantly increase this amount during his second mandate (2019-2024).
In this context, the Village Law and the Village Fund constitute a fundamental basis for TEKAD, which is conceived to support
villages to use the Village Fund resources to catalyse sustainable local development.
PNPM/VDP experience. The second element on which TEKAD builds is the previous experience of PNPM/VDP project. Its first
phase (PNPM) was a source of inspiration for the Village Law, and its second phase (VDP) was an important tool to support,
although at small scale considering the country size, the use of resources from the Village Fund during its early steps. Results of
the Village Law and Village Fund, and the more specific results of PNPM/VDP, show that the pertinence and replicability of a
community-driven development approach is beyond doubt; this is the rationale for TEKAD which design thoroughly incorporated
key lessons from this experience.
Short term necessities vs. long term development. The project demonstrated how financial resources planned at village level
allowed to meet community most pressing needs, improved access to basic social infrastructure and the fast building of
infrastructure including housing, access roads and small irrigation schemes. However, as less than 10% of the Village Fund
resources were allocated to economic development, the use of these resources to support sustainable poverty alleviation and
village economic growth remains a major challenge. VDP was not exempt of this trend and it focused on supporting annual
village planning and budgeting, which led to the selection of short-term priorities, often under the form of inputs. This shows that
some of the main challenges for the Village Fund and for TEKAD are promoting the planning of economic investments, adopting
a longer-term more strategic perspective, and gradually building a dynamic village-based productive sector instead of focusing
on short-term priorities. Some government authorities are aware of these challenges but, even so, there is still much to do.
Effective social inclusion for economic development. While the Village Law does support community participation and
accountability, experience show that the risk of elite capture is strong, particularly where village structures are not involved,
village capacities are limited and there is no tradition of transparency, inclusion and accountability in the use of public resources.
Despite all efforts devoted by VDP to revert this tendency, priorities selected by producers’ groups were often not taken into
consideration in the village planning process. This lesson from VDP constitutes another fundamental challenge to be faced by
TEKAD, to be tackled through community empowerment, capacity building and setting the right incentives to ensure that village
resources are programmed based on inclusive participation and that Village Heads are accountable to the community and the
district in line with the Village Law. Similarly, capacity building is required at district level so that districts can provide guidance
and oversight to villages in the use of public resources, in line with the Village Law. Concurrently, Concurrently, limited familiarity
by rural population with the opportunities offered by the Village Law suggest that only bottom-up approaches and effective social
inclusion strategies stand a chance for real social inclusion for economic development.
30.
Capacities of village leaders and structures. The design of VDP overestimated the capacities of Village Heads and Village
Apparatus, as well as Village Heads’ willingness to conform to broad community participation and accountability, and did not
include sufficient measures to prevent elite capture in the new context of the Village Law. Moving forward, greater support to
village planning activities, improvements to the quality of the facilitation model, greater emphasis on market linkages, and
additional check and balances against the risk of elite capture will be need to be put in place by TEKAD to ensure that community
empowerment and economic development are inclusive and can be sustained.
31.
Long term capacity building. Building the capacities required for sustainable and inclusive improvement of livelihoods in remote
and disadvantaged provinces and in traditional Papuan societies requires a phased, long-term approach to sustainable and
inclusive rural transformation that is tailored to the specific local context. The limited duration of projects is not sufficient to fully
build the necessary capacities, strengthen local institutions and sustainable improvement of livelihoods, especially in traditional
Melanesian societies. Expected changes due to the Village Law are substantial and it should not be anticipated that they will
happen in the short-term. Therefore, a longer-term approach is needed to support sustainable transformation and to phase it in
gradual stages, meaning that the processes to be supported by the new project can't rely only on TEKAD's resources and
structure.
6/39
Looking at the village and beyond. Even though VDP activities were entirely village-focused, they counted with limited
involvement of village existing structures, whether traditional or created for the implementation of the Village Law. This
undermines local empowerment and ownership, which jointly with the development of new capacities at village level should be
the foundation for long-term social and economic sustainable development. However, building village actors capacities is not
sufficient and should be complemented by improving the capacities of public agencies, service providers and other stakeholders
at sub-district, district and provincial level, which in addition to strengthening the institutional fabric would contribute to broaden
the social, institutional and economic perspective beyond the strictly local village level.
Access to finance. Village Fund allocations tend to be used for the purchase of seasonal inputs or for immediate consumption
needs, diverting public resources from the financing of needed productive investments. This is prompted by the lack of access to
finance, limited financial literacy, and a general expectation to receive free goods from the government. This prevents the
utilisation of Village Fund resources for more sustainable productive investment, generates villagers’ dependency and hinders
the sustainable growth of their farming or fishing enterprises. To revert this tendency, village producers need greater support to
be able to access and use working capital in a manner that promote livelihoods diversification, sustainable growth of farming and
fishing enterprises, access market opportunities and greater resilience to shocks. This support may be provided in different forms
including the provision of financial literacy to villagers, promoting savings and making available suitable financial products, , as
well as access to reliable and timely market information.
Access to markets. VDP offered technical support to develop productive activities selected by villagers. However, improving
villagers’ production without consideration for market opportunities leaves them with products that cannot be sold beyond
traditional traders and since they were not provided with prior information on market opportunities, they had little other options
than selling to local middlemen at very low prices. This fails to generate sufficient incentives to keep up with improved agricultural
practices, especially where these involve higher production costs. Market information needs to be made available as a tool to
help villagers in selecting priority commodities that can meet market demand and that can provide them with a good, sustainable
income worth the effort of changing their traditional practices.
Despite of the strategic challenges discussed above, programme achievements have been significant, from the 2.2 million
beneficiaries serviced, to the range of infrastructure built under PNPM Rural in Sulawesi, the introduction of new high-value
agriculture and aquaculture crops, innovative market linkages in isolated Papua provinces, and, against a poorly conducive
environment, women participation. For VDP in particular, the key reasons for success relied on an innovative model to address
the specificities of the Papua provinces that combined understanding of the Papua social organization and culture, with new
approaches based on alliances with market players or universities.
PNPM has specifically shown that participatory planning building on farmer groups in Papua and West Papua can be
meaningfully supported with public funds and that this can lead to a number of improvements such as, for example, more
efficient farming techniques. This major innovation was not scaled up in numbers, as VDP took over from PNPM in the same
districts plus one. But it was scaled up institutionally, with GoI deciding to adapt the approach to the new institutional context
brought about by the Village Law, with the intent of scaling it up through new project phase.
Other innovations at village level, though of a lesser scale, open up new opportunities that, in some cases, have already been
replicated in the target districts and that will be scaled-up by TEKAD, including the promotion of new marketing arrangements in
collaboration with farmer groups, using social media as an advertising and brokering platform (Wamena district); the forging of
direct, informal marketing linkages with supermarkets, which was a first in Papua; alternative conflict resolution mechanisms
(Wamena district) and subsequently adopted by a number of villages.
VDP succeeded in bridging from PNPM to the new environment and laying the first building blocks of a new approach for
developing village capacities to engage into economic development. VDP (re)design focused project activities on the village
level, as was already the case with PNPM, including through the use of the Village Fund. VDP has shown, on the one hand, that
village-based initiatives are not sufficient to improve villagers’ livelihoods, and, on the other hand, that even in Papua, profitable
market linkages can be developed and that locally developed innovative technologies can be accessed.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
Unfortunately limited attention was devoted to monitoring and evaluation and to systematic management of knowledge. The
VDP Project Completion Report conclusion from field visits and focus group discussions is that the programme had important
achievements and impact, which however were not fully captured in the absence of adequate data.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
40.
Programme objectives. TEKAD’s overall goal is that empowered village communities contribute to rural transformation and
inclusive growth in Eastern Indonesia by leveraging the potential of the Village Law and the Village Fund. The programme
development objective is to enable rural households to develop sustainable livelihoods, taking advantage of strengthened
village and district level governance. This is aligned with the overarching goal of IFAD’s country strategy for Indonesia, which is to
support inclusive rural transformation so that rural families move out of poverty and achieve sustainable livelihoods, and
especially with Strategic Objective 1 - Small-scale producers participate in remunerative food markets, and Strategic Objective 3
- Rural institutions deliver responsive services meeting the needs of small producers.
7/39
Geographic area of intervention
41.
Target provinces. TEKAD will focus its interventions on five Eastern Indonesian provinces: Papua, West Papua, Maluku, North
Maluku and East Nusa Tenggara. Four out of the five provinces have the country’s highest poverty rates, as indicated in Table 1.
Although GoI has been concentrating its development efforts on improving infrastructure, especially in remote rural areas,
Human Development Indicator (HDI) rates are still among the lowest in the country. Literacy - and numeracy - rates can be as
low as 25% in the Papuan highlands (especially among women; the provincial average is 68%) and up to almost 100 percent
elsewhere – for example in villages close to urban centres in East Nusa Tenggara. Malnutrition is significantly higher in Eastern
Indonesia, and stunting of children under 5 years of age is above 40% in East Nusa Tenggara and Maluku.
Table 1: Percentage of poor people and HDI in the target provinces
42.
Table 2 further shows that 90% of the 6,072 villages in the target provinces are in IDM more deprived categories.
Table 2: Villages IDM ranking in target provinces
43.
44.
The target provinces are amongst Indonesia’s areas most vulnerable to climate change. Significant local micro-climatic
differences are expected, due to the complex topography and different altitudes, with average temperatures increasing between
1.0-1.5 C° by 2060. Rising sea levels and coastal flooding will particularly affect the Maluku provinces and East Nusa Tenggara.
With respect to the impacts of climate change on agriculture, some of the biggest losses in per capita terms are to be expected in
West Papua[2].
Papua and West Papua. Indonesia’s most eastern provinces are also the least developed provinces in the country, with 41%
(Papua) and 37% (West Papua) of the rural population living below the official poverty line. Home to 4.3 million people[3], they
form a largely undeveloped, sparsely populated area, which is 90 % forested and rich in natural resources - from fisheries and
forests to coal, natural gas, copper and gold. The majority of indigenous inhabitants of Papua live in the economically
underdeveloped highlands, setting them apart from better educated and generally more affluent coastal and lowland Papuans –
especially in West Papua. The topography is rugged, with poor connectivity and remote areas that can only be accessed by
plane or several days walking. Over 90% of the population depend on subsistence agriculture and fisheries, with incipient
aquaculture. Shifting cultivation as well as hunting and gathering are commonly practiced, especially in the lowlands of the Papua
provinces. Low productivity and product quality, lack of value and poor access to markets are compounded by limited support
services and difficult and costly access to remote areas. The lack of economic opportunities has prompted youth to migrate to
cities, where they face high unemployment. However, tourism has been rising steadily with both sea and highlands sites
presenting great potential for international and national tourism and for offering important market outlets for village productions.
45.
Papua hosts Indonesia’s last active separatist insurgency, the Free Papua Organization (Organisasi Papua Merdeka or OPM).
Papua’s relative calm over recent years is largely due to the co-opting of Papuan élites through a law on special autonomy
(Otonomi Khusus or Otsus), which transferred the responsibility for health, education, and other services to local governments. In
the highlands especially, administrative units have been modified to allow clans to create their own districts and sub-districts. The
traditional Melanesian system of conflict and exchange persists as a largely parallel customary governance system, dominated
by older men, while women and youth are largely excluded from decision-making and economic development.
46.
Maluku, North Maluku and East Nusa Tenggara. This area is characterized by a diverse geography, with each of the three
provinces covering more than 550 small islands, some of them very isolated. Located in the dryland and dry climate agro-
ecological zones of Indonesia, about two thirds of their landscapes are covered by trees, with a mixed topography ranging from
flat to hilly and mountainous. Subsistence agriculture is practiced across the three provinces, but traditional export commodities
are also grown, including coffee, cocoa, coconut, nutmeg and clove. Coastal areas comprise important fishery and tourism
resources. While the remainder of the economy relates mostly to forestry and mining, tourism is rising in importance every year.
8/39
47.
Target districts. TEKAD will operate in 25 districts, of which 13 are the districts where VDP was implemented for two years in
Papua and West Papua provinces, and 12 are ‘new districts’ in Maluku, North Maluku and East Nusa Tenggara (Table 3).
Districts were selected by MoV based on demographic density, economic potential, road connectivity, complementarities with
other ongoing or previous development programmes (such as IFAD-financed Smallholder Livelihood Development
Project/SOLID, which was recently completed in Maluku and North Maluku), low security risk (in Papua and West Papua), and
the Village Development Index (IDM) scores of their villages. Most of the criteria guarantee that geographic targeting is based on
the latest available data on multi-dimensional poverty indicators at village level.
Table 3: TEKAD target districts
Papua
West Papua
Maluku
North Maluku
East Nusa Tenggara
Boven Digoel
Jayawijaya
Fak Fak
Kaimana
Manokwari
Buru
Halmahera Barat
Manggarai
Kepulauan Yapen
Maluku Tengah
Halmahera Selatan
Ngada
Nabire
Sarmi
Yahukimo
Manokwari Selatan
Maybrat
Pegunungan Arfak
Raja Ampat
Seram Bagian Barat
HalmaheraTengah
Sumba Timur
Seram BagianTimur
Halmahera Utara
Timur Tengah Selatan
48.
Target villages. Within the target districts, TEKAD will implement activities in 1,720 villages, which will be distributed across the
five provinces (Table 4).
Table 4: Village distribution per province
Province
Papua
West Papua
Maluku
North Maluku
East Nusa Tenggara
TOTAL
Number of villages
566
290
288
288
288
1,720
49.
Activities will start being implemented in Papua and West Papua provinces, which present the highest rates of poverty among the
five included in the project area, and also because the experience developed in these two provinces by the previous IFAD-
supported VDP project constitutes a solid basis for quick start-up and effective implementation. At project start-up it will be
decided whether its activities would be also implemented since the beginning in a third province. Activities in the other two
provinces will start once the project is ongoing and the main tools for its implementation are developed and available. This
gradual incorporation of provinces and districts will contribute to continuous learning and increased effectiveness, taking
advantage of the experience to be gained since the beginning in the two/three provinces where project implementation will start.
50.
TEKAD will support the development of village clusters that will pool production and resources to facilitate the access to larger
and better remunerated markets. Village clusters will also ensure the profitability of collective investments for storage and
processing, facilitate village-to-village learning and increase the efficiency of programme delivery. The following approach will be
used for selecting villages participating in clusters:
9/39
Out of the 1,720 villages, a first batch of 500 core villages will be identified in PY1 and start activities in PY2. Criteria for the
selection of core villages will include: (i) potential for developing target commodities (see below); (ii) reasonable road access;
(iii) levels of social capital (from the IDM database); (iv) low security risk (in Papua and West Papua); and (iv) not participating
in P3PD to avoid overload for sub-district staff. Priority will be given to villages that are priority villages in district plans, that
have an active BUMDes or cooperative, and that have access to electricity. Consideration will also be given to have a
minimum number of villages classified as ‘developing’ (berkembang) against IDM. In addition, in Papua and West Papua,
villages involved in VDP will be considered as priority if they fit the other selection criteria. Similarly, in Maluku and North
Maluku, former SOLID villages will be considered in the selection.
Another 1,220 villages will be pre-identified in PY1 and start activities in PY3 (second batch of 610 villages) and PY4 (third and
last batch of 610 villages).The main criteria for selecting cluster villages are that: (i) they will be within reasonable distance of a
core village; and (ii) they will have potential for developing the same target product as in the core village.
The participation of both core and cluster villages will hinge on the willingness of their village heads to sign an agreement with
TEKAD, whereby they will commit to implement Village Law prescriptions with regard to participation, inclusion, transparency
and accountability, as well as to allocate an adequate share of the Village Fund to the development of economic activities[4].
51.
It is expected that village clusters will assemble around 10 villages (depending on potential, connectivity, villages’ willingness).
One cluster can therefore include several core villages.
Target groups and inclusion/targeting strategy
52.
53.
54.
Primary beneficiaries. Target groups will consist of smallholder farming households, micro-entrepreneurs as well as
households in coastal communities involved in fisheries and the production of marine products. Primary beneficiaries will mostly
be semi-subsistence households (low input-low output producers with some though limited engagement with the market), who
have a minimum range of assets and resources, including labour, required for the production of target products, and who will be
willing to enhance their production activities for food security and income generation. It is expected that TEKAD will directly
benefit approximately 412,300 households, or 1,855,350 people based on a household of 4.5.
The target groups are part of a very heterogeneous universe of population groups in the five provinces - in the case of the Papua
provinces alone, it is comprised of over 375 ethnic groups speaking over 250 languages. This wide socio-cultural diversity is
furthermore subject to the complex interplay between traditional social structures (including ethnic and clan affiliations), statutory
government structures, public sector interventions as well as market forces. Poverty levels among the programme target groups
are high, but defy easy standardization: poverty is to some extent correlated with food security and remoteness (road
connectivity) as well as origin of the household head (autochthonous, migrant from the same province, ‘transmigrant’ from
another province), but not with family size, asset ownership, or land holding.
Women’s time poverty is ubiquitous and most severe in the Papuan highlands. Women in all provinces are actively engaged in
agricultural production and, in the highland areas, may carry out 80 to 90% of all agricultural activities. Furthermore, in Papua
and West Papua, intra-household violence on the part of men is among the most pronounced in the world - a recent report[5]
shows that nearly two in five women aged 14-64 (38%) have experienced at least one form of physical and/or sexual violence by
a male intimate partner in their lifetime. Women will therefore constitute a specific target group, because of their
disempowerment, lack of access to services and markets as well as elevated gender-based violence, which altogether negatively
affect household revenues and well-being. The project will also benefit youth, by creating new economic opportunities in the
production and marketing of primary commodities and in agro-tourism, facilitating access to innovation and new technologies and
services (including through digital applications), supporting small business growth, and engaging them as agents of change.
55.
Secondary beneficiaries. TEKAD will also benefit service providers extending business development services (including
technical services) and financial services to village producers, as well as buyers of target commodities in the target provinces.
56.
GESI Strategy. TEKAD will develop a Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) Strategy to ensure that poor target groups,
women, young people and indigenous groups in the target villages participate in TEKAD activities and access programme
benefits. The strategy will define objectives, a core set of orientations and mechanisms building on the Village Law to : (i) profile
target sub-groups; (ii) ensure gender equitable and social inclusion of the target groups and especially of disadvantaged or
isolated groups in the village planning and budgeting process and in the development of village economic initiatives; (iii) develop
transparent monitoring mechanisms to measure achievements and identify challenges, such as community audits and grievance
mechanisms to assess gender equitable and social inclusion in village processes; (iv) prevent elite capture, for which the main
strategy will consist on empowering rural communities, including organizations strengthening and capacity building, emphasizing
the poorest and more vulnerable segments, for them to participate and make their rights and priorities prevail in villages'
decisions on the Village Fund resources allocation; (v) identify capacity building needs assessment of programme staff and key
partners and identify capacity building needs assessment of programme staff and key partners; (vi) ensuring that economic
organisations and multi-stakeholders’ platforms are inclusive of women, poor and indigenous youth, and that GESI issues are
addressed as part of their regular agenda; (vii) develop an implementation plan with outcomes and indicators to be updated
annually in conjunction with the AWPB. They will also provide detailed orientations for ensuring that TEKAD activities foster social
inclusiveness and accommodate the needs of women, young people and diverse socio-economic groups, building on the above
guidance.
57.
Expected outcomes, with targets and milestones will be laid out in the strategy and will be monitored as part of TEKAD M&E
system. Targets will include the following:
An overall gender participation rate of 50% of women amongst programme beneficiaries;
An overall gender participation rate of 40% qualified women in the NPMU, PPIUs and DPIUs – while it may be harder to
achieve in DPIUs, it should strongly be promoted;
An overall 30% of decision-making positions in economic organisations occupied by women/disadvantaged groups;
All of the service providers recruited to support the programme will be required to have experience in the principles and
practice of gender and social inclusion;
The terms of reference of all programme staff will include responsibility for gender and social inclusion objectives and support
will be given to the recruitment of women to ensure gender-balanced programme implementer teams.
10/39
58.
59.
A GESI consultant will be hired at project onset to prepare GESI guidelines, in close collaboration with the National and
Provincial GESI Experts. Given the socio-cultural diversity, while the GESI Strategy will build on core principles, it will be adapted
to the specific features of each of the five target provinces. In every district, guidelines will be reviewed by the TEKAD District
Coordinator and the team of Village Governance Facilitators and of Economic Initiatives Advisors to take into account the local
specificities, under the guidance of the Provincial GESI Expert and building on the outcomes of the Village Information System
and the village mapping. The revised guidelines will be reflected into the annual plans of activities of the TEKAD district team.
Plans will be approved by the TEKAD Provincial Team Leader and annually updated. TEKAD AWPB will include an annual GESI
Implementation Plan.
The NPMU Consultant Team Leader will bear direct responsibility for ensuring that the programme meets both economic
targeting and social inclusion objectives. The National GESI Specialist and the Provincial GESI Specialists, each within their
province, will have overall responsibility for guiding programme stakeholders in implementing the GESI Strategy, providing
technical assistance, ensuring monitoring and promoting knowledge management. All agreements, strategies and contracts will
specifically promote gender equity and social inclusiveness objectives. Facilitators will be held accountable for achieving the
results they have specified for themselves on targeting and GESI in their activity plans.
60.
Finally, in Papua and West Papua, a cornerstone of the GESI strategy will be a household-based approach adapted from PNG’s
Family Team methodology, which is designed to reach out to both wives and husbands to help them to jointly plan their
participation in TEKAD activities (Sub-component 1.1).
D. Components/outcomes and activities
61.
TEKAD interventions are clustered around three outcomes and three matching components, as presented in Figure 1:
Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment will be rooted in the Village Law and will aim at strengthening village
governance and developing village economic initiatives. This component will improve the abilities of village governments and
communities to promote inclusive and sustainable economic development, building on the local potential and using resources
from the Village Fund and from other sources. The expected outcome is that village communities implement profitable
economic initiatives, prioritized through participatory planning to ensure that strategic choices rest on broad participation of
social and economic groups. Most of the activities under this component will take place at village level and will be
complementary to others implemented at district and provincial level.
Component 2 – Partnerships for Village Economic Development will promote an enabling environment for inclusive and
sustainable local economic development, by facilitating access of village households and economic organizations to
production support services, markets and commercial financing necessary for their economic initiatives. This component will:
(i) strengthen the capacities of districts and sub-districts to provide support services to village governments and better
integrate village needs into district economic development planning; (ii) promote villagers’ access to qualified technical and
business development services; (ii) support linkages with financial services providers, so that villagers access financing to
complement public resources. This component will have a key role in ensuring that, by the end of the project, villages keep
accessing services, markets and financing to ensure profitable and sustainable economic initiatives.
Component 3 – Innovation, Learning and Policy Development will promote evidence-based learning, policy development and
institutional strengthening in support of village economic development by: (i) documenting innovative practices and
achievements from TEKAD implementation, and generating replicable models based on successful experiences; (ii) providing
evidence-based information to support the consolidation of the policy and regulatory framework for village economic
development; and (iii) strengthening capacities of the Ministry of Villages to promote village economic development, taking
advantage of the positive environment set by Village Law and the Village Fund. The expected outcome is that an enabling
policy and institutional environment facilitate village economic development.
11/39
a.     Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment
62.
63.
Component 1 will improve villagers’ ability to promote inclusive and sustainable local economic development, building on the
village potential and using Village Fund and other village revenues. The expected outcome is that village communities plan and
implement profitable economic initiatives taking advantage of village resources. Main indicators are: (i) 70% of households
reporting increase in production; (ii) average 30% increase in both marketed volume and value of sales of agricultural/marine
products; and (iii) at least 30% of Village Fund (Dana Desa/DD) and District Village Allocation (ADD) budgeted for economic
development.
Strategic orientations for Component 1 include the following: (i) activities will be rooted in the Village Law and annual planning will
be aligned with the regular annual planning cycle; (ii) strategic choices and planning will rest on broad-based participation and
agreement of different village social and economic groups; (iii) a village medium-term economic strategy, focusing on a limited
number of commodities/trades, will be prepared to orient annual planning, building on village potential and features (agro-
ecological zone, remoteness, existence of economic organisations, existence of traditional settlement (adat)) and on information
on available market opportunities; (iv) clusters of villages pooling production and resources will be promoted to facilitate the
access to larger and better remunerated markets, to ensure the profitability of collective investments for storage and processing,
to facilitate village-to-village learning and to increase the efficiency of programme delivery. Most importantly, the component will
be implemented with maximum flexibility to accommodate different potentials, needs (food security and/or market-driven
production), distance to markets, initial levels of capacity and learning paces of participating villages.
64.
Component 1 comprises two sub-components: (i) Village Governance; (ii) Village Economic Initiatives. Activities will focus on the
village level, with villages phased in over three years, as explained in Section II A b. They will be complemented by activities
implemented under Component 2 (especially mapping studies, cluster development, facilitation of market linkages, and
facilitation of access to financing) at district and provincial level. Guidelines and tools will be embodied in the Orientation and
Capacity Building Packages that will be developed under Component 3.
Sub-component 1.1 – Village Governance
65.
66.
This sub-component aims at building the capacities of village communities to envision, plan and implement village resources in
support of economic initiatives bringing sustainable revenues, in accordance with the Village Law and through inclusive
community participation. Activities will include the following.
Awareness campaign. In every district a set of potential core and cluster villages will be identified[6] and will host an awareness
campaign to provide information to village groups about: the Village Law and Village Fund; programme objectives, activities and
expected benefits; GESI objectives; commodities/trades with highest potential of success and returns (as described in
Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages); the village cluster approach; and respective roles and obligations of villages
participating in the programme, district/sub-district administrations and TEKAD.
67.
Commitment. Further to the awareness campaign, villages willing to participate in TEKAD activities will be requested to sign an
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
agreement, which will outline respective roles and obligations of the signatories - Village, District and Sub-District Heads and
TEKAD - in particular with regard to inclusive community participation, the establishment of a Village Information System,
monitoring and reporting obligations and engaging with the village cluster. It will also spell out how the community will facilitate
access to land, support regular loan recovery and facilitate the implementation of the household-based approach where
applicable (see below). Free, Prior and Informed Consent will be required from local indigenous communities. Finally, the
agreement will reflect the Village Head commitment to allocate an adequate share of the Village Fund resources to support
economic initiatives identified by the village community through the planning process described below. Every village will have a
reflection period to allow debate and ratification of the agreement, after which activities will commence.
12/39
Village mapping and Village Information System. Rapid, participatory, gender-sensitive livelihoods and nutrition analysis will
be carried out, along with a mapping of natural resources and assessment of land use. Social mapping focusing on the village
traditional social structures (including adat), lines of power and community groups (farmers’, women, youth, religious or others)
will also be conducted, along with a review of best ways to reach out to women and youth. The mapping methodology will draw
on the ‘indigenous food systems appraisal’ developed by Aman[7], the largest organization of Indigenous People in Indonesia
(see more details in PIM). A Village Information System (VIS) will be set up to orient village planning and monitor progress,
building on KOMPAK successful pilot in Papua and adapted to cover village economic data.
Capacity building and community mobilization. Building on the mapping, preliminary capacity building will be provided to the
village head, government and council, sub-village heads and community group leaders so they can engage in village planning
and monitoring and facilitate broad community mobilisation and participation. Modules will cover the Village Law, budgeting,
reporting, accountability, good and transparent governance and inclusiveness, as well as leadership and facilitation skills.
Capacity building and advisory services will be delivered by a district technical team, which will be led by TEKAD District
Coordinator, and will be composed of TEKAD Village Information System/M&E Coordinator and TEKAD Village Governance
Facilitators; and of existing sub-district and district staff, namely: (i) Village Community Empowerment Facilitators[8] and
Participatory Development Facilitators[9] under the district Community Empowerment department; and (ii) sub-district Village
Community Empowerment Facilitators[10]. Village Governance Facilitators will gradually decrease the intensity of their support to
villages, as existing sub-district and district staff build their capacities and gradually take over support.
The district technical team will receive initial training (under Component 2), building on the Orientation and Capacity-Building
Packages. Further to the training, TEKAD will appoint two village cadres selected among community participants, one woman
and one man, who will be responsible for implementing the Village Information System, disseminating information and for
mobilizing community social and economic groups to participate in the planning, implementation and monitoring of village
economic development. Village cadres and community leaders will build on existing social and economic village structures and
particularly seek to mobilise young people to promote a network of village activists that will further support broad-based village
participation. It is expected that, building on good achievements, a larger number of village cadres could be hired using Village
Fund resources.
Economic development strategy. The district technical team will support village communities in developing a simple medium-
term economic development strategy through broad community participation. The strategy will outline how the community intends
to promote the production and marketing of a limited number of commodities/trades over the medium-term and what would be
expected outcomes. Target products will be selected based on village potential and on the Orientation and Capacity-Building
Packages, which will clarify available market opportunities for agriculture, marine, non-timber forest products and/or agro-tourism,
technical and economic options, required investments at household and village level, and financial returns that could be expected.
The village strategy will define a gradual build-up in developing production, processing/adding value and marketing activities
within the village (at household level and on a collective basis through BUMDes or other types of economic organisations), as
well as in partnership with villages in the cluster. The respective importance attributed to producing for food security or for
income-raising through marketing will also vary according to villagers’ priorities and key factors such as remoteness and food
availability. Measures to ensure the participation in activities and benefits of women, youth and other special groups identified
through the village mapping will also be spelled out.
73.
Annual planning and monitoring. Every year, as part of the regular village annual planning process, TEKAD will support the
preparation of a detailed annual economic development plan and budget, which will describe: activities to be implemented, in line
with the village economic development strategy; required investments (collective pre- and post-harvest equipment[11] and
support services); costs and sources of financing, including Village Fund and other village resources. TEKAD will also support the
village government and village groups in monitoring plan implementation, building on the Village Information System. Every year
a participatory and inclusive review of the plan implementation will be conducted to assess performance and identify success,
innovations and constraints, based on which the strategy will be reviewed as required and a new annual plan and budget will be
developed.
74.
Implementation of Village Fund resources. TEKAD will provide capacity building to village governments to support budget
implementation and ensure compliance with the Village Law and regulations in carrying out procurement and reporting.
75.
Household-based approach. The household-based approach will be conducted on a trial basis in Papua and West Papua. It
has successfully been tried in Papua New Guinea (and implemented by IFAD in other countries) to propose a more
equitable distribution of agricultural and household work done by women, men and youth. Specifically, the household-based
approach will aim at: increasing the capacities of household members to jointly taking advantage of programme benefits to
improve family welfare, through family planning and budgeting; empowering women so that they access programme benefits
alongside men, within the family unit; raising awareness on good nutrition practices; and engaging the community to create a
supportive environment for household level activities and for broad inclusion. An international consultant with experience in IFAD-
supported household-based approach will assist TEKAD in developing a suitable methodology and manual for Papua and West
Papua and in training an Indonesian NGO with relevant experience in those two provinces, which will then be tasked with
providing training of trainers and coaching in target villages.
Sub-component 1.2 – Village Economic Initiatives
76.
77.
78.
The objective of the sub-component is to enable village households in developing economic initiatives for the production,
processing and marketing of target commodities/trades, in line with the annual plan developed under Sub-component 1.1.
Economic initiatives will be supported through the following activities.
13/39
Capacity building and advisory services. Village households will receive capacity building and advisory services to help them
develop the target products selected in their village economic strategy and plan, so that they can meet market demand in terms
of volume and quality, and fetch remunerative prices. Capacity building and advisory services will be based on Orientation and
Capacity-Building Packages, which will be organized by product. The Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages will be
prepared under Component 3 and will cover good production practices and technologies, sustainable land management
practices, pre- and post-harvest management, primary processing/value adding and business management, in relation to
selected target products.
Capacity building and advisory services will be delivered by a district technical team, which will be led by TEKAD District
Economic Initiative Manager, and will be composed of TEKAD-financed Economic Initiatives Advisors; and of existing sub-district
and district staff, namely: (i) Village Economic Development Facilitators[12] and Appropriate Technology Facilitators[13] under the
district Community Empowerment department; and (ii) sub-district Field Agriculture Extensionists[14] under the district
Agriculture department. Economic Initiatives Advisors will gradually decrease the intensity of their support to villages, as existing
sub-district and district staff build their capacities and gradually take over support. They will receive initial training (under
Component 2) building on the Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages developed under Component 3.
79.
Additionally, every target district will have access to an annual programme budget for hiring specialised service providers to
complement available skills within the district technical team and offer on-demand support services to producers (see Sub-
component 2.2 – Economic services). Finally, district teams will promote the inclusion of embedded technical services in the
contract farming arrangements that will be supported under Component 2.
80.
Peer to peer learning. Different peer to peer learning activities will be conducted to trigger producers’ engagement and facilitate
the dissemination of information, the adoption of new technologies and the experimentation of new practices. This will include:
village-owned training centres: this will build on a prior district mapping that will assess the capacities of the existing network of
farmer/fisherman owned training centres (POSYANTEK)[15] in the target areas and to identify needs and interest for the
establishment of new POSYANTEK centres. The programme will finance: related cost of construction; a small operation
allowance to cover transport expenses around villages and a small recognition of their donation of time; training of
farmer/fishermen trainers; and capacity building for the planning and delivery of training and exchange activities for both
existing and new POSYANTEK centres;
demonstration plots: they will be established in all of the target villages in their first year of participation. Farmers willing to
participate will sign a partnership agreement defining their obligations and will receive a start-up kit in exchange for the
organisation of farmers’ visits;
districtstudy tours will enable producers to learn about successes and innovations developed within the district.
81.
82.
83.
84.
BUMDes and village businesses. Business development functions such as input supply, quality control/certification, collection
and aggregation, processing and marketing will require collective action to pool higher volumes of better quality produce, access
larger and better remunerated markets and earn better prices. TEKAD will support existing village-based business organisations
(primarily BUMDEs and cooperatives, but possibly also other groups such as women or youth groups, or individual businesses
such as a lead farmer aggregating and marketing produce, or indigenous types of enterprises) in developing simple business
plans, and in setting up, managing and financing business development, in line with the economic strategy/annual planning, and
based on annual capacity assessment. Where there are no pre-existing organisations, TEKAD will promote individual (for
example lead farmers) or group-owned businesses (for example women group), including BUMDEs where conditions are met.
Access to financing. Capital investment for collective production, processing and marketing, as well as power generation, water
conservation or other climate change mitigation equipment or infrastructure, will be identified in the annual plan and financed by
the Village Fund and other village resources. Short-term investment such as seasonal inputs will be financed by producers’ own
resources or by loans, which will be facilitated under Component 2.
Geo-tagging of infrastructure. In complement to the Village Information System and to further support planning, monitoring and
programme transparency, a geo-tagging system will be developed to map and document village collective infrastructure financed
through village resources and their status of achievement. Geo-tagging will assign specific, infrastructure-related data (such as
infrastructure sub-project latitude, longitude, place name, cost, progress) to a web-based mapping application such as Google
Maps, using a phone or tablet built-in Global Positioning System (GPS). The system will build on the successful experience of the
World Bank-financed Philippine Rural Development Project, which developed geo-tagging as a tool for monitoring project
infrastructure development.
Implementation arrangements for Component 1. The implementation of Component 1 will be led by a TEKAD-financed District
Implementation Team[16] comprised of:   (i) a District Coordinator, a District Marketing Specialist and an MIS/M&E coordinator;
(ii) Village Governance Facilitators, who will support the implementation of activities under Sub-component 1.1 and will work in
close collaboration with sub-district Village Community Empowerment Facilitators[17]; and (iii) Economic Initiatives Advisors, who
will support the implementation of activities under Sub-component 1.2 and will work in close collaboration with existing district
and sub-district staff as described above, including Field Agriculture Extensionists under the district Agriculture department.
These will be redeployed to ensure that their skills match the target products selected by village clusters. The facilitators will be
recruited locally and will work as a team. Each facilitation team (composed of one Village Governance Facilitator and one
Economic Initiatives Advisor) will initially cover 4 villages with a decreasing rate of intensity[18], so that by the end of TEKAD
support, farmers’ access to services is ensured by local players using local resources. Capacity building will be provided to local
service providers under Component 2.
85.
86.
The household-based approach will be implemented by an NGO, along a methodology that will be developed by international
technical consultant with experience in household-based methodologies gained in IFAD projects. The Village Information System
will be implemented along an approach that will be developed in partnership with KOMPAK.
14/39
The geo-tagging system will be designed with support from a service provider, who will also be responsible for producing a
manual and organising the training of district teams. The system will be operated and maintained by the district-level staff, with
support from the Provincial MIS/GIS Specialist. A study tour for a small team of MoV/TEKAD staff to visit the Philippines Rural
Development Project will possibly be organised prior to designing the system.
b.         Component 2 – Partnerships for Village Economic Development
87.
88.
Component 2 will promote an enabling environment for inclusive and sustainable village economic development, by facilitating
village connection to services, markets and commercial financing. The expected outcome is that village households will have
sustainable access to markets and to public and private services in support of village economic initiatives. Main indicators are: (i)
50% of participating districts integrate investment financing for target districts in district plan; (ii) 75 % of households reporting
adoption of improved inputs, technologies or practices; (iii) 80% of households are satisfied with the: a) relevance, b) quality, and
c) accessibility of agricultural extension and advisory services provided by the public and private sector; and (iv) 60% of
households reporting access to adequate BDS/financial services.
Main strategic orientations for Component 2 include the following: (i) building the capacities of districts and sub-districts relevant
departments so they can provide support services to village governments and better integrate village needs into district economic
development planning; (ii) complementing public support services by building villagers’ access to qualified private service
providers extending technical and business development services (BDS), whose services can be paid with Village Fund and
other village resources; (iii) phasing out programme facilitators’ support and building gradual takeover by public and private
service providers; (iv) building the awareness of and facilitating linkages with market players so they source from village-based
producers and provide embedded services; (v) supporting linkages with selected banks so that villagers have access to financial
products meeting their needs and complementing public resources. Component 2 achievements will therefore have a key role in
ensuring that, by the end of the programme, villages keep accessing services to ensure profitable and sustainable economic
initiatives.
89.
Component 2 will be implemented at district and provincial level, and will support and complement village-based activities
implemented under Component 1. It is comprised of three sub-components: (i) District Support for Village Economic
Development; (ii) Economic Services; and (iii) Financial Services. Guidelines and tools will be embodied in the Orientation and
Capacity Building Packages that will be developed under Component 3.
Sub-component 2.1 – District Support for Village Economic Development
90.
91.
92.
The aim of this sub-component is to ensure that district and sub-district administration can extend the right mix of technical
services and financial assistance to support village economic development. To this end, the component aims at gradually build
capacities at district and sub-district level to provide technical assistance and facilitation support for the village economic
development planning and the implementation of village economic activities. It will also promote district-level productive
investment (such as cold storage or large processing facilities), which will complement investments financed through village
resources by addressing constraints that exceed village financing capacity or that are common to several villages. Activities will
include the following.
Information. In the first project year[19], information and awareness will be conducted with the District Head and relevant district
departments (Dinas) - Community Empowerment, Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, Planning, Trade and Industry, Cooperatives
and Small and Medium Enterprises – with a view to provide information about: programme objectives, activities and expected
benefits; GESI objectives; commodities/trades with highest potential of success and returns; the village cluster approach; and
respective roles and obligations of the District Head, district/sub-district departments, villages and TEKAD. This would include a
start-up workshop at provincial level with all of the District Heads of the target districts and relevant provincial departments
(Dinas), a district workshop and meetings with the different district and sub-district departments as required.
Commitment. District Heads will then be invited to sign an agreement, which will outline respective roles and obligations of the
signatories - District Head and TEKAD - in particular with regard to: promoting the adoption of increased Village Fund allocations
for inclusive economic development; promoting village clusters with common economic development strategies; district
participation in and support to TEKAD activities; gradual take-over of facilitation and technical support services by the district
departments, and other plans to ensure sustainability; and participation in monitoring and evaluation, including to link district
systems with the Village Information System and to hold regular meetings with the TEKAD District Team. It will also spell out the
District Head commitment to address village cluster needs in the district planning of investments, to organise a Village Desk
offering easy access of Village Governments and villagers to information and services related to economic development and to
set up a District Coordination Platform for Village Economic Development that would also involve Village Heads (see below).
Finally, this should also include the agreement to redeploy the Field Agriculture Extensionists under the district Agriculture
department, to ensure that their skills match target commodities/trades as described under Component 1. A District Head
regulation (Peraturan Daerah – PERDA) will confirm the terms of the agreement as relevant.
93.
Capacity building. District/Sub-District Heads and staff of the relevant departments will receive capacity building to strengthen
their abilities to provide technical assistance to district/sub-district facilitators and village governments. This will be achieved
through: (i) training of trainers (ToT), which will be carried out under a partnership agreement with MoV Community Training
Center Department (Pusat Pelatihan Masyarakat – Puslatmas). ToT will rest on training modules that will be developed building
on the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages to be designed under Component 3, and will be implemented at Puslatmas
training centres in Ambon (for Maluku and North Maluku provinces), Jayapura (for Papua and West Papua provinces) and
Denpasar (for East Nusa Tenggara province); (ii) district- and province-based training, targeting the departments mentioned
above and their sub-district divisions as well as TEKAD District Team; (iii) refreshment ToT/training by PY3, building on TEKAD
implementation progress and TEKAD mid-term review; (iv) broad dissemination of TEKAD capacity building packages within
relevant district/sub-district departments; (v) province-based community of practices facilitated by TEKAD Online Platform
(Component 3) and access to the Platform.
15/39
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
Under the joint leadership of the TEKAD District Coordinator and of the District Head, TEKAD Annual Work Plan and Budgeting
will describe how facilitation, technical assistance and coaching activities will be implemented by TEKAD team and district/sub-
district staff, in particular Community Empowerment facilitators and Field Agriculture Extensionists. While in the first years of
programme implementation, TEKAD District Team will take full responsibility for the implementation of activities with participation
of district staff, TEKAD facilitators will be tasked with building the capacities of existing, permanent facilitators, so that
responsibility will gradually shift to the latter and by the end of the programme, they will be fully in charge for extending support to
villages. Where possible (which will be contingent on TEKAD being able to demonstrate the added value brought by TEKAD
facilitators), TEKAD will promote with the District Head/MoV the integration of at least one of TEKAD facilitators[20] into the
regular district Community Empowerment Facilitation Team.
Additionally, an annual programme budget for hiring specialised service providers to complement available skills within the
district technical team and offer on-demand support services to village clusters will be available under similar modalities as those
described for budgeting service providers’ services at village level. The annual budget for service providers will gradually phase
out as it is expected that district resources will take over.
Village Desk. Village Desks will be established in every target district, starting from PY4. They will operate as a one-stop-shop
for village governments seeking support on village economic development at the district administration, providing easy access to
economic information (such as market opportunities and specifications, technologies, roster of service providers, linkages with
banks) and information about technical and financial assistance available within the district administration. They will also provide
quick referral to the relevant district departments. The Village Desk will be operated by a focal point within the Community
Empowerment Department and will not involve any additional costs for the district administration.
Planning integration. While village resources will finance economic equipment and infrastructure that are economically justified
at village level (such as storage or dryers), districts should make financing available for bigger investments that exceed village
financing capacity or that are economically justified at a higher scale than the village (such as cold storage or large processing
facilities) or for capital investment into inter-village BUMDes. To this effect, TEKAD will support district administrations in
integrating village needs into district planning and budgeting by: (i) ensuring that village planning is aligned with the national
planning cycle;     (ii) making available updated village data through the Village Information System; (iii) promoting clusters of
villages involved in the production and marketing of the same commodity (see Sub-component 2.2); and (iv) setting up District
Coordination Platforms.
District Coordination Platforms. TEKAD will establish District Coordination Platforms to support information exchange and
coordination of activities related to the promotion of village economic development, and will discuss programme progress, using
village-based M&E data. The Coordination Platform will be chaired by the District Head and its secretariat will be ensured by the
District Planning Department (Bappeda) with TEKAD support. It will be composed of relevant district departments (Community
Empowerment, Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, Planning, Trade and Industry, Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises)
and Village Heads. Market players, development projects, NGOs or other service providers will be called to participate in working
sessions as required. District Coordination Platforms will meet every quarter.
Sub-component 2.2 – Economic Services
99.
The objective of the subcomponent is to facilitate the access of village-based producers to markets and services through
remunerative market linkages and sustainable service delivery systems. Activities will include the following.
100.
Mapping studies. The development of linkages with market players or service providers will rest on prior mapping studies, which
will be carried out in every province in PY1, with a focus on the target districts. They will include:
Market opportunities and value chain analysis: this study will assess productive resources and market opportunities for
primary sector commodities (agriculture, livestock, fisheries, aquaculture, non-timber forest products) with the highest potential
for growth and for generating income for male and female village-based producers with different socio-economic profiles in the
target districts. Opportunities in agritourism and related economic activities will also be covered given their increasingly
important effects in triggering supply chains and generating income and employment. Detailed value chain analysis will be
carried out for a number of priority products, to be selected based on pre-agreed selection criteria. It will identify a limited
number of inclusive value chains with the highest prospects of return for village-based producers and, for each of them,
recommend priority measures to access increasingly remunerative and demanding markets, in line with build-up of villages’
capacities;
Access to services mapping: this study will assess the availability and capacities of: (i) service providers that could extend
technical and business development services to village producers and their organisations in the target districts (including
PLUTs, P4S, NGOs, consultants, chamber of commerce); and (ii) market players, input dealers or other value chain agents
extending or interested in extending services to small producers as embedded services[21]. The study will make
recommendations for strengthening service providers’ capacities and facilitating villagers’ access to services, and will develop
a provincial roster of business development service providers;
BUMDes assessment: building on the Market Opportunities and Value Chain Analysis above, an assessment of existing
BUMDes will be carried out in the target districts, covering their activities, capacities and related BUMDes-ranking, main
constraints and opportunities for development, including for upgrading to joint BUMDes (BUMDes Bersamah);
Climate risk and vulnerability assessment: this study will: (i) identify areas with climate change risks and other natural hazards
(such as drought, flood, hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunamis…) that must be addressed; (ii) establish baseline data and climate
change trends; and (iii) identify a suite of appropriate short and medium term risk management strategies and best practices in
relation to the target commodities/activities.
101.
Studies will build on available material and reflect studies and experience of relevant projects financed by development partners,
such as PRISMA, GEGPP and Lestari. Information will be captured in a database, shared with programme stakeholders,
reflected in the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages (Sub-component 3.2) and posted on the Eastern Indonesia Gateway
(Sub-component 3.1).
16/39
102.
Provincial workshops gathering TEKAD public and private stakeholders will be organised to present studies outcome, discuss
and validate results and make recommendations to orient TEKAD activities in the province and to further support the preparation
of Orientation and Capacity Building Packages.
103.
Access to markets. Building on the mapping studies and on the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, TEKAD will
facilitate formal and informal marketing arrangements with different types of buyers (such as middlemen, larger collectors,
traders, processors, exporters or distributors) and for different types of markets (local markets, main commodities export markets,
niche markets), in adaptation with the features and capacities of target villages (well-connected or remote) and groups. This will
be achieved through the following activities:
District Strategies for Access to Markets: building on the studies and on the product-based Orientation and Capacity Building
Packages, District Teams will develop a District Marketing Strategy with support from TEKAD Provincial Implementation Unit.
The strategy will be developed in PY2 and will be upgraded annually, based on achievements at district level. It will aim at
fostering the development of market linkages between village-based producers and different types of markets (local, export,
niche) and different types of off-takers (middlemen, local collectors and traders, processors, exporters…). In particular, it will
clarify how to: (i) build a gradual approach to facilitate producers’ access to increasingly remunerative markets, as villagers’
skills develop and produce increased volumes of increasingly good quality produce; (ii) ensure that villagers can retain an
increasingly higher share of the final added value, through primary processing, packaging, branding, certification etc.; (iii)
promote contract farming and other marketing arrangements with lead farmers, BUMDes/cooperatives, SMEs and tech start-
ups (see below); (iv) encourage villagers to join into village and inter-village collective forms of organization such as BUMDes,
other types of economic organisations and village clusters. The strategy will complement Orientation and Capacity Building
Packages and will further guide villages and district implementation teams;
Facilitation services: building on the market studies, TEKAD will support the development of market linkages between
producers and buyers, whereby producers will have secure and remunerative market outlets justifying that they invest in
increased production of better quality products, whereas buyers will obtain reliable and consistent supply in line with market
demand. Services will be provided by TEKAD Marketing Specialists at district and Economic Development Specialists at
provincial level, in collaboration with TEKAD Economic Initiatives Advisors, BUMDes where relevant, Village Economic
Development Facilitators under the district Community Empowerment Department (PED) as well as the district and province
Trade and Industry and other relevant departments. TEKAD will also facilitate the negotiation of fair and transparent contracts
between buyers and village-based economic organisations, spelling out a clear distribution of responsibilities and a balanced
share of risks and benefits. In this respect, based on local current practice and international experience, an international
consulting firm/consultant will be contracted by the NPMU to develop guidelines for good practices on contract farming and to
train district teams and BUMDes where appropriate;
Local market agents: capacity building will be provided to middlemen and other local market agents who play a vital role in
connecting isolated areas to markets, so that they are aware of and can apply quality standards, and increase both their and
producers’ income;
Online and tech start up marketing: TEKAD-supported online platform under Component 3, will offer the possibility to market
products online, by branding them as products from Eastern Indonesia in connection with existing online marketplaces,
including those with which MoV already has a partnership[22]. A study exploring opportunities will be carried out in PY3 and
reflected into updated Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, based on which capacity building will be made available
as appropriate. A similar approach will be used to promote partnerships between villagers and agritech, marinetech, traveltech
startups, building on initial efforts launched by MoV. The study will be complemented by a budget made available at provincial
level for sponsoring visits of interested tech startups and initiating contacts.
Market promotion: once the programme villages are able to ensure a steady supply of quality products through organized
farming, market diversification will be promoted. TEKAD includes a budget, available at district level, to sponsor villagers’
participation in trade fairs and for market exploration activities.
104.
Access to services. Building on the access to services mapping, TEKAD will conduct the following activities:
District Strategies for Access to Services: the TEKAD District Coordinator, in collaboration with the technical team and the
BUMDes where existing, will develop a demand-driven Strategy for Access to Business Development Services for the target
villages. It will combine available public and private sources of service delivery, will build on the roster of service providers and
will be updated annually. The annual budget for service providers will gradually phase out as it is expected that Village Fund
and other village resources will take over;
Service provider rosters: service provider rosters will be established at district level based on the service mapping (see
above), and will be regularly updated. Interested service providers will submit a standard application including basic
information about areas of expertise, the type and cost of services and their experience (references). A simple system for
tracking performance at district level will also be developed;
Capacity building for service providers: capacity building will be provided to selected service providers in specific areas of
interest linked to the target commodities supported by the programme (such as postharvest storage and agro-processing, food
safety and nutrition and certification) and to delivery modalities adapted to the target groups and in particular women;
Embedded services: TEKAD will also promote the provision of embedded services by market players to village producers,
mostly on how to improve product quality to meet market requirements[23]. The international consulting firm/consultant
contracted for developing guidelines for good practices on contract farming will also cover the promotion of embedded services
and district teams will be trained accordingly.
105.
Cluster development. TEKAD will support the development of groups of villages engaged in the production and marketing of the
same commodity, or clusters, with a view to improve producers’ market access, bargaining power and remuneration through
stronger organisation, increased quantity, quality and delivery reliability, and economies of scale. Village clusters will be
promoted building on awareness campaigns conducted from PY2 in core and cluster villages, and with due consideration to
anthropological and socio-cultural context, especially in Papua and West Papua. While clusters will initially consist of group of
villagers engaging in the production and marketing of the same commodity, as volume increases and village capacities in
meeting market requirements develop, TEKAD will provide support to gradually organise the clusters and setting up and building
the capacities of cluster-based organisations such as BUMDes Bersamah[24]. A detailed approach for cluster development will
be developed in PY3, building on experience in Indonesia and elsewhere.
17/39
Sub-component 2.3 – Financial Services
106.
The objective of the sub-component is to facilitate the access of village-based producers to financial services, for the financing of
private assets and working capital, and to foster savings. Activities will include the following.
107.
Survey on demand and supply of financial services. A survey will be organised in PY2 in every province to: (i) assess
villagers’ (and different sub-target groups in the village as evidenced by the village mapping) demand of financial services related
to productive and non-productive needs, with a focus on productive financing for micro/small business start-up and expansion
(working capital and fixed assets), savings and insurance; (ii) identify formal and informal channels through which villagers
currently access financing, including remittances, value chain finance and informal loans; and (iii) identify financial and non-
financial services and products (especially in relation to productive activities) offered by financial service providers in the
programme area, and in particular by BRI and BPDs, through physical or digital solutions. Survey outcomes will be used to
support the design of the financial and digital education programme as well as for socialization and product development with
partnering financial institutions.
108.
Financial and digital education. TEKAD-supported financial and digital education programme will build on available material
already developed by OJK (which will be assessed and adapted to suit the needs of TEKAD target groups as revealed by the
survey and as required to support the production and marketing of TEKAD-supported priority products) and on OJK’s know-how in
relation to training material adaptation and training logistics (organization of training of trainers, supervision of trainings, trainers’
certification and mobilization). Financial education modules will be made available in paper copies and through e-learning, and
broadly include: knowledge on savings products, knowledge on loan products and duties/responsibilities as a borrower, use of
digital banking, knowledge of other financial products and services such as money transfer or remittances, basic financial
management for agri-based activities, basic book-keeping, budget planning for agri-based activities, and overall household
budget planning. Financial education will be delivered through village facilitators, BUMDes/cooperatives staff and extension
officers, who will be trained, possibly by OJK-certified master trainers. Initial training will be followed by regular coaching, in
particular through BUMDes and cooperatives, as well as through partnering financial institutions and their agents in the target
districts (see below). In Papua and West Papua, financial education will be implemented in coordination with the household-
based approach.
109.
Linking villagers to financial institutions. MoV has already a MoU with BRI and many districts have partnerships with regional
development banks (Bank Pembangunan Daerah – BPDs). Activities will therefore be developed in partnership with BRI (along a
consolidated MoU) and BPDs (along MoUs to be established at provincial level). They will include the following:
Increased outreach. TEKAD will support BRI’s and BPDs’ expanded outreach by supporting existing agents’ networks and
providing them with capacity building to suit the needs of TEKAD target populations. It will also facilitate network expansion to
improve access to financial services in the target areas. Ways to support BUMDes in becoming bank agents under the current
legislation will be explored. Socialisation with BRI/BPDs will be organised to familiarise branches in the target areas with the
economic activities supported by TEKAD and related financial needs;
Product development. TEKAD will provide on-demand technical assistance to develop new or adapting existing financial
products that meet village producer’s needs in the target value chains. This could include: (i) revised loan repayment
schedules meeting agriculture production cycle; (ii) savings to loan products; (iii) warehouse receipt financing; (iv)
receivables/non-invoice financing, and (v) tripartite agreement financing;
Linking village-based economic organisations to financial institutions. Building on the mapping and capacity assessment of
village-based business organisations (above), TEKAD will support the linking of eligible (i.e. meeting minimal performance
criteria and legally recognised) existing organisations (mainly cooperatives) to the partner financial institutions, and will provide
them with capacity building as required. Should current legal provisions evolve, BUMDes might also benefit from this activity.
110.
Value chain financing. Building on value chain analysis and on market arrangements developed under Sub-component 2.2,
TEKAD will promote alternative financing sources to loan banking, such as advanced financing through contract farming or input
supplier credit. Such models will be developed in partnership with BUMDes or cooperatives, which will be supported to assess
opportunities, negotiate arrangements and ensuring compliance by villagers.
111.
Implementation arrangements for Component 2. The implementation of Sub-Component 2.1 will be led by the TEKAD-
financed District Implementation Team[25] comprised of: (i) a District Coordinator, a District Marketing Specialist and an
MIS/M&E coordinator; (ii) Village Governance Facilitators, who will support the implementation of activities under Sub-component
1.1[26] and will work in close collaboration with sub-district Village Community Empowerment Facilitator[27] under sub-district
Community Empowerment department; and (iii) Economic Initiatives Advisors, who will support the implementation of activities
under Sub-component 1.2[28] and will work in close collaboration with existing district and sub-district staff as described above,
including Field Agriculture Extensionists under the district Agriculture department. These will be redeployed to ensure that their
skills match the target products selected by village clusters. To this effect, an MoU will be signed between MoV and MoA.
TEKAD-financed services will gradually decrease so that by the end of programme support, farmers’ access to services will be
ensured by local players using local resources.
112.
Sub-component 2.2 mapping studies will take place in PY 1. The Market opportunities and value chain analysis will be conducted
under the same contract financed by the IFAD grant for the preparation of the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages (see
Component 3). It will be updated by the end of PY3, by Provincial Economic Development Experts and District Marketing
Specialists, with support from technical assistance. Access to services mapping and BUMDes assessment will each be carried
out by a team of five province consultants (or provincial universities), under the leadership of an international consultant. The
Climate risk and vulnerability assessment will be carried out by an international service provider, in collaboration with provincial
universities.
18/39
113.
The implementation of activities under Access to markets and Access to Services will be led by TEKAD Marketing Specialists at
district level and Economic Development Expert at provincial level, with technical assistance from the national TEKAD Economic
Development Specialist. Together, they will also design and provide capacity building programmes to local market agents,
building on the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages developed under Component 3.
114.
Sub-component 2.3 will be implemented by a Financial Inclusion Team composed of national-level Senior Financial Services
Specialist and a Financial Services Specialist in every Provincial Programme Implementation Unit. The survey on demand and
supply of financial services will take place in PY 2 and will be outsourced to a service provider. Existing financial education
modules will be adapted by a specialised consultant, possibly in partnership with OJK. Existing financial education modules will
be adapted by with support from a specialised consultant, possibly in partnership with OJK. Furthermore, international technical
assistance will be hired at project inception for three months, to assist the Financial Services Team in: (i) identifying new products
and services that could be carried out with BRI and the BPDs, building on lessons from other countries; (ii) assisting in the
preparation and negotiation of MoUs with BRI and the BPDs; and (iii) assisting in preparing training modules.
c.         Component 3 – Innovation, Learning and Policy Development
115.
Component 3 aims at fostering innovation and at promoting policy development and institution building in support of village
economic development in Eastern Indonesia. This will be achieved by: (i) capturing innovative practices and documenting
achievements and successful models from TEKAD implementation; (ii) mobilizing village audiences and opening online access to
knowledge and resources; (iii) enhancing the policy and regulatory environment in support of village economic development and
strengthening MoV capacities.
116.
The expected outcome is that an enabling policy, institutional and media environment facilitates village economic development
that builds on local opportunities and leverages the Village Fund resources. Main indicators are: (i) districts have plans for
continued implementation of TEKAD approach; (ii) innovative, replicable models for supporting village economic development
leveraging Village Fund and village resources; (iii) policy/regulatory instruments proposed to policy makers for approval,
ratification or amendment.
117.
Component 3 has two sub-components: (i) Innovation, Learning and Inspiration; and (ii) Policy Development and Institution
Building. While it will mainly be implemented at the national level, it will complement and support activities carried out at village
and district level, respectively under Component 1 and Component 2.
Sub-component 3.1 – Innovation, Learning and Inspiration
118.
This sub-component will be implemented at the national level and will aim at: (i) setting up an open Management Information
System (MIS); (ii) promoting digital solutions and the use of social networks for enhanced transparency and accountability and for
facilitating wide access to information and knowledge; (iii) documenting innovation, good practices and successful models; (iv)
inspiring and motivating village stakeholders, and in particular youth, by showcasing innovations and successful achievements;
and (v) improving the internet connectivity of target villages. Activities will be developed as follows.
119.
MIS. A web-based Management Information System (MIS), which will be compatible with MoV’s systems and will start from the
Village Information System developed under Component 1, will track and regularly update gender-disaggregated financial and
technical data on programme outputs and outcomes, lessons learnt and good practices. The MIS will display weekly-updated
dashboards, showing progress on key outputs and objectives, profiling DPIU and PPIU performance and showing progress
towards meeting key programme indicators. The use of mobile applications like WhatsApp, Facebook and Instagram will facilitate
the exchange of information throughout wide programme target areas and will foster team building.
120.
Eastern Indonesia Gateway. An online platform will be developed to engage with large target audiences, including TEKAD
stakeholders in the five provinces and interested village and other players nation-wide. It will connect village players to
knowledge and innovation, as well as services and markets. The platform will be in the form of both a website and applications,
and will give access to TEKAD-generated material and information, but will also direct users to existing websites that would be of
interest for the planning and promotion of village economic development in Eastern Indonesia. A mapping of relevant
websites[29] will be carried out as part of the platform design in PY2, with a major objective to avoid duplications and develop
original content only where it can bring added value to the existing. A study will be conducted in PY5 to assess the effectiveness
of the Eastern Indonesia Gateway and whether it should outlive the programme, in which case a feasibility study for its
continuation will be undertaken and TEKAD will support implementation.
121.
Learning and village innovation. Learning material will be posted on the platform and will also be available offline and in
printed form. This will include the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages developed under Component 3.2, other knowledge
products, such as mapping studies and surveys, and information about TEKAD achievements and outcomes. Additionally,
TEKAD will facilitate the identification, documentation and dissemination of innovative practices developed in the target areas in
relation to products and activities supported by TEKAD. A simple system will be designed in PY2, building on World Bank-
financed Village Innovation Programme methodology. Facilitators will be trained to assess and document village-based
innovations that contribute to enhanced production, processing and marketing. Innovations will be disseminated through: (i)
showcasing on the Eastern Indonesia Gateway; (ii) village competitions and awards (see below); (iii) Village Youth Ambassadors
(see below); and (iv) study tours and innovation fairs for peer to peer learning. Videos, graphic media and social networks will be
widely used for documenting and dissemination innovations.
122.
Inspiration and motivation. This set of activities will aim at inspiring villagers, especially village youth, in developing rewarding
and fulfilling economic activities, as well as generating motivation. A competitive system will be developed for the gender-
balanced attribution of annual awards in every province in possibly five main categories: (i) ‘Eastern Indonesia Youth
Ambassador’, for young people from 20 to 35 year old; (ii) village producer; (iii) village; (iv) facilitator/extensionist and village
cadres; and (v) BUMDes/cooperative. Nominations will start from sub-district level and up to provincial level, and will be based on
criteria such as adoption of innovative technologies, generated benefits, social and environmental impact. Nominees and award
recipients will be promoted through communication events (including a roadshow featuring Eastern Indonesia Youth
Ambassadors) and on the Eastern Indonesia Gateway. Promotion will also cover information regarding replicability and
requirements, including with regard to skills, access to finance or business development.
19/39
123.
Furthermore, TEKAD will partner with state-owned universities in the target provinces to implement annual Thematic Student
Service Programmes (Kuliah Kerja Nyata – KKN)[30]. TEKAD will replicate VDP good experience in West Papua and will co-
finance Thematic KKN for a batch of students in each of the five provinces every year from PY3. Implementation will be carried
out in close collaboration with TEKAD Facilitators and Advisors, so that follow-up is ensured once the students have left and
outcomes generated are sustainable.
124.
Connectivity. To enhance village access to internet networks, MoV will establish a partnership with the Ministry of
Communication and Information Technology (MoCI) to engage with BAKTI (Badan Aksesibilitas Telekomunikasi dan Informasi), a
government agency under MoCI that administers and manages the improvement of telecommunication networks mainly in
disadvantaged regions, by supporting the installation of connectivity equipment at village level. Every year, MoV will communicate
a list of priority villages for connection to grid and equipment installation by BAKTI at no cost[31]. While access to electricity is a
pre-requirement to benefit from equipment installation, advice will be provided to interested villages as to the type of electricity
power installation they could adopt and include in their annual plan and budget.
Sub-component 3.2 – Policy Development and Institution Building
125.
The Village Law represents the core policy at the root of GoI efforts to support village-based economic development. Therefore,
TEKAD efforts with regard to policy development will focus on making the implementation of the Village Law and of the Village
Fund more effective and impactful in promoting village economic development. TEKAD strategy with regard to policy
development is therefore to: (i) develop approaches and tools to assist village governments and communities in leveraging the
Village Fund to promote economic development in different agro-ecological and social contexts in Eastern Indonesia, and
potentially throughout the country; (ii) pilot their implementation and monitor results; (iii) share outcomes with stakeholders at
village, district, province and national level, including with institution; and (iv) institutionalise them under the responsibility of four
main partners: MoV, Bappenas, provincial and district governments.
126.
In this respect, one key programme outcomes will be the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, a set of evidence-based
and replicable models for improving the use of village resources and for developing village partnerships with public and private
players in support of inclusive and sustainable village economic development.
127.
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages. An initial set of Orientation and Capacity Building Packages will be developed in
PY1 to guide activities and support capacity building of programme staff, district and provincial departments and village
stakeholders in the following areas:
Village Governance for Economic Development. This package will build on models and tools developed through World Bank-
financed P3PD[32] and will cover the development, monitoring and reviewing of the village economic development strategy,
annual planning and budgeting, regular monitoring annual reviews and setting up and running the Village Information System;
Support to Village Economic Initiatives. This part will build on the mapping studies conducted under Subcomponents 2.2 and
2.3 and will be largely commodity-based. Commodity-based packages will promote multi-benefit approaches that deliver
multiple benefits for production, poverty reduction, environment and climate resilience. While agriculture is the dominant sector
in the target provinces and therefore will dominate the priority commodities, non-agriculture commodities and services are also
important economic development opportunities, including marine products, non-timber forest products (especially in remote
villages and indigenous communities), and ecotourism;
BUMDes, economic organisations and village clusters. This package will focus on the creation and expansion of economic
organisations (primarily BUMDEs and cooperatives, but possibly also other groups such as women or youth groups) and (ii)
village clusters. It will also provide guidance and capacity-building modules in developing simple business plans and in setting
up, managing and financing business development.
Access to financial services. This package will cover financial and digital education modules, guidance for linking to financial
service providers and accessing financing, as well as a range of financial products and services, including innovations
promoted by TEKAD with partnering financial institutions (see Sub-component 3.2).
128.
Each Orientation and Capacity Building Package will include a guide with step-by-step explanations, which will be linked to
practical tools designed in adaptation to different audiences. They will provide solutions for supporting women’s inclusion
(including labour- and time-saving technologies) and that of marginalised groups, and will promote multi-benefit approaches that
deliver multiple benefits for production, poverty reduction, environment and climate resilience.
129.
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages will form the building base for TEKAD model development. They will be
developed through a contract with a specialized international firm with multi-disciplinary competences covering rural inclusive
economic planning and business development, along with provincial-based national consultants (possibly though provincial
universities). This team will work in partnership with MoV Puslatmas and other relevant departments, provincial universities and
public and private provincial stakeholders.
130.
They will build on and be fully compatible with instruments developed for MoV’s Village Academy 4.0 and P3PD[33], which will
be complemented to fit the specific needs of village economic planning and the specificities of the target provinces. While there
will be a common core of guidance/capacity building modules, adaptations will be introduced for every province as required, to
reflect socio-cultural and product-related specifics to every province and agro-ecological zone. Preparation will associate TEKAD
provincial and district teams and will plan an approach for ensuring that they could be adapted to district local conditions.
20/39
131.
Packages designed in PY1 will be tested from PY2 and will be annually updated by Puslatmas to reflect the lessons of
experience, innovations developed along with programme implementation, and review of conditions for replication. Package
development will therefore be closely linked to programme monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management. Progress and
updates will be widely shared through the Coordination Team under MoV Directorate General of Village Community
Empowerment and Development, the Joint TEKAD-P3PD Working Group[34], the coordination platforms at district and provincial
level, the Papua Desk, and the Eastern Indonesia Gateway.
132.
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages will be available both online, through the Eastern Indonesia Gateway platform, and
offline to facilitate wide access to support, including in most remote areas. In recognition of lower literacy and numeracy skills
among beneficiary communities, will adopt visual learning tools including graphics and videos. Economic Initiatives Facilitators
will be equipped with digital tablets to enable multi-media presentations using the product-based capacity-building packages.
133.
Policy studies. Additionally, TEKAD will carry out policy studies, to address two objectives. On the one hand, they will contribute
to translating innovative approaches and tools developed under the programme into legal and policy instruments, such as: MoV
regulations, ministerial instructions, technical guidelines or Puslatmas training programmes; or Papua Desk-sponsored
regulations. On the other hand, they will address policy gaps identified through the provincial mapping studies, TEKAD
programme operations and recommendations made by District and Provincial Coordination Teams. Areas for policy development
identified during programme design include the following: (i) an expenditure/performance review of the Village Fund and of MoV,
district and village performance for the promotion of village economic development in Eastern Indonesia; (ii) revised guidelines
and legal framework for BUMDes to become a village economic development-supporting organization; and (iii) a survey on
participation and accountability in Village Law implementation, building on the model of the Sentinel Villages Study, under the
Local Solutions to Poverty programme implemented by the World Bank. Gender equity and social inclusion considerations will be
mainstreamed in all of the policy development activities.
134.
TEKAD will finance: specialised technical assistance for policy review and policy development; policy workshops with relevant
stakeholders, either to support the preparation of policy studies or to present and discuss the results of such studies and
dissemination costs.
135.
Institution building. TEKAD will contribute in strengthening the capacities of MoV, and especially of the Community
Empowerment and Development General Directorate, in: (i) implementing the programme in an accountable and transparent
manner, in line with GoI and IFAD procedures, and in delivering programme outcomes and outputs according to plans; (ii)
promoting inclusive and profitable village economic development; and (iii) tracking achievements and capitalising on good results
to improve related performance. Capacity building will be provided on the basis of annual participatory capacity assessments and
capacity development plans. This set of activities should also benefit the Association of Indonesian Village Governments[35], at
national and provincial level, and possibly the Papua Desk.
136.
Upscaling facility. An upscaling facility is available to finance specific operations that would upscale innovative tools
successfully implemented by the programme. The facility could be used for any of the following purposes (not exclusive): expand
programme operations to additional villages (for example to participate in cluster); scale up specific activities in target districts (for
example trainings); finance study tours or other peer-to-peer instruments to disseminate programme knowledge and experience
to villages not included in target areas; face increased costs in relation to planned activities in this PDR.
137.
Implementation arrangements for Component 3. The implementation of Component 3 will be led by the TEKAD-financed KM
and Policy Development Expert, who will work in close collaboration with the team of technical experts at the national level and at
provincial/district level.
138.
Under Sub-component 3.1, service providers will be hired to: (i) develop the TEKAD MIS system and provide support to
Provincial MIS/GIS Officers for MIS development; (ii) develop and maintain the Eastern Indonesia Gateway; (iii) implement the
annual selection and awarding process for the Eastern Indonesia Youth Ambassadors; (iv) produce videos on the Eastern
Indonesia Youth Ambassadors. A national consultant will provide support to design the guidelines for the Eastern Indonesia
Youth Ambassador Programme. An MoU will be signed between MoV and MoCI to engage with BAKTI for the implementation of
the connectivity programme.
139.
Under Sub-component 3.2, an international service provider will be hired under the IFAD grant to develop the Orientation and
Capacity Building Packages, in partnership with MoV Community Training Center Department (Pusat Pelatihan Masyarakat –
Puslatmas), based on an MoU to be established by the NPIU, which will also cover the training of TEKAD staff in using the
Packages (Sub-component 2.1). The same service provider will be hired to carry out the provincial Market opportunities and
value chain analyses (see Component 2). Orientation and Capacity Building Packages will be annually updated by Puslatmas,
building on annual assessments and on the specifications of the Annual Plan for Model Development, Innovation and
Communication.
140.
Priority areas for the development of policy studies and for institution-building will be identified annually by the NPMU and will be
validated by the Programme Steering Committee. An international consultant will assist in defining a methodology and in
providing guidance for implementation. TEKAD will finance the cost of policy studies, workshops and capacity building.
141.
Bappenas, including the Papua Desk, will be closely associated to the implementation of Sub-component 3.2.
E. Theory of Change
142.
There are significant opportunities to better leverage the Village Law and the Village Fund to strengthen village-based economic
development and sustainable rural transformation in Eastern Indonesia TEKAD’s theory of change assumes that empowered
village communities, supported by public agencies at sub-district and district level, linked to markets, able to connect to service
providers and using financial services will be able to leverage Village Fund and other village resources to develop profitable
economic activities and achieve improved livelihoods.
21/39
143.
TEKAD’s approach is therefore to combine different levels of interventions so that village communities not only can build their
capacities to invest in successful economic undertakings, but also can rely on an enabling environment that secures sustainable
and inclusive access to markets and services. At the village level, TEKAD will build the capacities of village institutions and
households in planning, implementing and monitoring Village Fund and other village resources for inclusive economic
development bringing sustainable revenues (Sub-component 1.1.) and in undertaking economic initiatives for the production,
processing and marketing of target commodities/trades (Sub-component 1.2). At the district level, TEKAD will promote a dynamic
ecosystem to support village-based economic development. It will build the capacities of district-based public agencies to extend
quality services to support village economic initiatives (Sub-component 2.1). It will also facilitate market linkages through
partnerships between market players and village producers to ensure that villagers’ investments can bring sustainable revenues,
promote the use of Village Fund resources to hire quality private service providers (Sub-component 2.2), and expand the
capacities of Financial Service Providers to meet the financial needs of village households (Sub-component 2.3). Finally, TEKAD
will open online access to knowledge and learning, inspire and motivate village stakeholders and especially youth, by showcasing
innovation (Sub-component 3.1) and meet GoI request to derive innovative, replicable models for supporting village economic
development by leveraging Village Fund and village resources, building on experience in diverse geographical areas and
economic settings (Sub-component 3.2). A visual representation of the theory of change is in Annex 2.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
144.
The programme has been officially requested by GoI and it is included in GoI’s national investment planning and budgeting.
TEKAD is in line with the 2015-2019 National Medium-Term Development Plan, which gives the highest priority to reducing
inequalities and improving the livelihoods of the rural poor. It is also designed to directly contribute to the anticipated priorities of
new 2020–2024 National Medium-Term Development Plan. GoI regards the programme as a strategic investment to trigger the
transformation of the rural sector, by creating the conditions for villages to move up the IDM scale through a better use of their
resources, including the Village Fund. TEKAD is also in line with Government’s objective of boosting agriculture productivity and
improving the economic situation of the smallholder farmers in under-developed areas of Eastern Indonesia. Furthermore,
TEKAD will directly support the Indonesia United Nations Country Team's efforts to specifically target Papua and will contribute to
Sustainable Development Goals 1 – No poverty, 5 – Gender equality, 8 – Decent Work and Economic Growth, and 10- Reduced
inequalities. It is also aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which aims at enabling inclusive and sustainable rural
transformation, and it will contribute to its three strategic objectives.
145.
TEKAD will build on the experience of past investments in village governance and economic development, especially in Papua
and West Papua, including the Village Innovation Project financed by the World Bank. It will establish a tight partnership with
P3PD and MoHA. It will also establish a partnership with KOMPAK, a project financed by Australia that has successfully piloted a
Village Management Information System to orient village planning and monitor progress, in partnership with MoV and Bappenas.
Furthermore, it will establish linkages with projects that support access to markets (such as PRISMA, also financed by Australia)
and the sustainable and gainful use of natural resources (such as the Green Economic Growth Programme for Papua Provinces
(GEGPP) financed by DFID, as well as USAID-financed Lestari and Sustainable Ecosystems Advanced – SEA). Finally, TEKAD
will align activities with the UN Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), and with UNDP-supported Papua Platform
Project.
22/39
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
146.
Total TEKAD cost inclusive of taxes and duties is estimated at US$ 702.03 million over a six-year implementation period.
Programme investments are organized into three components: Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment (86.5% of the
costs); Component 2 – Partnerships for Village Economic Development (10.4%); and Component 3 – Innovation, Learning and
Policy Development (3.1%). Table 5 below presents the summary of project costs by component in United States Dollar and in
Indonesian Rupiah.
147.
Project sub-components 1.2 Village Economic Initiatives, 2.2 Economic Services and 3.2 Policy Development and Institution
Building are partially counted as climate finance. The total amount of IFAD climate finance is preliminarily calculated as US$ 565
945.
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
148.
TEKAD will be financed from an IFAD loan of US$ 32.85 million, an IFAD grant of US$ 1.50 million, beneficiary contribution
estimated at US$ 27.08 million (cash and in-kind), GoI contribution under the Village Fund estimated at US$ 541.60 million, and
GoI contribution in taxes and staff salaries of US$ 18.99 million. A financing gap of US$ 80 million has been identified from
project year 3, which will be financed by IFAD with resources from its next funding cycle (2022-2024) or by a co-financier willing
to partner and acceptable to the GoI; the current IFAD financing is adequate to cover the first 3 years of implementation. Table 6
below presents the structure of components by financier, and table 7 shows the distribution of expenditure accounts by financier.
149.
The GoI contribution of Village Fund resources is set up under the framework of the Village Law and is designated to fund village
investments, including in economic infrastructure and empowerment.
150.
The IFAD grant will be used to finance two different types of activities. On the one hand it will finance all the activities related to
policy development (Sub-component 3.2) which is an area of priority for the GoI. On the other hand it will finance key
international technical assistance to be fielded at project inception, including for the design of the Orientation and Capacity
Building Packages (Sub-component 3.2) for market opportunities and value chain analyses (Sub-component 2.2), a climate risk
and vulnerability assessment study (Sub-component 2.2), and the Technical Programme Expeditor. This technical assistance will
play a decisive role in shaping the programme economic development strategy , and in providing the tools that will guide village
communities’ choices of priority commodities, economic development strategies, and planning and capacity building
programmes.
Table 5: Components Project Cost Summary
Table 6: Components by Financier
23/39
Table 7: Expenditure Accounts by Financier
Table 8: Project Components by Year – totals including contingencies
c. Disbursement
151.
Disbursement detailed arrangements will be outlined in the Letter to the Borrower. There will be three types of disbursement
mechanisms: (i) Advance Withdrawal; (ii) Direct Payment; and       (iii) Reimbursement. Considering the activities, the project will
adopt imprest account arrangements, with advance payment and then followed by replenishment to the DA. The maximum
Authorized Allocation will be USD 3,000,000 for IFAD loan, USD 250,000 for IFAD grant and can be amended if required.
152.
GoI will open two Designated Accounts (DAs) in USD, in the name of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) at Bank Indonesia (BI). One
account will be for the IFAD loan funds and one for the IFAD grant. Funds in these accounts will be used to pay the eligible
programme expenditures incurred by NPMU and PPIUs. Grant financing will be used to finance technical assistance for:
developing the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages and related studies, which will be at the core of TEKAD’s approach to
develop evidence-based and replicable models for improving the use of the Village Fund resources; and for activities related to
policy.
24/39
153.
Before disbursement can begin,  (I) a letter designating the name(s) of officials authorized to sign withdrawal applications and
Statements of Expenditure, which includes their authenticated specimen signature(s) (ii) Details of the specific names, titles and
signature(s) of the persons authorized to operate these accounts must reach IFAD shall reach to IFAD.
154.
Although the DA will be under the name of the Director General Treasury, MoF, the NPMU will be the one responsible for
reconciling the DA, preparing the application for withdrawal for advances and reporting the use of the DA, duly approved by DG
Treasury, before submissions to IFAD. Copies of the DA bank statement will be provided to the NPMU by DG Treasury, MoF on
a weekly basis or upon request.
155.
Funds from cofinaciers will be deposited in separate bank accounts.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
156.
The Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) of TEKAD programme is based on financial performance of a series of rural level
enterprises in four agricultural zones in the five provinces of Eastern Indonesia, namely: Maluku, North Maluku, East Nusa
Tenggara, Papua and West Papua. The agricultural zones comprise dryland, coastal, highlands and lowlands for 1,720 core
villages (direct beneficiaries) comprising 412,300 households. The financial and economic analyses are only indicative for the
reasons that the enterprises in the participating villages would be finalized only during implementation. However, based on
reasonable assumptions and a set of agronomically and technically suitable mixture of crops and other enterprises, the EFA
analyses conducted at the design stage are good indicators of Programme financial and economic viability.
157.
TEKAD is expected to generate multiple benefits. These include enhanced financial and social service delivery capacities of the
village institutions; improved technical capacities of the producers; improved animal health (pigs and fisheries); improved
productivity of listed enterprises leading to increased farmers’ income; increased contribution to the export earnings; and
development and expansion of rural businesses. TEKAD will also generate employment opportunities for women and men,
particularly the youth through their involvement with the enterprises and related backward and forward linkages. It is not feasible
to credibly quantify all the benefits highlighted. As such the financial and economic analyses are conducted for the costs and
benefits that are readily measurable and are associated with TEKAD interventions.
158.
The programme is reaching out to a total of 412,300 families as its direct beneficiaries and it is assumed that about 70% of them,
amounting to 288,610 families, would develop their enterprises. The distribution of the beneficiary producers according to their
engagement in enterprises, representing provinces and by the programme year are summarized in Table 9 below. The
approximate number of indirect beneficiaries who are mainly engaged in backward and forward linkages are estimates at about
10,000 (5%).
Table 9: Total and cumulative distribution of beneficiary households in VC enterprise receiving full benefits
Crops / Enterprises
Provinces
Total HH
Practicing the
enterprise
Distribution of HH who start the enterprise by the Programme
Year
PY 2
PY 3
PY 4
PY 5
PY 6
Seaweed
Papua & West Papua 10,260
2,052
3,078
3,078
1,539
513
Sea Cucumber
Papua & West Papua 71,817
14,363
21,545
21,545
10,773
3,591
Black Pepper
Papua & West Papua 30,779
6,156
9,234
9,234
4,617
1,539
Coffee
Papua & West Papua 20,519
4,104
6,156
6,156
3,078
1,026
Pig production
Maluku, North
Maluku, & East Nusa
Tenggara
34,518
6,904
10,355
10,355
5,178
1,726
Cocoa production
Papua & West Papua 10,260
2,052
3,078
3,078
1,539
513
Bee Honey Production
Maluku, North
Maluku, & East Nusa
Tenggara
25/39
41,254
8,251
12,376
12,376
6,188
2,063
Sweet Potato
Bamboo
Maluku, North
Maluku, & East Nusa
Tenggara
Maluku, North
Maluku, & East Nusa
Tenggara
20,783
4,157
6,235
6,235
3,117
1,039
48,421
9,684
14,526
14,526
7,263
2,421
Total
5 Provinces
288,610
57,722
86,583
86,583
43,292
14,431
159.
Representative enterprise models were developed based on information collected during the field visits of the design team and
extracted from various publications and other sources of information as listed in the EFA Annex. Table 10 summarise the results
indicating that all enterprises are financially viable.
160.
The programme direct beneficiaries would be expected to increase their production with technical and financial assistance that
they will receive during the programme period. The EFA estimated the annual production levels of the commodities at full
development. The market-ready outputs of them are about: 22 thousand tons (mt) of seaweed (115% increase from the base);
160 thousand mt of sea cucumber as a new product; 27 thousand mt of black pepper (345% increase); 30 thousand mt of coffee
(1359% increase); 139 mt of pig meat (68% increase); 17 thousand mt of cocoa (360% increase); 12 thousand mt of honey as a
new product; 1.3 million mt of sweet potato (2820% increase); and 82 thousand bamboo stems (467% increase).
Table10: Financial viability indicators of all enterprise models used for the EFA of TEKAD
161.
The financial analysis indicates that all enterprise, except seaweed, pig production and bees honey, would be generating an
annual income which is higher than the poverty line. These enterprises collectively generate employment for about 22,600 hired
labour per annum. The Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) is 27%. The net benefit flow was discounted at 9%, which is the
current average interest rate, to ascertain the Financial Net Present Value (NPV) of the programme which is US $ 1,517 million
and the break-even point of the programme cash flows. At the 10th year (2029), the programme will be able to breakeven the
total programme investment and the beneficiaries’ investment and start generating a positive net benefit flow.
162.
Economic analysis: The economic analysis, conducted with appropriate adjustments to reflect the economic values of inputs and
outputs of all enterprise models and with the economic cost of the programme derived from COSTAB, indicates that the
Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for the 20-years period is 29% with benefit cost ratio of 2.36. The programme earns an
Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) of US$ 2,490 million for the 20-year period with 6.2% discount rate (the current weighted
average deposit rate). The sensitivity analyses indicate that the programme is adequately viable under 20% cost increase, 20%
benefit decrease, simultaneous increase in cost and decrease of benefits by 10%, and 1-years delay in starting production
operations. These scenarios cover all the risk factors identified during the programme design.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
163.
The programme strategy is driven by the primary concern that, by the end of project implementation, sustainable mechanisms
are in place to ensure sustainable planning and implementation of village resources for economic growth. To this effect, TEKAD
approach rests on three pillars: (i) build the capacities of village governments and communities to plan Village Fund resources for
economic development and to implement profitable economic initiatives (Component 1); (ii) promote an ecosystem whereby
villagers will be able to access profitable markets, to receive support from qualified public and private service providers and to
use financial services (Component 2); and (iii) develop evidence-based Orientation and Capacity Building Packages to support
village economic development in Eastern Indonesia, to improve the policy framework and to raise MoV capacities to make use of
these new instruments (Component 3). Key specific features are as follows:
Project implementation set-up: TEKAD design builds on existing organisations and consolidates them, rather than creating
new, project-driven structures. This is aimed both at supporting sustainability and ensuring that models derived from project
approaches and successful practices can be mainstreamed into the country’s institutional framework and scaled up;
Capacity building: capacity building will be provided to ensure that stakeholders have the right mix of technical and
management competences to carry on activities beyond project completion, from village level to district, provincial and national
level, for both public and private sector players and, at village level, for both village governments and community groups,
including traditional ones;
Gradual phasing out of programme support: while in the first years of programme implementation, TEKAD District Team will
take full responsibility for the implementation of activities with participation of district staff, TEKAD facilitators will be tasked
with building the capacities of existing, permanent facilitators, so that responsibility will gradually shift to the latter and by the
end of the programme, they will be fully in charge for extending support to villages. A similar approach is taken for other
programme support instruments at village or district level (including the provision of financial resources for hiring service
providers, or allocations to P4S centres), whereby programme support is gradually phased out, with village or district budget
resources taking over;
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages: evidence-based and tracking programme successful achievements, they will
remain available to sustain project achievements, and to guide economic development and to support capacity building in
Eastern Indonesian provinces;
Village Desks: Village Desks will continue to operate beyond project completion to offer village governments easy access to
information and support services related to economic development at the district administration;
Financial sustainability: financial education, business planning, capacity building of key players and linkages to performing
financial service providers will support the viability and sustainability of village-based economic initiatives.
26/39
164.
Furthermore, the Village Fund will keep extending annual allocations that will be available to finance support costs initially paid by
the programme, such as the cost of village cadres, additional facilitators, peer-to-peer activities or trainings.
165.
The two Interim Reviews will make recommendations with regard to key measures required to further secure the sustainability of
project achievements. The NPMU will prepare a detailed exit strategy building on the recommendations of the Second Interim
Review.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
166.
Main risks and mitigation measures are identified as follows. An Integrated Risk Framework is in Annex 9. Fiduciary risks are
summarised in Section IV A b and a Financial Management Risk Assessment is attached in Annex 9. 
Risks
Mitigation measures
Variable GoI implementation capacity
Provide institution-building services to MoV and different levels of local governments. Hire
TA to provide methodological guidance and capacity building. Outsource implementation for
specific activities.
Management challenge deriving from
widespread and dispersed
geographical area
Phased programme implementation. Use of ICT tools to facilitate communication and
programme monitoring. Close monitoring of performance with dashboards and periodic
assessment, building on the lessons of IFAD-financed CCDP, which was successfully
implemented with similar geographical dispersion. Capacity building to MoV.
Limited interest of private sector
partners to deal with villagers because
of risks involved
De-risking measures including: financial and business education; technical advisory
services; support to contract farming and business linkages.
Elite capture of programme benefits
Community empowerment, including organizations strengthening and capacity building,
emphasizing the poorest and more vulnerable segments, for them to participate and make
their rights and priorities prevail in villages' decisions on the Village Fund resources
allocation. Support to districts in fulfilling their role of mobilization and empowerment.
Remoteness
In this first phase, focus on villages with reasonable connectivity. Support village clusters to
increase impact while minimising management costs. Select high-value commodities that
can be stored and easily transported. Use ICT as tool to bridge remoteness.
High turn-over of staff at the local level Hiring local staff with right set of incentives.
Climate change
Promoting climate smart practices through capacity building packages. Building farmers’
resilience through savings.
Insecurity in Papua and West Papua
MoV has selected districts that were risks are minimal and the same criterion will be applied
to village selection. Broad and inclusive participatory approach at village level. Inclusion of
traditional authorities. Strong involvement of district mayors. Full on-demand approach.
167.
The inherent risk is deemed to be medium. Indonesia was ranked 89th out of 180 countries in the 2018 TI Corruption Perception
Index, with a medium score of 38.
168.
27/39
The latest PEFA report for Indonesia was published in 2017. It described a reasonably well-functioning PFM system, with
significant improvements from 2011 to 2016. The assessment over time shows significant improvements in the quality of PFM
including: (i) Aligning the legislative and regulatory framework to the latest international budget, accounting and reporting
standards with the adoption of the COFOG classification and accrual accounting standards; (2) Establishing a multi-year
budgeting framework and a robust macroeconomic fiscal framework to optimize expenditure management in line with revenue
mobilization; (iii) Rolling out the FMIS SPAN as a platform for the integration of the Treasury system and the consolidation of
cash management operations at the central government level; and (iv) Strengthening the effectiveness of the oversight function
by the internal audit and external audit institutions. in PFM systems linked to predictability and control over budget execution,
particularly PEFA performance scores are slightly below B, which is above the basic level of performance broadly consistent with
good international practices.
169.
The Indonesian Corruption Perception Index (CPI) score for 2018 according to Transparency International website is 38 (2017:
37; 2016: 37; 2015: 36; 2014: 34; 2013: 32), scale 0-high and 100-low risk
170.
The Indonesia portfolio consists of six investment projects, with a disbursement ratio of 5.1% in 2018 (USD 8.19 Million out of
USD 162 Million). Three projects are in completion or closing stage (CCDP, VDP &SOLID). Three projects are on the second
year of implementation (IPDMIP, co-financed with ADB, READSI and SMPEI) and one project in preparation stage of
implementation (YESS). The disbursement performance of IPDMIP & READSI are unsatisfactory.
171.
MoV through the Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technology, under the Directorate General of Village Community
Empowerment and Development will be the leading agency which has experience in implementing IFAD project.
172.
The Financial Management Assessment (FMA) for TEKAD was undertaken based on IFAD requirement and Guidance Notes on
Undertaking Financial Management Assessment at Design. The assessment was conducted by reviewing government
regulations and documents, interview several government officials at national, 2 provinces and 2 districts.
173.
The Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technology, under the Directorate General of Village Community
Empowerment and Development, Ministry of Villages as experience in implementing international funding project from World
Bank and IFAD through VDP. However, VDP audit report 2017 states that the internal control of the project was not adequate due
to the capacity of the government in the fiduciary aspect of the project. Under these circumstances, the overall FM risk rating is
Medium (M).
-Government commitment to have a stronger and
dedicated team to manage the project.
-Financial Management consultants will be hired at
national, provincial and district level to support FM
function
-FM consultants will be hired individually. Not through
service provider/company
 MOV is a new ministry with capacity issue that need to
be addressed at the beginning of implementation. LPA
has experience in implementing internal funding projects,
including VDP. Project location: Papua and Papua Barat
are the most challenging provinces in the country. For risk
mitigation, use VDP lesson learned to improve financial
management system and provide better and clearer
guideline for TEKAD"
1.Organization & Staffing
·          Inadequate dedicated government official to
implement the project, in financial management aspect
in particular
H
·          Remoteness might create issue in coordination
and communication
2.Budgeting
·         
M
28/39
3. Funds Flow & Disbursements
·          Delay from the date of entry into force to the date
of first disbursement, resulting in slow start-up.
·          Delay in disbursement due to delay in submitting
withdrawal application
·          ADB cofinancing might be effective in 2020 and
can only start disbursed in 2021
4. Internal Control  
·          Staff turnover especially of government staffs can
lead to poor management of project financial documents
H
H
5. Accounting Systems, Policies & Procedures
·          Reliability of government accounting system for
IFAD and project monitoring purposes
M
·          No component identity in the government
financial system.
6.Reporting & Monitoring
·          The project might not be able to produce reliable
and timely financial report
H
·          Unclear system to capture GOI & community
contribution in the project financial report
7.Internal Audit
·          The project not included in to Itjen internal audit
program
H
·          VDP internal audit was weak. Itjen involved in
budgeting process only
o the extent possible, new financing should build on
existing structures and mechanisms, and early and
continuous consultation with Government is essential to
mitigate delays.
To ensure a smooth start-up of the project including early
recruitment of service providers and implementation of
construction activities in PY1, preparatory planning,
establishment of the PSU, recruitment of staff and
procurement of service will take place at earlier stage.
Financial management consultants recruited to assist day
today project financial management at national and district
level
IFAD to provide training on financial management
procedures, including disbursement requirements
Take ADB condition itu implementation plan. First year
implementation will be funded by IFAD and GOI only
Internal control including financial document management
and storage are documented in the project manual
The project will develop an automation financial reporting
system. Meanwhile a spreadsheet-based reporting
system will be use to process the data derived from the
government accounting system into project financial
reports for monitoring and reporting purposes
Automation financial reporting system will be developed
Provide guidance on how to capture GOI and community
contribution in the project financial report
IFAD to conduct additional fiduciary supervision mission
for the first 2 years to ensure that FM systems are in
place
The project to include the internal auditor  in designing the
internal audit framework for the project
To propose to MOF to include BPKP as internal audit for
the project
8. Auditing
·          Integrity of the Auditor
·          BPK is relatively new for IFAD project. They have
not yet familiar with IFAD procedure and/or system
·          Poor follow up of auditor findings
BPK will be assigned for the audit.
M
The project to create a tool to monitor follow up progress
and status of auditor findings, and included in the PIM
Public discloser will be included in the Auditor TOR
I. Environment and Social category
174.
TEKAD is assessed as a Category “B” programme as it is expected to contribute positively to improving the livelihoods of rural
communities. Furthermore, by supporting climate-smart agriculture and by offering channels to widely advertise on successful
business models and approaches (through an online platform, applications and social networks), TEKAD is expected to positively
contribute to climate change adaptation and sustainable use of natural resources. Potential social impacts will be mitigated by
offering channels to widely advertise on successful business models and approaches (through an online platform, applications
and social networks) and in this manner being more inclusive. The project will also follow a community-based approach where
the communities will have a key role in decision making on project interventions. By this approach, TEKAD is expected to
positively contribute to climate change impact and promotion of the sustainable use of natural resources.
29/39
J. Climate Risk classification
175.
TEKAD is expected to be highly sensitive to climate risks, mainly climatic variability and occasionally weather-related hazards.
Climate risk assessments will be conducted in target provinces at project onset with a view to identify major risks and fully
integrate mitigation measures in capacity building packages. Preliminary focus areas identified include awareness, dissemination
and skills development on climate-smart practices (e.g. building farmer's resilience towards climate change impacts through
insurance and savings), which will be provided through the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, project partners’, digital
technologies and communication.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
176.
As mentioned above in the section on geographic targeting, the project will start being implemented in Papua and West Papua
provinces, which present the highest rates of poverty among the five included in the project area, and to take advantage of the
experience developed in these two provinces by the previous IFAD-supported VDP project. At start-up it will be decided whether
a third province would be incorporated since the beginning; activities in the other two provinces will start once the main
implementation tools are developed and available. This gradual incorporation of provinces and districts will contribute to
continuous learning and increased effectiveness, taking advantage of the experience to be gained since the beginning in the
two/three provinces where project implementation will start.
177.
The main features of the programme organizational framework are as follows:
A National Steering Committee will provide overall guidance and oversight. As part of the Steering Committee, a Joint TEKAD-
P3PD Working Group will ensure optimal coordination between the two programmes;
MoV is the Executing Agency. Under the authority of MoV’s Director General of Village Development and Community
Empowerment, the Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technologies (DNRAT) will have direct responsibility for
programme implementation. A Coordination Team will be set up to secure coordination and collaboration between DNRAT and
the other directorates composing the Directorate General for Village Development and Community Empowerment;
A National Programme Management Unit (NPMU) will assist MoV in carrying out programme implementation responsibilities;
A Provincial Programme Implementation Unit (PPIU) will be established in every target province to support the implementation
of programme activities at the provincial level, provide technical assistance to district units and ensure knowledge
management across the province;
A District Programme Implementation Unit (DPIU) will be established in every target district, to support the implementation of
activities at village level;
Coordination Platforms will be established at the provincial and district levels, and will provide a venue for stakeholders
involved in the promotion of village development to agree on objectives, review progress, ensure coordination and seek
measures for addressing challenges.
178.
The organizational chart in Annex 8, Section V presents the programme institutional structure. Implementation responsibilities are
outlined below.
Key Implementing Institutions
179.
Programme Steering Committee. A Programme Steering Committee (PSC) will be set up at the national level to provide overall
guidance and oversight, to ensure that TEKAD programming is aligned on national sector priorities, to offer a venue for sharing
TEKAD good practices and for channelling policy issues to the appropriate policy making bodies. The PSC will also approve
Annual Work Programs and Budgeting (AWPBs) and annual progress and financial reports. It will include representatives from
government structures - Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Village, Ministry of Agriculture, BAPPENAS, Papua Desk and other
departments as deemed relevant – and other stakeholders, such as the Association of Indonesian Village Governments
(Asosiasi Pemerintah Desa Seluruh Indonesia) or the Village Peoples’ Association (Persatuan Rakyat Desa), BRI and the
Association of Regional Development Banks (ASBANDA).
180.
Joint TEKAD-P3PD Working Group. This Working Group will convene TEKAD and P3PD Programme Managers and
representatives from MoHA and MoV, and will mainly aim at ensuring that TEKAD activities under Component 1 - Village
Economic Empowerment, and those related to village governance in particular, build on and align with the guidelines and tools
developed by P3PD for MoHA and MoV.
181.
MoV. The Lead Executing Agency will be the Ministry of Village, Underdeveloped Regions and Transmigration through the
Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technologies (DNRAT). The NPMU will be operated under the authority of MoV’s
Director General of Village Development and Community Empowerment, which will be delegated to the Director of Natural
30/39
Resources and Applied Technology.. MoV will be responsible for the overall programme management, coordination, and
oversight. This will involve the following: (i) ensuring the management and timely implementation of programme activities, with
support from the NPMU (see below); (ii) prepare Annual Work Programs and Budgeting (AWPBs), jointly with the NPMU, for
submission to the Programme Steering Committee; (iii) ensure the integration of programme activities within DNRAT overall
programme of activities and the coordination of programme activities with other DNRAT initiatives; (iii) supporting provincial and
district governments’ participation in programme implementation, the fulfilment of their responsibilities and the channelling of
resources as planned; (iv) approve technical and financial reports and Withdrawal Applications prepared by the NPMU; and (v)
support coordination between TEKAD and other relevant initiatives in the promotion of village economic development and
facilitate programme access to knowledge generated by such initiatives. A Coordination Team will be established within the
Directorate General of Village Community Empowerment and Development, which will gather DNRAT and all of its other
directorates, to exchange information and quickly mainstream successful tools and approaches.
182.
NPMU. A National Programme Management Unit (NPMU) will be established to assist DNRAT in implementing the programme
and will be fully accountable for the performance of programme implementation and the use of funds. It will be responsible for
programme management, the coordination of government and non-government agencies participating in the programme and the
promotion of inclusive approaches and mainstreaming of targeting and gender requirements in all of the programme activities in
accordance with the GESI Strategy. The NPMU will be headed by a full-time National Programme Manager.
183.
PPIUs. A Provincial Programme Implementation Unit (PPIU) will be established within the Dinas Village and Community
Empowerment (provincial department) in every target province. PPIUs will be under the direct supervision of the NPMU Director
and will be responsible for providing guidance, coordination, management-support services and technical assistance to District
Programme Implementation Units (DPIUs) in the implementation of Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment and for
jointly implementing Component 2 – Partnerships for Village Economic Development with DPIUs. PPIUs will also be responsible
for the management of programme funds, M&E and KM and the implementation of the GESI strategy.
184.
DPIUs. One District Programme Implementation Unit will be established in every target district. DPIUs will be responsible for
implementing Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment and for participating in the implementation of Component 2 -
Partnerships for Village Economic Development along with PPIUs.
185.
Composition. Table 11 shows the composition of the NPMU, PPIUs and DPIUs.
Table 11: Staffing of NPMU, PPIUs and DPIUs
Management
Technical Staff
Administrative Staff
National Programme Management Unit
- Regional Coordinator I (Papua)
- Regional Coordinator II (West Papua)
- Financial Management Officer
- Regional Coordinator III (Maluku)
- Procurement Officer
- Regional Coordinator IV (North Maluku)
- Accountant
- Regional Coordinator V (NTT)
- Administrative Officer
- National Programme Manager
- GESI Specialist*
- National Team Leader*
- Senior M&E/KM Officer
- Financial and Administrative Management Expert
*
- Senior M&E Expert*
- Senior Village Governance Expert*
- Senior Economic Development Expert*
- Senior Financial Services Expert *
- KM and Policy Development Expert*
- Procurement Expert*
- Administrative Assistant
- Translator
- Driver
Provincial Programme Implementation Units (per Unit)
Management
Technical Staff
31/39
Administrative Staff
- PPIU Manager
- Provincial Team Leader*
- GESI Expert*
- Village Governance Expert *
- Economic Development Expert*
- Financial Services Expert*
- M&E/KM Officer
- M&E/KM Expert *
- MIS/GIS Expert *
- Financial Management Officer
- Accountant
- Planning Officer
- Procurement Officer
- Administrative assistant
- Financial Management Expert*
- Procurement Expert*
- Driver
District Programme Implementation Units (per Unit)
- District Marketing Specialist*
DPIU Manager
- MIS/M&E Specialist*
District Coordinator *
- Village Governance Facilitators*
- Economic Initiatives Advisors*
Staff marked with * are TEKAD-financed consultants. Other staff are government-financed staff.
186.
The NPMU and PPIUs should include at least 40% of qualified women, and women participation in DPIUs, while it may be harder
to achieve, should strongly be promoted. Staff identified for the positions financed by government resources will require IFAD no-
objection. Consultants financed by programme resources will be selected based on competitive bidding (with IFAD no-objection)
and have performance-based contracts.
187.
Programme expeditors. Two Programme Expeditors (international) will be fielded at programme onset to expedite programme
start-up. One will support programme management, will have knowledge of IFAD management procedures and will assist in:
setting up all the administrative and financial management procedures; preparing the first AWPB and Procurement Plan;
expediting compliance to pre-conditions for the release of the first fund disbursements; supporting the finalization of the PIM;
hiring programme staff; and preparing MoUs. The other one will have technical responsibilities, a background in rural economic
development and will assist with the tendering for the international consulting firm that will lead the development of Orientation
and Capacity Building Packages; hiring of international technical assistance; preparing the first AWPB; finalising the PIM. They
will both provide capacity building to the NPMU/PPIUs, with a view to support fast programme start-up.
188.
Cost tables include a total of ten months (six months for the Expeditor/programme management and four months for the
Expeditor/technical) that can be used at once or in split assignments.
189.
Partner institutions. Partnership agreements will be established to support implementation with the following organisations:
MoV Community Training Center Department (Pusat Pelatihan Masyarakat – Puslatmas): TEKAD will partner with this MoV
agency for the development of the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages (Sub-component 3.2) as well as for the training
of TEKAD staff (Sub-component 2.1);
Ministry of Agriculture: a partnership agreement will be signed with the Agency of Agricultural Extension and Human Resource
Development within the Ministry of Agriculture to facilitate the participation of Agriculture Field Extensionists (PPLs) and
ensure their redeployment so that their skillsets match the priority products supported by village annual plans (see Sub-
component 1.2);
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MoCI): a partnership agreement will be signed to engage with BAKTI
(Badan Aksesibilitas Telekomunikasi dan Informasi), a government agency under MoCI that administers and manages the
improvement of telecommunication networks mainly in disadvantaged regions, by supporting the installation of connectivity
equipment at village level.
190.
Close collaboration and coordination will be established with MoHA so that the implementation of TEKAD builds on and aligns
with guidelines and tools developed for village governance and that coordination and exchange of information proceed smoothly
between the two programmes. This will be supported by the Joint TEKAD-P3PD Working Group set up at the national level.
191.
Close collaboration will also be developed with the Papua Desk for the implementation of activities in Papua and West Papua,
particularly with regard to the mapping studies under Component 2, and to the development of Orientation and Capacity Building
Packages and other policy development activities under Component 3.
192.
193.
It is also anticipated that partnership agreements will be signed with BRI and with the five Regional Development Banks for the
implementation of Sub-component 2.2 – Financial Services.
32/39
Provincial and District Coordination Platforms. Coordination Platforms will support information exchange and coordination of
activities related to the promotion of village economic development. They will also review and validate AWPBs prepared by
PPIUs/DPIUs, provide guidance to PPIUs/DPIUs, monitor programme implementation, and discuss TEKAD achievements,
challenges and bottlenecks, including policy gaps, and agree on measures required to lift them. They will be composed of
provincial/district departments involved in the promotion of economic development: Community Empowerment, Agriculture,
Forestry, Fisheries, Planning, Trade and Industry, Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises. District platforms will be
chaired by the District Head and will also include Village Heads. Market players, business associations, development projects,
NGOs or other service providers, as well as universities at provincial level, will be called to participate in working sessions as
required. Coordination Platforms will meet every quarter.
194.
Service providers. All service providers’ contracts will stipulate clear deliverables with a timeframe and quantified expected
outputs/outcomes, and they will specify responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting, including the information of
progress indicators as set forth in the contract. Terms of reference for service providers will require gender-balanced teams with
prior experience of gender mainstreaming, and that contract deliverables reflect gender and inclusion target and indicators.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
195.
Financial management. TEKAD’s financial management arrangements follow the government system, especially on budgeting,
flow of funds, and the auditing mechanism. Overall, the financial management risk is rated as Medium before and after mitigation
respectively. The project faces a major risk in staff capacity to manage project implementation and to improve the internal control
mechanism based on lesson learn from VDP audit findings. To minimize the risks, a team of qualified financial management
consultants will be hired to assist NPMU and PPIUs in financial management. The Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied
Technology, under the Directorate General of Village Community Empowerment and Development, Ministry of Village will have
the overall accountability for the project, including fiduciary aspects. The flow of funds for the project will be determined by the
implementation strategies adopted by the Implementing Agencies which will consist of APBN-funded (Anggaran Pendapatan dan
Belanja Negara – national revenue and budget) activities and would then be passed on to the provincial and district government
using Dekonsentrasi mechanism. The flow of fund is described in Figure 2 hereafter.
196.
Designated accounts. After loan entry into force, the Government will open two Designated Accounts (DA) in USD, in the name
of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) at Bank Indonesia. One account will be for the IFAD loan funds and one for IFAD grant. Funds in
these accounts will be used to pay eligible programme expenditure incurred by NPMU and PPIUs. The modalities of the DA for
the IFAD resources will be detailed in the Letter to the Borrower. The following are designated as additional general conditions
precedent to withdrawal: (i) the opening of DA with details of specific names, titles and signature(s) of the persons authorized to
operate these accounts must have reached IFAD; (ii) the NPMU will have been duly established; and (iii) The PIM will have been
finalized and approved.
33/39
197.
Accounting and reporting. All financial transactions will be recorded in the computerized government accounting system and
included in government accountability reports. The project will develop an automated reporting system for the preparation of the
project financial reports that is suitable for project monitoring purposes and reporting purposes to IFAD and Auditor. The NPMU
will be responsible to prepare the aggregate Interim Financial Reports (IFR) and submit them to IFAD quarterly on an agreed
format within 45 days after the period end. The programme will also submit an unaudited consolidated financial statement for
each fiscal year, stating all programme operations, resources and expenditure, within 4 months after the end of the fiscal year. All
financing resources (IFAD, GoI contribution and beneficiary contribution) will be accounted in the report.
198.
Auditing and public disclosure. The audit of TEKAD’s consolidated financial statements will be carried out by the Audit Board
of Indonesia (Badan Pemeriksa Keuangan BPK). The audit will include the assertion on the reliability of the programme financial
statement, review and reconciliation of DA and examination of aspects of compliance and governance, internal control, and
detection of fraud and corruption. IFAD requires that the programme accounts be audited (by approved independent auditors) in
accordance with international auditing standards consistent with IFAD Handbook on Auditing and Reporting. The auditor will visit
the various implementation units as considered necessary for the audit. The audit coverage will consider the risk of material
misstatement as a result of fraud or error. The annual audit report will be furnished to IFAD no later than six months after the end
of the fiscal year. After review, IFAD will disclose the Project financial statements and the opinion of the auditors on the financial
statements. Internal audit for the project will be conducted by Inspectorate General (Itjen) who is reporting to the Minister of
Village. Preliminary discussion has been made with MoF to include BPKP in the project internal audit function. This will allow the
internal auditor to conduct internal monitoring of programme performance, financial management and administration, through
audit, review, evaluation and supervision.
199.
Governance. Indonesia is ranked 89th out of 180 countries, with a score of 38/100 in the Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI)
published by Transparency International in 2018, which indicates substantial corruption risk. IFAD will apply a zero-tolerance
policy on appearances of corruption. The NPMU will prepare a program framework for transparency and public notice and ensure
that procurement is carried out in accordance with GoI and IFAD regulations (including the Policy on Preventing Fraud and
Corruption) and with project design specifications. It will be included in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and published
on TEKAD website. Provisions will include: (i) compliance with internal procedures and controls for project activities, following
international best practice standards for the purpose of preventing corruption, money laundering and the financing of terrorists; (ii)
the publication/posting of all procurement, calls for proposals, contract awarding and business partnership details on local
newspapers, at district and provincial offices and on TEKAD website, including assessment criteria and weighing; (iii) the
participation of representatives of end-users in bid assessments; (iv) the prompt communication to bidders of bid evaluation
outcomes; (v) contracts will include a provision requiring suppliers, contractors and consultants to ensure compliance with IFAD
zero tolerance anticorruption policy and to permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating to the bid
submission and contract performance, and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors; (vi) annual financial audits, with a
random sample transaction, will be performed in accordance with International Standards of Auditing by an independent auditor
accepted to IFAD; (vii) IFAD’s direct supervision process will specifically address fiduciary compliance and the implementation of
the Project framework for transparency and public notice; (viii) programme stakeholders will be directly involved in programming,
implementing and M&E of the project activities; (ix) evaluation and impact assessment will be outsourced to professional
independent institutions; and (x) rules will allow potential project beneficiaries and other stakeholders to channel and address any
complaints they may have on TEKAD implementation.
200.
This framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by all NPMU, PPIU and DPIU staff and consultants, and
a code of business ethics, to be signed by all partners and beneficiaries of TEKAD activities. The draft framework and codes will
be prepared with support from the Programme Expeditor and subsequently discussed and agreed upon at the project inception
workshop.
201.
Other measures reflected in project design to ensure transparency include the following: (i) IFAD’s direct supervision process will
specifically address fiduciary compliance and the implementation of the project framework for transparency and publicity; (ii)
project stakeholders will be directly involved in programming, implementation and M&E of TEKAD activities; (iii) Coordination
platforms will provide a forum for raising issues affecting the implementation of activities, including transparency.
202.
The procurement of goods, works and services financed from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in
accordance with Presidential Regulation 16/2018 on Procurement for Government Goods and Services and with Presidential
Regulation 17/2019 on the Procurement of Goods and Services for the Acceleration of Welfare Development in Papua and West
Papua Provinces. The National Public Procurement Agency (LKPP) has disseminated technical guidance detailing mechanisms
to implement the Presidential Regulation. Procurement procedures are now simpler and the guidelines for procurement are more
complete. Procurement for goods and services are done through e-purchasing such as electronic catalogues or online stores that
managed by LKPP so procurement does not always have to be done through a tender/selection process. Therefore,
procurement procedures are categorized as moderate to low risk. Since 2017, LKPP has developed a PSU Maturity Level
Measurement model that is defined and used as a measurement instrument in implementing PSU institutional management. PSU
Maturity Level Measurement describes the ability of PSU and be a reference for PSU in an effort to develop/ strengthen
institutions towards a center of excellence in Procurement of Goods/ Services. Maturity Level Measurement of the PSU is based
on a model consisting of 4 domains and 9 variables where each variable is targeted to meet a minimum level of 3 (Proactive),
namely as a PSU which becomes a Procurement Center for Excellence by the ability to function goods / services procurement
oriented to meet customer needs through collaboration, strengthen the planning function with internal and external customers.
(https://siukpbj.lkpp.go.id/).
203.
34/39
Procurement at the national level of TEKAD Project. Refer to supervision/project completion missions for previous IFAD Funded
Project, i.e. Village Development Programme (VDP), which was managed by the MoV General Directorate for Village
Development and Community Empowerment showed that the performance of procurement was moderate unsatisfactory. The
BPKP noted in audit report the weaknesses of internal control in the project implementation during fiscal year 2017 and 2018.
The Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technologies who will responsible for TEKAD management needs to improve
the performance of the whole procurement process, its including but not limited to development of procurement plan, quality of
bidding document, disclosure of evaluation process and appropriate draft contract. To this end, the Directorate will require to have
a project procurement specialist with proficient knowledge and experience in Government Procurement Regulation to support
PSU in order to manage TEKAD Project procurement. Procurement specialist at NPMU or one in each PPIU has the main task of
providing support for the procurement commitment officer (or Project Director) work. In accordance with the prevailed regulations,
procurement specialists are not the parties involved in the procurement process (as stated in presidential regulation number 16
of 2018 in article 8).
204.
The maturity level of PSU at MoV is 1 (lowest level in a scale of 5) based on self-assessment in 2017
(https://siukpbj.lkpp.go.id/history_maturity). The low level of maturity correlates with performance, proactivity, and the ability to
carry out continuous improvements that can encourage the creation of added value and benefits in the procurement of goods /
services. The PSU has the task of organizing support procurement of goods/services at Ministry/ Institution/ Regional
Government. The procurement committee for tender/selection, hereinafter referred to as Working Group is defined as human
resources assigned by the Head of PSU to manage the selection of Services Provider or Vendor. The working groups are still
serving as ad-hoc for the PSU. Learned from the VDP Project, its strongly recommended for PSU of MoV to assign procurement
officer who has proficient knowledge and experience in Government Procurement Regulation or alternatively involving
procurement agent for complex procurement that has high risk.
205.
Procurement at sub-national level. TEKAD will also be implemented and managed by sub-national governments at five
provinces. i.e. Papua, West Papua, Maluku, North Maluku and Nusa Tenggara Timur (NTT) Provinces. Based on self-
assessment of PSU in respective province as published by LKPP at http://siukpbj.lkpp.go.id, the latest risk rating are as follow:
Province
Targeted 9 variables at level 3
Papua Province
West Papua Province
Maluku Province
North Maluku Province
East Nusa Tenggara
1 of 9
0 of 9
1 of 9
2 of 9
4 of 9
Maturity Rate
(scale 1-5)
1
1
1
1
2
206.
The maturity measure of the PSU goes to the center of excellence in the procurement of goods/ services carried out in stages
through 5 (five) levels of maturity of the PSU, which consist of:
Level 1: Initiation, namely PSU which is passive in responding to every request with a form that is still ad-hoc and has not
reflected the integrity of the expansion of functions in the goods / services procurement organization.
Level 2: The essence, namely the PSU which focuses on the basic functions of the PSU in the selection process, has a
pattern of work that is segmented and has not yet formed collaboration between the actors of the effective procurement
process.
207.
Presidential Regulation number 16/2018 is applied for the whole province and district governments in Indonesia. However,
particular for Papua and West Papua Province, there is Presidential Regulation number 17 year 2019 which released to
accelerate welfare development in these two Provinces. Therefore, both governments in these two Provinces have more
flexibility in carry out procurement for goods and services. Hence, there’s no specific assessment of PDR team to respective
province and district project implementer. Refer to above rating and to mitigate the potential risk. The following recommendations
are addressed to Directorate PPDM as coordinator of the whole project implementation:
Internal control: Involving the inspectorate or Indonesia's National Government Internal Auditor to conduct probity audits. The
probity concept is used to ensure that the process of carrying out public sector activities, such as the process of procurement
of goods / services is carried out fairly, objectively, transparently and accountably. Therefore, to control the weakness of
internal controls that affect the procurement of goods / services that are considered to be necessary, audit procedures are
needed starting at the time of identifying the needs in the preparation of the General Procurement Plan which is part of the
preparation of work plans and budgets.
Procurement at planning process: Lowering thresholds to define IFAD Prior or Post Review for procurement of goods, works
and/or services;
The process of vendor preparation and selection:
Carried out by procurement agent services for complex procurement that has high risk, need technology high, use
specially designed equipment, and / or difficult to define technically and to meet the needs and objectives of
Procurement.
Carried out by working group for procurement with medium to low risk or budget value equal to US$ 200,000, and for
the procurement of consultancy with a budget value equal to US$ 100,000;
Carried out by procurement officials or officials of procurement commitments (Pejabat pengadaan) for low risk and low
value procurement or special procurement as stated by NPPA No. 12 of 2018.
35/39
208.
Procurement Plan. The National Project Management Unit (NPMU) will initially prepare an 18-month Procurement Plan,
building on the preliminary Procurement Plan attached in Annex 7, and will update it annually or as required to reflect actual
implementation needs. Procurement will be undertaken as per the consolidated Procurement Plan submitted by the NPMU for no
objection by IFAD. The application of different methods of procurement for goods, works, services or other services will be in
accordance with the methods of procurement for goods, works, other services and services as established and approved in the
Procurement Plan. Unapproved variations and non-compliance will be considered as mis-procurement. IFAD will undertake to
review the provisions for the procurement of good, works and services to ensure that the procurement process is carried out in
conformity with the applicable rules and regulations consistent with IFAD's Procurement Guidelines.
209.
Governance. Indonesia is ranked 89th out of 180 countries, with a score of 38/100 in the Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI)
published by Transparency International in 2018, which indicates substantial corruption risk. IFAD will apply a zero-tolerance
policy on appearances of corruption. The NPMU will prepare a program framework for transparency and public notice and ensure
that procurement is carried out in accordance with GoI and IFAD regulations (including the Policy on Preventing Fraud and
Corruption) and with project design specifications. It will be included in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and published
on TEKAD website. Provisions will include: (i) compliance with internal procedures and controls for project activities, following
international best practice standards for the purpose of preventing corruption, money laundering and the financing of terrorists; (ii)
the publication/posting of all procurement, calls for proposals, contract awarding and business partnership details on local
newspapers, at district and provincial offices and on TEKAD website, including assessment criteria and weighing; (iii) the
participation of representatives of end-users in bid assessments; (iv) the prompt communication to bidders of bid evaluation
outcomes; (v) contracts will include a provision requiring suppliers, contractors and consultants to ensure compliance with IFAD
zero tolerance anticorruption policy and to permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating to the bid
submission and contract performance, and to have them audited by IFAD-appointed auditors; (vi) annual financial audits, with a
random sample transaction, will be performed in accordance with International Standards of Auditing by an independent auditor
accepted to IFAD; (vii) IFAD’s direct supervision process will specifically address fiduciary compliance and the implementation of
the Project framework for transparency and public notice; (viii) programme stakeholders will be directly involved in programming,
implementing and M&E of the project activities; (ix) evaluation and impact assessment will be outsourced to professional
independent institutions; and (x) rules will allow potential project beneficiaries and other stakeholders to channel and address any
complaints they may have on TEKAD implementation.
210.
This framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by all NPMU, PPIU and DPIU staff and consultants, and
a code of business ethics, to be signed by all partners and beneficiaries of TEKAD activities. The draft framework and codes will
be prepared with support from the Programme Expeditor and subsequently discussed and agreed upon at the project inception
workshop.
211.
Other measures reflected in project design to ensure transparency include the following: (i) IFAD’s direct supervision process will
specifically address fiduciary compliance and the implementation of the project framework for transparency and publicity; (ii)
project stakeholders will be directly involved in programming, implementation and M&E of TEKAD activities; (iii) Coordination
platforms will provide a forum for raising issues affecting the implementation of activities, including transparency.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
212.
M&E system. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Knowledge Management (KM) system will: (i) provide programme
stakeholders at the three levels of intervention with information and analyses to assess programme achievements and support
decision-making to improve programme performance; (ii) allow villagers and other programme beneficiaries to assess the return
brought by innovation, and to make informed decisions for the development of profitable and sustainable economic activities; and
(iii) develop scalable models for Eastern Indonesia, whilst inspiring innovation by prompting stakeholders to try out new
approaches.
213.
TEKAD will organise access to information and knowledge sharing through a web-based Management Information System (MIS)
that will be developed based on interaction with users, and will start from village-owned Village Information System, building on
KOMPAK successful pilot in Papua and West Papua. TEKAD MIS will track and regularly update gender-disaggregated financial
and technical data on project outputs and outcomes, lessons learnt and good practices. A service provider will set up the system
along indications to be provided by the M&E/KM consultant hired at project onset and provide training to relevant staff.
214.
The MIS will generate weekly dashboards showing progress on key outputs and objectives, profiling DPIU and PPIU
performance and showing progress towards meeting key project indicators. Regular meetings will be held at the various levels to
review progress, discuss issues, and update project status. The use of mobile applications like WhatsApp, Facebook and Twitter
will facilitate the exchange of information throughout wide project target areas and will foster team building. The Eastern
Indonesia Gateway will facilitate transparent access to project achievements and innovations.
215.
M&E and KM plans. The M&E plans will be prepared by the NPMU in line with IFAD and GoI requirements, drawing on, and
consolidating, inputs received from the district and provincial levels. The system will be harmonized with that of MoV, and in
particular with the Smart Village data system to be developed under P3PD, so that TEKAD-related data can be easily used by
GoI. Short-term international TA will be hired by the NPMU as part of the start-up process to produce a detailed M&E/KM
manual, to be translated into easy-to-grasp guidelines in Bahasa Indonesia, and a first M&E Annual Implementation Plan, which
will be largely shared and matched with capacity building at provincial and district level. Annual planning KM for KM will be part of
the Annual Plan for Model Development, Innovation and Communication described under Sub-component 3.2. The Annual
Implementation Plan will be revised every year and will make part of the Annual Work Plan and Budget.
36/39
216.
Baseline and completion survey. The NPMU will undertake a baseline study, measuring the status of impact and outcome
indicators at programme onset, with assistance from an outsourced qualified consulting firm. The baseline study will be updated
during the first year of programme implementation through the mapping studies (Subcomponent 2.2). Impact surveys will be
carried out at three points during project implementation, at baseline in 2018/19, in preparation to the second interim review (end
of PY 4) and prior to project completion. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the programme’s Annual Work Plans
and Budget (AWPB), which, except in Year 1, will build on AWPBs prepared by the districts.
217.
KM agenda. One of the programme outcomes is that an enabling policy, institutional and media environment facilitates village
economic development. Given the strong policy focus, it is necessary for the programme to develop KM strategy to ensure that
knowledge generated within the project is systematically identified, analyzed, documented and shared, and that it is used to: (i)
improve project performance and delivery; (ii) document and share innovations, best practices and stories of successes and
failures to improve project intervention and support mainstreaming in national processes and upscaling; and (iii) identify important
issues to convey to policy makers. Particular attention will be given to the regular development and update of Orientation and
Capacity Building Packages (Subcomponent 3.2), which will provide a set of evidence-based and replicable models for improving
the use of village resources and for developing village partnerships with public and private players in support of inclusive and
sustainable village economic development.
218.
In consultation with project stakeholders and in collaboration with the Senior M&E Specialist and the Policy Development and KM
Specialist, the same consultant hired to design the M&E system will prepare a detailed KM framework and implementation plan.
The framework will include objectives, responsibilities and methodology, including the development of Annual Plans for Model
Development, Innovation and Communication.
219.
Online communication approach utilizing the Eastern Indonesia Gateway, instant messenger, social media and short videos, will
be used to reach wider audience, communicating the programme objectives, efforts and outcomes, also inspiring the local youth
on economic opportunities that they could start in their own village. The Eastern Indonesia Gateway will be connected to
GoDesa, the online platform that will be developed by MoV, with support from P3PD.
b. Innovation and scaling up
220.
Innovation. Main innovative features brought by TEKAD are as follows:
A new approach for supporting the planning of Village Fund resources for village economic development, designed to boost
village growth and improve the impact of the Village Fund on village livelihoods. The approach rests on: (i) the provision to
villages of useful economic information, particularly with regard to market opportunities and opportunities to retain a larger
portion of the final value added along target value chains; (ii) the development of a medium-term economic strategy to guide
gradual development in line with potential and capacities; (iii) District Marketing Strategies to support villagers’ market access;
A new approach for promoting villagers’ access to public and private service providers in support of village economic
development at district level, based on: (i) District Strategies for Access to Business Development Services; (i) setting up
rosters of qualified service providers at district and provincial level; promoting the use of Village Fund and district budget
resources to finance the cost of service providers;
Village Desks, or a mechanism within the district administration ensuring easy access to economic information and quick
referral to district departments;
Village cluster development, whereby groups of villages will engage in the production and marketing of the same commodity,
which will improve producers’ market access, bargaining power and remuneration through stronger organisation, increased
quantity, quality and delivery reliability, and economies of scale;
Innovative financial products and services, meeting the financing needs of villagers in the target value chains, including
alternative solutions to bank financing;
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, which will guide economic development and support capacity building through
multi-media presentations accessible online and offline and reflecting TEKAD innovations;
221.
The Eastern Indonesia Gateway, which will connect village players to knowledge and innovation, as well as services and
markets.
222.
Additionally, TEKAD will facilitate the identification, documentation and dissemination of innovative practices developed in the
target areas in relation to products and activities supported by TEKAD, through a simple system building on World Bank-financed
Village Innovation Programme methodology.
223.
Scaling up. GoI has attributed high priority to leveraging Village Fund resources to promote economic development, which sets
up a conducive political and institutional framework for replicating and scaling up programme achievements. Besides, TEKAD has
been designed with the purpose of developing evidence-based and replicable models for improving the use of village resources
and for developing village partnerships with public and private players in support of inclusive and sustainable village economic
development. Elements specifically designed to support scaling up include: (i) a solid M&E and KM system allowing to track
achievements, document approaches and outcomes and disseminate them to public and private stakeholders in Eastern
Indonesia; (ii) Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, which will remain available to orient scaling-up and the building of
new capacities; (iii) implementation through existing organisations personnel, building on existing systems, which will enable
scaling-up throughout districts and provinces; (iv) involvement of policy makers at national and provincial levels in implementation
and through evidence-based policy dialogue; (v) coordination platforms at the provincial and national level, which will disseminate
knowledge on programme achievements and advocate central and local authorities for policy changes; and (vi) strengthening
national and provincial capacities.
37/39
M. Implementation plans
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.
224.
GoI is expecting implementation to start in January 2020.
225.
To enable fast start-up once the project is approved, MoV has started organising socialisation activities at provincial level about
TEKAD to share programme plans with provincial and district stakeholders. Additionally, it is expected that MoV will start with
preparatory activities even before the Financing Agreement is signed, including with regard to appointing programme staff and
preparing for hiring programme consultants. These will include two Programme Expeditors/supporting consultants to facilitate
project start-up - setting up programme management systems and initiating tenders in support of technical activities. It is
anticipated that TEKAD will start in the first quarter of 2019.
226.
Start-up workshops. A national start-up workshop will be organized with all project stakeholders and implementing partners,
including from the five target provinces, to ensure broad-based understanding and adherence to TEKAD scope and implementing
modalities, and to introduce key processes, tools, strategies as well as the M&E and KM system. Start-up workshops will
subsequently be organized in every participating province.
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
227.
The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Following IFAD standards, joint supervision missions will be conducted with the
Government of Indonesia once a year, complemented by implementation support missions as needed but not less than once a
year. An early implementation support mission will be mobilized within the first three months of project effectiveness. Continuous
follow-up to implementation will be provided by the IFAD sub-regional office. Supervision and implementation support missions
will offer an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to review innovations, and to reflect on improvement
measures; these missions will therefore be an integral part of the KM cycle, playing a supportive and coaching role.
228.
Mid Term Review. A Mid Term Review will take place at the end of PY 3 with a view to: (i) assess the results, efficiency and
effectiveness of the project; (ii) identify key lessons learnt and good practices; (iii) review institutional arrangements; and (iv)
provide recommendations for improved performance and the achievement of impact.
229.
Supervision missions and the Mid Term Review will focus on the following themes:
Overall project implementation and performance.
Best performing models and opportunities for scaling up .
Performance in attributing Village Fund and other resources to support village economic development.
Progress in engaging women, youth and marginalised groups in village development planning and in all project activities;
Performance of the NPMU, PPIU and DPUI in terms of required reporting, disbursement targets, implementation schedule and
resolving implementation issues
Performance of key implementation partners in delivering services to project beneficiaries within the framework of TEKAD,
including technical assistance, business development services and financial services among others.
Linkages and synergies between the three components;
230.
The Mid Term Review will also be a key milestone to assess the prospects for sustainability of the processes triggered by the
project, including the extent to which a conducive ecosystem has been developed whereby public and private programme
stakeholders are geared to take over from project interventions and support village economic development.. This Mid-Term
Review will make recommendations with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability of programme
achievements, based on which the NPMU will prepare a detailed exit strategy.
231.
Impact and outcome assessments. As per the current practice, three surveys will be carried out during project implementation
aimed at assessing the project impact and outcomes: at baseline, in PY 4 and at project completion.
232.
Completion Review. By the end of the project, an in depth Completion Review will be undertaken with two main objectives:
reporting on project outputs, outcomes and achievements, and systematizing and sharing the learnings emerging from the
implementation experience. The themes to be included will be basically the same included along the supervision and mid-term
review, although the learning dimension of the completion review will require deepening on a number of key topics to be selected
prior to completion.
Footnotes
[1] IDM is based on 22 variables and 52 indicators that focus on four dimensions, namely social, economic, ecological and
environment. IDM classifies villages into the following categories: Highly Disadvantaged Villages (IDM value <0.491); Disadvantaged
Villages (IDM value 0.491 - 0.599); Developing Villages (IDM value 0.599 - 0.707); Advanced Villages (IDM value 0.707 - 0.815); and
Independent Villages (IDM value > 0.815).
38/39
[2] Unless justified by extraordinary events such as, for example, natural disasters or other emergencies.
[3] UNDP 2016. “Study on Women’s and Men’s Health and Life Experiences in Papua, Indonesia”.
[4] Policy brief: Indonesia: costs of climate change 2050, USAID 2016.
[5] 2019 estimate based on 2010 population census, BPS.
[6] Selection criteria are in Section II A b Geographic area of intervention.
[7]  Aliansi Masyarakat Adat Nusantara or Indigenous Peoples Alliance of the Archipelago (AMAN) represents 2,332 communities and
17,000 individuals.
[8] Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Desa - PMD.
[9] Pembangunan Partisipatif - PP.
[10] Pendamping Desa Pemberdayaan – PDP.
[11] Such as nurseries, storage sheds, processing equipment, pack houses, transport equipment, start-up kits…
[12] Pengembangan Ekonomi Desa – PED.
[13] Technologi Tepat Guna – TTG.
[14] Penyuluh Pertanian Lapangan – PPL.
[15] Pos Pelayanan Teknologi Desa or Rural Technology Center, as stipulated in PERMENDES (Minister of Village Regulation) No.
23/2017.
[16] Budgeted under sub-component 2.1 – District Support for Village Economic Development.
[17] Pendamping Desa Pemberdayaan – PDP.
[18] See Annex 5.
[19] And at any rate prior to carrying the awareness campaign in village districts described in Sub-component 1.1.
[20] Most likely the Economic Development Facilitator, who would complement currently existing facilitator positions at sub-district
level (Village Community Empowerment Facilitator and Village Technical Infrastructure Facilitator).
[21] Embedded services are technical or other types of services (including credit, in kind or in cash) that are provided within the
framework of a business transaction between a buyer or an input dealer, and village-based producers, without any direct payment
charged to the producers. For example, a buyer, in addition to marketing products, can provide technical assistance, training, finance
and/or inputs to its village-based suppliers. The buyer provides these services because it makes good business sense to do so and it
ensures the exporter receives high-quality goods from the producers. This type of embedded services often occurs in the frame of
contract farming. Another example is where technical advice is linked to the sale of agricultural inputs (e.g. seeds, fertiliser,
pesticides, veterinary drugs) and the costs of the advice are inbuilt in the price of the sold input.
[22] Bukalapak.com and Shopee.co.id.
[23] On the model of Ransiki cocoa cooperative (Manokwari) or the approach supported by WANTANAS (National Defence Council)
on sago.
[24] Joint BUMDes covering several villages.
[25] Budgeted under sub-component 2.1 – District Support for Village Economic Development.
[26] One Village Governance Facilitator for 4 villages, gradually phasing out – see Annex 5.
[27] Pendamping Desa Pemberdayaan – PDP.
[28] One Economic Initiatives Facilitator for 4 villages, gradually phasing out – see Annex 5.
[29] Such as GoDesa and other digital applications to be developed by P3PD, as well as online marketplaces with which MoV already
has a partnership.
[30] KKN is a university programme across Indonesia that links academic study with the practical experience of community service.
[31] A similar model currently applies for Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health.
[32] Expected to be available end of 2019.
[33] Currently being developed and to become available by end of 2019.
[34] See Section IV A a – Programme Management and Coordination.
[35] Asiosasi Pemerintah Desa Seluruh Indonesia (APDESI).
39/39
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Logical Framework
1/6
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Project M&E system
Annual
PMU
Household members
0 618450 1855350
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Project M&E system
Annual
PMU
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed
households
Households
0 123696
412300
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Project M&E system
Annual
PMU
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Indigenous people
Non-Indigenous people
Total number of persons
receiving services
Male
Female
Young
0 247392
824640
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
2/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Villages receiving services supported or promoted by the project Project M&E system
Annual
PMU
Villages receiving services
supported or promoted by the
project
0
680
1720
Project Goal 
Empowered village communities contribute to
rural transformation and inclusive growth in
Eastern Indonesia
Development Objective 
Enable rural households to develop
sustainable livelihoods, taking advantage of
strengthened village and district level
governance
Percentage of households receiving services promoted by
TEKAD increase: Real income in at least 30%; HH asset
ownership index (CI1 and COSOP)
Project M&E system
Households
0
30
60
Percentage of villages, where smallholders' farm and off-farm
businesses supported by the Village Fund and by the Project
are functioning effectively.
Project M&E system
Villages
0
20
70
PMU
Mid-term
review and
project end
PMU
Mid-term
and project
end
Outcome 
1. Village communities plan and implement
profitable economic initiatives taking advantage
of village resources
At least 30% of Village Fund (DD) and District Village Allocation
(ADD) budgeted for economic development
Village Fund
5
15
30
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Households
0
20
70
Annual
PMU, district
and village
authorities
Annual
PMU
Village Fund, village plans
and records on District
Village Allocation, Project
M&E system and Village
Information System
Village Fund, village plans
and records on District
Village Allocation, Project
M&E system and Village
Information System
Limited internal or
external shocks to
the economy
Sufficient viable
economic
opportunities to
attract interest in
developing
marketed production
Crop failure
resulting from
extreme weather
conditions
Economic
development is not
considered a priority
for Village Fund
Crop failure due to
weather events or to
lack of market
opportunities
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
3/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 1.1 Governance and capacities of
village communities to envision, plan and
implement village resources improved
Output 
Output 1.2 Village households enabled to
develop economic initiatives
Outcome 
2. Villages households have sustainable
access to markets and to public and private
services in support of village economic
initiatives
Average 30% increase in marketed volume and value of sales of
agricultural/marine products (COSOP)
Average increase
0
10
30
Persons engaged in village governance and administration
receiving capacity-building for preparing and implementing
development plans (COSOP)
Number of persons
0
6880
8600
Village Fund, village plans
and records on District
Village Allocation, Project
M&E system and Village
Information System
Project M&E system
Villages receiving capacity-building for economic initiatives
Project M&E system
Villages receiving capacity-
building support
0
688
1720
Annual
PMU
Semi-
annual
PMU
Semi-
annual
PMU
Village development plans including activities and resources in
support to economic activities
Viallge Fund and village
plans
Annual
PMU
Village development plans
0
688
1720
Districts integrating investment financing for target villages in
district plans
District plans
Annual
PMU
Participating districts
10
20
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs,
technologies or practices
Households
30
70
Project M&E system,
Village Information
System
Annual
PMU
Households satisfied with the relevance, quality and
accessibility of extension services provided by public and private
sector (COSOP)
Project M&E system,
Village Information
System
Annual
PMU
Households satisfied with
services provided by public and
private sector
20
80
Percentage of households reporting access to adequate
financial services (COSOP)
Project M&E system,
Village Information
System
Annual
PMU
In preparing village
development plans
prevails a short term
vision not inclusive
of economic
development
BDSPs and
agribusiness
interested in
partnering with
villages Internet
coverage on target
area
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
4/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 2.1 District and sub-district capacity
strengthened to extend technical services in
support to village economic development
Output 
2.2 Access to markets and business
development services for village-based
producers improved
Households reporting access to
financial services
20
60
District administrations receiving capacity-building for supporting
economic activities (COSOP)
District administrations
receiving capacity-building
support
0
10
25
1.1.7 Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy and/or
use of financial products and services
Females
Males
Young
Indigenous people
Persons in rural areas trained
in financial literacy and/or use
of financial products and
services
123500
329840
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Not young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Indigenous people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - savings
Project M&E system and
Village Information
System for all indicators
Semi-
annual
PMU and PPIU
Project M&E system and
Village Information
System for all indicators
Semi-
annual
PMU and PPIU
Project M&E system and
Village Information
System for all indicators
Semi-
annual
PMU and PPIU
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
5/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Non indigenous people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Not young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Indigenous people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - credit
Non indigenous people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - credit
Persons accessing financial
services - savings
Persons accessing financial
services - credit
80000
206150
80000
206150
People receiving services from BDSPs
People receiving services from
BDSPs
Households
80000
206150
Project M&E system and
Village Information
System for all indicators
Semi-
annual
PMU and PPIU
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
6/6
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
2.3 Access to financial services by Village-
based producers improved
1.1.6 Financial service providers supported in delivering
outreach strategies, financial products and services to rural
areas
Project M&E system and
Village Information
System for all indicators
Semi-
annual
PMU and PPIU
Outcome 
3. Enabling policy and institutional environment
facilitate village economic development that
builds on local opportunities and leverages the
Village Fund resources
Service providers
0
2
Policy analytical documents prepared and disseminated, and
regulatory instruments proposed to policy makers
Policy analytical documents
prepared and disseminated
0
3
5
6
Project reports, policy
briefs and proposals
Annual
PMU jointly
with MoV
Continuous support
from MoV
Output 
Output 3.1 Innovation, learning and knowledge
being documented and promoted
Output 
Increased impact of Village Law and Village
Fund on village economic transformation
Districts applying replicable models developed by TEKAD for
supporting village economic development leveraging Village
Find and village resources
Project M&E system
Annual
PMU jointly
with MoV
Districts applying replicable
models developed by TEKAD
0
8
20
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
0
3
6
Project M&E system,
District MIS, MoV
Annual
PMU jointly
with MoV
Districts with MIS and KM systems operational (COSOP)
Districts with MIS and KM
systems operational
0
10
25
Policy 2 Functioning multi-stakeholder platforms supported
Number
0
8
20
Project M&E system,
District MIS, MoV
Annual
PMU jointly
with MoV
Project M&E system,
District MIS, MoV
Annual
PMU jointly
with MoV
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
ANNEX 2: THEORY OF CHANGE
55
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
ANNEX 3: PROJECT COST AND FINANCING: DETAILED COST TABLES
A.
Programme Costs
Main assumptions
220.
Introduction. This annex describes the assumptions underlying the derivation of costs,
estimated costs and financing plan for the programme. Total programme costs are based on
November 2017 prices.
221.
Programme Period. The programme will be financed over a six-year period starting from
beginning 2020.
222.
Inflation. The base rate of inflation has been set at 4 percent up to programme start-up,
reaching 3.6 per cent for the last years of the programme.
223.
Exchange Rate. The exchange rate was fixed at US$ 1 = IDR 14,000 as per average
situation in 2018. Programme costs are presented in both IDR and US$ currency.
224.
Physical and price contingencies. Both types of contingencies have been taken into
account and included in the costing of programme.
225.
Taxes and Duties. There is VAT of 10% levied on all imported and locally procured goods
and services. The Government would finance the cost of all
taxes on goods and services
procured under the Programme. Most items procured under the Programme would be purchased
locally.
226.
Expenditure Accounts. Programme expenditure accounts will be the following:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
Civil works
Goods
Consulting services
Training
Operating costs
Grants
Beneficiary contributions
Recurrent costs
227.
Total costs. Total TEKAD cost inclusive of taxes and duties is estimated at US$ 702.03
million over a six-year implementation period. Programme investments are organized into three
components: Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment (86.5% of the costs); Component 2
– Partnerships for Village Economic Development (10.4%); and Component 3 – Innovation,
Learning and Policy Development (3.1%). Tables 1 to 8 below present the distribution of costs by
component, category of expenditure and disbursement account, and their distribution along the
project life.
228.
In conformity with the principle that no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds
of the IFAD Loan/Grant, any future changes in the rates and/or structures of taxes and duties
would have to be met by the Government. The estimate of taxes and duties was based on the
rates prevailing at the time of programme design.
229.
Financing. TEKAD will be financed from an IFAD loan of US$ 32.85 million, an IFAD grant of
US$ 1.50 million, beneficiary contribution estimated at US$ 27.08 million (cash and in-kind), GoI
contribution under the Village Fund estimated at US$ 541.60 million, and a GoI contribution in
taxes and staff salaries of US$ 18.99 million; the financing structure presents a gap of US$ 80
million, which will be financed by IFAD with resources from its next funding cycle (2022-2024) or
by a co-financier willing to partner and acceptable to the GoI. The current IFAD financing is
adequate to cover the first 3 years of implementation.
230.
The GoI contribution of Village Fund resources is set up under the framework of the Village
Law and is designated to fund village investments, including in economic infrastructure and
empowerment.
56
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
231.
The IFAD grant will be used to finance two different types of activities. On the one hand it will
finance all the activities related to policy development (Sub-component 3.2) which is an area of
priority for the GoI. On the other hand it will finance key international technical assistance to be
fielded at project inception, including for the design of the Orientation and Capacity Building
Packages (Sub-component 3.2)
for market opportunities and value chain analyses (Sub-
component 2.2), a climate risk and vulnerability assessment study (Sub-component 2.2), and the
Technical Programme Expeditor . This technical assistance will play a decisive role in shaping the
programme economic development strategy , and in providing the tools that will guide village
communities’ choices of priority commodities, economic development strategies, and planning
and capacity building programmes.
232. The foreign exchange component
is estimated at US$ 9.15 million. Taxes and duties are
estimated at US$ 12.27 million. Funds allocated to Programme Management amount US$ 14.42
million. Tables below summarize programme costs and financing.
57
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
Table 1: Components Project Cost Summary
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Com ponents Project Cost Sum m ary
A. Village Econom ic Em pow erm ent
1. Village Governance
2. Village Economic Initiatives
Subtotal Village Econom ic Em pow erm ent
B. Partnerships for Village Econom ic Developm ent
1. District Support for Village Economic Development
2. Economic Services
3. Financial Services
Subtotal Partnerships for Village Econom ic Developm ent
C. Innovation, Learning and Policy Developm ent
1. Innovation, Learning and Inspiration
2. Policy Development and Institution Building
3. Programme Management
Subtotal Innovation, Learning and Policy Developm ent
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
(IDR Billion)
Foreign
Local
Total
Local
(US$ '000)
Foreign
Total
% Total
%
Foreign
Base
Exchange Costs
271.0
8 161.3
8 432.4
733.1
50.3
94.2
877.6
43.6
45.1
159.1
247.8
9 557.7
77.8
156.4
9 791.9
20.1
19.7
39.9
38.3
4.3
2.1
44.7
5.3
0.8
25.6
31.6
116.2
6.2
9.4
131.8
291.1
8 181.1
8 472.2
19 282.2
580 671.9
599 954.1
771.4
54.6
96.3
922.3
48.8
46.0
184.6
279.4
9 673.9
84.0
165.8
9 923.8
52 157.4
3 578.5
6 703.6
62 439.5
3 098.8
3 210.6
11 318.3
17 627.7
680 021.2
5 538.9
7 317.0
692 877.1
1 431.5
1 404.7
2 836.1
2 728.3
303.0
150.0
3 181.3
374.1
59.3
1 818.3
2 251.7
8 269.1
440.3
440.6
9 150.0
20 713.7
582 076.5
602 790.2
54 885.6
3 881.5
6 853.6
65 620.7
3 472.9
3 269.8
13 136.7
19 879.4
688 290.3
5 979.3
7 757.6
702 027.1
7
-
-
5
8
2
5
11
2
14
11
1
7
6
1
3
85
88
8
1
1
10
1
-
2
3
100
1
1
102
58
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
Table 2: Components by Financier
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Com ponents by Financiers
(US$ '000)
A. Village Econom ic Em pow erm ent
1. Village Governance
2. Village Economic Initiatives
Subtotal Village Econom ic Em pow erm ent
B. Partnerships for Village Econom ic Developm ent
1. District Support for Village Economic Development
2. Economic Services
3. Financial Services
Subtotal Partnerships for Village Econom ic Developm ent
C. Innovation, Learning and Policy Developm ent
1. Innovation, Learning and Inspiration
2. Policy Development and Institution Building
3. Programme Management
Subtotal Innovation, Learning and Policy Developm ent
Total PROJECT COSTS
IFAD Loan
Am ount
IFAD Grant
Am ount
Financing Gap
Am ount
The Governm ent
Am ount
%
%
%
Beneficiary
Am ount
%
Village Fund
Am ount
%
%
Total
Am ount
%
5 713
2 438
8 151
15 763
1 106
2 630
19 498
665
392
4 149
5 206
32 855
24.7
0.4
1.3
25.8
25.8
34.8
26.7
17.0
10.7
28.8
23.7
4.7
-
-
-
-
354
-
354
-
1 047
100
1 147
1 500
-
-
-
-
8.3
-
0.5
-
28.5
0.7
5.2
0.2
15 086
11 323
26 409
36 424
2 461
4 195
43 079
2 862
1 970
5 680
10 512
80 000
65.3
1.9
4.4
59.6
57.5
55.5
59.0
73.0
53.7
39.4
47.8
11.4
2 289
1 529
3 818
8 932
360
740
10 033
392
262
4 487
5 141
18 992
9.9
0.3
0.6
14.6
8.4
9.8
13.8
10.0
7.1
31.1
23.4
2.7
-
27 080
27 080
-
4.6
4.5
-
541 600
541 600
-
92.7
89.2
23 087
583 971
607 058
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27 080
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
541 600
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
77.1
61 119
4 280
7 565
72 964
3 918
3 671
14 416
22 006
702 027
3.3
83.2
86.5
8.7
0.6
1.1
10.4
0.6
0.5
2.1
3.1
100.0
59
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
Table 3: Expenditure Accounts by Financier
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers
(US$ '000)
I. Investm ent Costs
A. Civil Works
B. Equipment and Materials
C. Vehicles
D. Training and Studies
E. Technical Assistance
International TA
National TA
Subtotal Technical Assistance
F. Operating Costs
G. Village Grants
H. IFAD Grant
I. Beneficiary Contribution
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Increm ental Operating Costs
Other Operating Costs
Equipment O&M
Vehicle O&M
Subtotal Increm ental Operating Costs
B. Increm ental Salaries
Salaries
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
IFAD Loan
Am ount
IFAD Grant
Am ount
Financing Gap
Am ount
The Governm ent
Am ount
%
%
%
Beneficiary
Am ount
%
Village Fund
Am ount
%
%
Total
Am ount
%
689
2 198
2 367
5 314
1 454
15 848
17 302
4 986
-
-
-
32 855
-
-
-
-
8.9
30.4
56.5
29.4
60.4
26.1
27.4
20.1
-
-
-
4.7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 500
-
1 500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100.0
-
0.2
-
-
-
-
6 266
4 308
1 403
10 956
953
38 779
39 732
17 335
-
-
-
80 000
-
-
-
-
81.1
59.6
33.5
60.6
39.6
63.9
63.0
69.9
-
-
-
11.5
-
-
-
-
773
723
419
1 808
-0
6 070
6 070
2 480
-
-
-
12 272
-
-
-
-
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
-
10.0
9.6
10.0
-
-
-
1.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27 080
27 080
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100.0
3.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
541 600
-
-
541 600
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100.0
-
-
77.9
-
-
-
-
7 727
7 230
4 189
18 078
2 407
60 697
63 103
24 801
541 600
1 500
27 080
695 307
-
-
-
-
1.1
1.0
0.6
2.6
0.3
8.6
9.0
3.5
77.1
0.2
3.9
99.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
32 855
-
-
4.7
-
-
1 500
-
-
0.2
-
-
80 000
-
-
11.4
6 720
6 720
18 992
100.0
100.0
2.7
-
-
27 080
-
-
3.9
-
-
541 600
-
-
77.1
6 720
6 720
702 027
1.0
1.0
100.0
60
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
Table 4: Project Components by Year – totals including contingencies
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Com ponents by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies
(US$ '000)
A. Village Econom ic Em pow erm ent
1. Village Governance
2. Village Economic Initiatives
Subtotal Village Econom ic Em pow erm ent
B. Partnerships for Village Econom ic Developm ent
1. District Support for Village Economic Development
2. Economic Services
3. Financial Services
Subtotal Partnerships for Village Econom ic Developm ent
C. Innovation, Learning and Policy Developm ent
1. Innovation, Learning and Inspiration
2. Policy Development and Institution Building
3. Programme Management
Subtotal Innovation, Learning and Policy Developm ent
Total PROJECT COSTS
2020
2021
Totals Including Contingencies
2024
2023
2022
2025
Total
119.7
-
119.7
5 915.0
798.9
53.0
6 767.0
49.0
563.3
2 986.7
3 599.0
10 485.7
4 636.2
43 529.0
48 165.2
8 781.1
438.1
2 419.8
11 639.0
391.3
304.3
2 207.5
2 903.2
62 707.4
6 647.2
97 657.4
104 304.6
7 938.3
149 519.2
157 457.4
2 365.1
147 750.3
150 115.5
1 380.6
145 514.6
146 895.1
23 087.0
583 970.6
607 057.6
13 286.9
1 078.7
2 544.1
16 909.6
1 003.2
797.0
2 373.0
4 173.2
125 387.5
15 756.1
1 048.9
2 369.9
19 174.9
807.3
626.6
2 172.9
3 606.9
180 239.2
12 914.7
669.9
177.9
13 762.5
823.5
683.8
2 320.7
3 827.9
167 705.9
4 464.9
245.9
-
4 710.8
844.1
696.2
2 355.4
3 895.6
155 501.5
61 118.7
4 280.3
7 564.7
72 963.8
3 918.5
3 671.1
14 416.2
22 005.8
702 027.1
61
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
Table 5: Expenditure Accounts by Components
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Partnerships for Village
Innovation, Learning and Policy
Expenditure Accounts by Com ponents - Totals Including Contingencies
Econom ic Developm ent
(US$ '000)
Village Econom ic
District
Developm ent
Policy
Em pow erm ent
Support for
Innovation, Developm ent
Village
Village
Learning
and
Village
Econom ic Econom ic Econom ic
Financial
and
Institution Program m e
Governance InitiativesDevelopm ent Services
Services
Inspiration
Building Managem ent
Total
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Civil Works
B. Equipment and Materials
C. Vehicles
D. Training and Studies
E. Technical Assistance
International TA
National TA
Subtotal Technical Assistance
F. Operating Costs
G. Village Grants
H. IFAD Grant
I. Beneficiary Contribution
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Increm ental Operating Costs
Other Operating Costs
Equipment O&M
Vehicle O&M
Subtotal Increm ental Operating Costs
B. Increm ental Salaries
Salaries
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
-
5 686.0
-
1 140.2
4 751.0
285.7
-
-
3 552.4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 040.9
-
7 726.9
822.9
40.6
82.8
3 523.3
3 062.1
3 146.3
7 026.7
1 081.8
201.4
11 107.4
11 308.7
-
36.3
36.3
344.7
42 617.7
42 962.4
10 555.3
1 294.1
8 084.0
- 541 600.0
-
-
-
27 080.0
-
-
-
323.0
425.7
748.7
31.8
-
353.5
-
162.8
375.2
538.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
230.9
230.9
189.2
636.3
7 229.6
4 188.7
155.0
18 077.9
1 374.8
2 406.6
5 903.7
60 696.7
7 278.5
63 103.4
-
-
-
-
-
1 782.9
543.1
2 509.7
24 800.9
-
-
-
-
-
541 600.0
1 046.5
100.0
1 500.0
-
-
27 080.0
23 087.0 583 970.6
57 946.7
4 280.3
7 564.7
3 918.5
3 671.1
10 868.6
695 307.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 172.1
3 172.1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 547.6
6 719.6
3 547.6
6 719.6
23 087.0 583 970.6
61 118.7
4 280.3
7 564.7
3 918.5
3 671.1
14 416.2
702 027.1
62
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
Table 6: Expenditure Accounts by Years
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies
(US$ '000)
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Civil Works
B. Equipment and Materials
C. Vehicles
D. Training and Studies
E. Technical Assistance
International TA
National TA
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Total
Totals Including Contingencies
-
112.2
2 103.7
2 485.3
2 535.0
189.2
1 804.5
2 390.6
2 432.0
204.6
490.7
208.7
7 726.9
7 229.6
1 807.7
676.1
844.1
860.9
-
-
4 188.7
1 241.3
3 523.2
5 561.0
4 507.3
1 968.5
1 276.6
18 077.9
968.1
405.6
422.2
123.8
241.1
245.9
2 406.6
3 729.9
9 759.8
14 329.0
17 423.5
11 456.5
3 997.9
60 696.7
Subtotal Technical Assistance
4 698.0
10 165.5
14 751.2
17 547.3
11 697.6
4 243.8
63 103.4
F. Operating Costs
G. Village Grants
H. IFAD Grant
I. Beneficiary Contribution
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Increm ental Operating Costs
Other Operating Costs
Equipment O&M
Vehicle O&M
Subtotal Increm ental Operating Costs
B. Increm ental Salaries
Salaries
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
467.5
3 274.4
5 165.4
6 730.8
5 602.1
3 560.7
24 800.9
-
40 000.0
88 800.0
137 600.0
137 600.0
137 600.0
541 600.0
1 016.8
65.0
223.2
65.0
65.0
65.0
1 500.0
-
2 000.0
4 440.0
6 880.0
6 880.0
6 880.0
27 080.0
9 420.4
61 620.8
124 279.2
179 108.8
166 552.8
154 325.4
695 307.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 065.2
1 086.5
1 108.3
1 130.4
1 153.0
1 176.1
6 719.6
1 065.2
1 086.5
1 108.3
1 130.4
1 153.0
1 176.1
6 719.6
10 485.7
62 707.4
125 387.5
180 239.2
167 705.9
155 501.5
702 027.1
63
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing
Table 7: Disbursement Accounts by Financiers
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Disbursem ent Accounts by Financiers
(US$ '000)
IFAD Loan
IFAD Grant
Financing Gap
The Governm ent
Beneficiary
Village Fund
Total
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
1. Civil Works
2. Goods
3. Consulting Services
4. Training
5. Operating Costs
6. Grants
7. Beneficiary Contribution
8. Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
689
4 565
17 302
5 314
4 986
-
-
-
8.9
40.0
27.4
29.4
20.1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.3
-
-
6 266
5 711
39 732
10 956
17 335
-
-
-
81.1
50.0
63.0
60.6
69.9
-
-
-
773
1 142
6 070
1 808
2 480
-
-
10.0
10.0
9.6
10.0
10.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27 080 100.0
6 720
100.0
-
-
3.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 727
11 418
63 103
18 078
24 801
1.1
1.6
9.0
2.6
3.5
541 600
99.7
543 100
77.4
-
-
-
-
27 080
6 720
3.9
1.0
541 600
77.1
702 027
100.0
32 855
4.7
1 500
0.2
80 000
11.4
18 992
2.7
27 080
64
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
ANNEX 4: ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
A. INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY
1.
–
Transformasi  Ekonomi  Kampung  Terpadu
Integrated  Village  Economic
Transformation  (TEKAD)  aims  at  empowering  village  communities  so  they  can
contribute  to  rural  transformation  and  inclusive  growth  in  Eastern  Indonesia.  The
programme  development  objective  is to  enable rural  households  to  develop
sustainable  livelihoods,  taking  advantage  of  strengthened  village  and  district  level
governance.  The TEKAD design builds on the  experience gained from GoI’s National
Program 
- Program  Nasional  Pemberdayaan
Masyarakat  (PNPM),  and  from  IFAD’s  past  programmes  supporting  PNPM  (PNPM
Pertanian/Agriculture)  and  the  implementation  of  the  2014  Village  Law  (Village
Development Programme) in Papua and West Papua.
for  Community  Empowerment
2.
TEKAD will assist MoV in developing an evidence-based approach for empowering villages to
make  a  better  use  of  Village  Fund  and  other  village  resources  in  support  of  economic  development
by: (i) building village and household capacities in planning, implementing and monitoring a significant
share  of  Village  Fund  resources  for  inclusive  economic  initiatives  bringing  sustainable  revenues;  (ii)
developing an enabling environment, whereby: districts/sub-districts will provide support services and
better  integrate  village  needs  into  district  economic development  planning;  market  players will  be
linked  to  village-based  producers;  and  financial  and  non-financial  service  providers  will  extend
services  meeting  the  needs  of  villages;  and  (iii)  raising  MoV  capacities  to  implement  TEKAD’s
innovative  approach and  to  develop  evidence-based  replicable  models  for  village  economic
development in Eastern Indonesia.
3.
TEKAD  will operate  in twenty-five districts in the five  eastern provinces of Indonesia - Papua,
West  Papua,  Maluku,  North  Maluku,  and  East  Nusa  Tenggara.  In  these  districts,  TEKAD  will  target
1,720 villages and around 412,300 households (HH), benefiting approximately 1,855,350 people. The
design  mission  of  TEKAD  carried  out  the  Economic  and  Financial  Analysis  (EFA)  to  assess  the
financial and economic viability of the TEKAD investments.
4.
Methodology  and  Approach  of  EFA. The  programme  support  uses  a  demand-based
approach.  As  such  definite  communities  /  villages  have  not  been  selected  at  the  design  stage.
Through a detailed selection process the programme will name the villages and corresponding crops /
livestock  /  fisheries  /  non-timber  forest  products  (NTFP)  etc.  during  programme  implementation.
Villages will be phased in three batches, with the first two batches receiving four years support, and
the last one only three, in the manner summarised in the following table.
Table 1: Temporal distribution of programme targeted villages for interventions during the
programme period
Batches of villages
Core villages
Cluster villages first
batch
Cluster villages second
batch
PY1
-
-
-
PY2
500
PY3
500
610
PY4
500
610
610
PY5
500
610
610
PY6
610
610
5.
It is also assumed on the basis of documentation and observations that the average number of
HH  per  village  is  240. The  programme  approach  would  be  that  one  village  will  focus  on  one  or  two
crops  maximum  for  development,  and  also  it  assumed  that  about  70% of  the  total  number  of
households  in  the  villages  will  adopt  that  crop.  With  programme  interventions  in  community
mobilization  and  community  capacity  building,  getting  70%  of  the  HH  to  adopt  improved  production
practices and obtaining resultant livelihood improvement seems feasible over the programme period.
6.
On  such  assumptions, Error!  Reference  source  not  found. summarises  the  distribution  of
participating  HHs  in  each  province  by  the  programme  years.  Accordingly,  288,610  out  of  412,300
direct  beneficiary  HHs  in  the  five  provinces  will  improve  their  production  systems  (crops,  livestock,
NTPF  and  fisheries/aquaculture)  taking  the  advantage  of  the  village  development  that  would  be
65
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
financed  by  the  programme.  Out  of  this  288,610,  it  is  assumed  that  57,722  HH  will  start  the
improvement to their production systems in the 2nd year of the programme, and 86,583 start in the 3rd
year  and  so  on.  During  the  implementation  this  distribution  can  change,  depending  on  the
effectiveness  of  social  mobilization  etc.  For  the  financial  and  economic  evaluation  process  a
conservative  estimate  of  a  lower  number  of  HH,  about  20%  of  the  total  HHs,  is  assumed  at  the
beginning of the programme.
Table 2: Distribution of participating households
PY 2
18,995
9,732
9,665
9,665
9,665
PY 3
28,492
14,598
14,498
14,498
14,498
PY 4
28,492
14,598
14,498
14,498
14,498
PY 5
14,246
7,299
7,249
7,249
7,249
PY 6
4,749
2,433
2,416
2,416
2,416
Total
Uptake
94,973
48,661
48,325
48,325
48,325
Total
Nb HH
135,675
69,516
69,036
69,036
69,036
% of
Uptake
70%
70%
70%
70%
70%
57,722
86,583
86,583
43,292
14,431
288,610
412,300
70%
Province
Papua
West Papua
Maluku
North Maluku
NTT
Total Uptake of
HH
for 
X
X
X
X
that 
nine 
been 
Papua
Maluku
models 
selected 
Dry Land
West
Papua
North
Maluku
Agro-
Ecology->
East
Nusa
Tenggara
High Land,
Costal Region
and Low Land
7.
The final selection of crops and other enterprises that would be improved would be based on
the  factors  such  as  (i)  local  potential  and  community  demand;  (ii)  market  prices  and potential  for
growth;  (iii)  return  to  producers
and  potential 
increasing
added value. However, a range of
commodities 
are
technically
agronomically  and 
suitable for the programme areas
have 
and
subjected  to  a  financial  analysis
to  assess  their  profitability  to  be
promoted.  These  enterprises  are
shown  in  the  imbedded  table.
representative
These 
enterprise 
were
developed  using  the  information
collected  during  the  field  visits  of
the  design  team  through  direct
observation, 
group
meetings  with  producers  and  the
staff  of  various  institution  visited;
and  information  extracted  from
various  publications,  namely  World  Bank  Commodity  Forecast,  Tradekey.come  website,  alibab.com
website, UN COMTRADE Data Base (for international prices for processed cocoa and coffee beans),
IFAD design reports42 and the Economic Report on Indonesia (2018) published by Bank of Indonesia.
The main types  of data that  were  used for the EFA  include (i) crop  and enterprise budgets for farm
models;  (ii)  market  prices;  (iii)  capital  and  working  capital  expenditure  of  cultivation  and  processing
facilities; (iv) land tax (this was used only when new land is used for cultivation, since prevailing land
use had to pay it); FAO43; and (v) international prices for computing parity prices of coffee and cocoa.
The  enterprise  models were  analysed  using  the  partial  budgeting  approach44 to  assess  their
8.
financial  viability  and  their  contribution  to  the  family  income. Incremental  benefits  were  estimated
Crops /
Enterprises
Seaweed
Sea
Cucumber
Black
Pepper
Coffee
Pig
Cocoa
Bee Honey
Sweet
Potato
Bamboo
focus 
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
42 Youth Entrepreneurship and Employment Support Services Programme, IFAD, designed in Nov 2018], IFAD: Rome, Italy
43 Global status of Seaweed production, trade and utilization; FAO GLOBEFISH RESEARCH PROGRAMME, FAO, 2018
44 A partial budget only includes those costs of resources and benefits of outputs of an enterprise under analysis that would be
changed due to the influence of the programme. It does not consider the resources in the enterprise that are left unchanged.
For example, the cost of land (even the rent has not been included since WOP and WP rent is the same), cost of water if
applicable, cost of some tools that are not newly purchased but used for farming etc. Only the change under consideration is
evaluated for its ability to increase or decrease income in the farm enterprises. Where as in the accounting / book keeping
process, the full budget analysis will be used where all the resources and outputs are counted.
66
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
based on expected physical outputs during the 6-year implementation period of the programme and
potential  incremental  benefits  that  would  realise  during  the  balance  14-year  period  of  post-
implementation programme life.
9.
Attribution. The EFA methodology needs to identify a clear linkage between the beneficiaries
and one or more programme interventions to elicit benefits and corresponding costs. TEKAD mainly
has  a  village  and  community  development  focus.  The  beneficiaries’  investments  are  assisted  by
community  and  infrastructure  development.  However,  the  crop  model  analysis  took  only  the
producers’ investment into account. The broader development interventions that the EFA recognises
as the contributory / facilitative factors to create incremental costs and benefits of the enterprises that
were selected for the analysis are:
Village economic empowerment activities aiming at improving the abilities of village governments
and  communities  to  promote  and  implement  inclusive  and  sustainable  village  economic
development which include village level enterprises, using the Village Fund and leveraging other
resources to support such development;
The  programme  supported  village  economic  development  that  promote  an  ecosystem  whereby
villages  will  be  connected  to  their  environment  and  will  access  services,  markets  and  financing
which will finance some of the incremental costs of the enterprises;
Although  implemented  at  the  national  level,  evidence-based  learning,  policy  development  and
institutional  strengthening  would  support  of  village  economic  development  in  Eastern  Indonesia,
which will have a trickledown positive effect on the development of the enterprises.
B. PROGRAMME COST, BENEFICIARIES AND ASSUMPTIONS
10.
The estimated cost of the TEKAD, generated from COSTAB, was used as the programme cost.
An  incremental  institutional  cost  is  required  after  the  programme period  to  continue  to  support  the
entrepreneurs who would start production during the programme period. A 5% of the programme cost
in the 6th programme year is used as this incremental cost.
11.
Error! Reference source not found. shows the distribution of 288,610 direct beneficiaries of
TEKAD by the different types of enterprises and by the programme implementation period. The main
parameters that determined the yearly distribution of them is the programme management capacity to
mobilise the beneficiaries.
Table 3: Total and cumulative distribution of beneficiary households in VC enterprise
receiving full benefits
Total HH
Practicing
the
enterprise
10,260
71,817
30,779
20,519
34,518
10,260
41,254
20,783
48,421
288,610
Commodities
Seaweed
Sea Cucumber
Black Pepper
Coffee
Pig production
Cocoa production
Bee Honey
Production
Sweet Potato
Bamboo
Total
Distribution of HH who start the enterprise by the Project Year
PY 2
2,052
14,363
6,156
4,104
6,904
2,052
8,251
4,157
9,684
57,722
PY 3
3,078
21,545
9,234
6,156
10,355
3,078
12,376
6,235
14,526
86,583
PY 4
3,078
21,545
9,234
6,156
10,355
3,078
12,376
6,235
14,526
86,583
PY 5
1,539
10,773
4,617
3,078
5,178
1,539
6,188
3,117
7,263
43,292
PY 6
513
3,591
1,539
1,026
1,726
513
2,063
1,039
2,421
14,431
12.
The  adoption  rate,  which  presents  the  rate  at  which  the  full  benefits  of  the  improvement  is
realised by those who started the enterprises, varies with the enterprise. The typical rates applied are:
1st programme year: 50%, meaning only 50% of the beneficiaries reached by the programme in this
year would apply all production technologies; 2nd year: 50%; 3rd year: 50-60%; 4th year: 80%; 5th year:
90%  and  6th year:  100%.  The  previous  IFAD  programmes  and  their  evaluations  were  used  as  the
basis for this assumption.
67



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
13.
The EFA was based on the following general assumptions:
The current enterprise budgets that were elicited through field discussions held with the producers
represent the “without programme - WOP” scenarios. The existing technologies and the prevailing
prices  of  inputs  and  outputs  were  used  to  derive  the  WOP  enterprise  budgets.  The  respective
“with  programme  (WP)”  situations  were  constructed  using  conservative  estimates  of  potential
changes to the costs and benefits of the models. These were provided by the design team.
All  benefits  were  estimated  using  2019  prices.  The  incremental  costs  and  benefits  of  the
programme-supported  enterprises  will  continue  for  a  20-year  period  which  include  the  6-year
programme implementation period.
For  all  activities  which  used  labour,  a  financial  rural  daily  wage  rate  of  Indonesia  Rupiah  (IDR)
70,000  per  person-day  for  skilled  labour  and  IDR  50,000  per  largely  unskilled  family  labour
(imputed cost of family labour) were used. These are the prevailing rates in the programme area.
The  imputed  cost  of  IDR  50,000  was  based  on  the  level  of  skill  and  also  the  abundance  of  the
family labour in the programme area.
Full production of the crops, livestock, bamboo, honey and fisheries models have been valued. It
is possible that a part of the production is domestically consumed, and it is in fact encouraged by
the programme to do so to provide enhanced nutrition to the family members. This portion is also
however valued at the same farm-gate price to reflect the full financial and economic value of the
production models.
C. FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
ENTERPRISE BUDGETS
14.
The  enterprise  budgets that  were  used  for  the  EFA  analysis  are  summarised  in Error!
Reference source not found.. The net benefits and the total labour used, hence rural employment,
of all the enterprises have increased in the “With Programme” case. The size of the enterprise unit is
the typical size that was observed in different areas. The information on actual farming systems and
the  combinations  of  enterprises  that  would  be  practiced  by  individual  HH  was  not  available  at  the
design stage. As highlighted, this is mainly  because  of the demand-driven nature of the programme
where the final selection of villages, beneficiaries and their actual farming systems would be known
during  the  1st year  of  the  implementation  stage. As  such  the  EFA  will  not  develop  farm models  with
combinations of crops/enterprise. Rather, the EFA will be developed on the basis of these enterprise
budgets  and  with  the  assumption  that  one  HH  would  practice  one  enterprise  among  those  that  are
listed  below. A  brief  description  of  each  enterprise  is  presented below  and  all  the  information  about
costs and returns are presented in the EFA excel sheets.
Seaweed  Farming. The  model  illustrates  an  investment  in  constructing  structures  for
15.
floating lines for seaweed  cultivation, small-scale sun drying facilities and material for collection  and
cleaning. The model assumes 50 seaweed lines per participating household which would expand on
about 1 ha. Harvesting would be done mostly by family labour with a frequency of every 40-60 days.
At maturity about 1500 kg of wet seaweed could be harvested per year (300 kg/harvest). With a 13%
conversion rate from wet to dry seaweed, and about 5% post-harvest lost, there will be about 1100 kg
per 0.5 ha for selling. Farm-gate price of IDR 7000 / kg is assumed for sale. In the WOP scenario, the
entire output is sold for IDR.4,000 to 5000 per kg. The main improvement would come from cleaning
(removing  sand)  and  proper  drying.  Technical  assistance  needed  will  be  provided  by  the
programme45. This will be practiced in Papua and West Papua provinces by estimated 10,260 HHs.
Sea Cucumber Farming. This faming is also practiced in the coastal provinces of Papua
16.
and West Papua  provinces by  estimated  71,817 HHs. The grow-out  of sea cucumber can either be
produced  extensively  by  stocking  juveniles  into  open  lagoon  areas  or  semi-extensively  in  contained
areas  within  lagoons.  The  latter  practice  is  budgeted  for  the  programme.  The  common  forms  of
containment are plastic fencing  which are budgeted  in the  EFA. The  possibility  of using a solid  wall
45 Ref source: Global status of seaweed production, trade and utilization; FAO GLOBEFISH RESEARCH PROGRAMME, FAO,
2018.
68




Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
formed  by  sand-filled  geobags  is  costly  and  hence  not  proposed.  One  ha  fencing  is  proposed  with
35,000 cucumbers for harvesting per year. This is possible with initial stocking density of 5 juveniles
per  m² (10,000  Sqm/ha).  Once  harvested  sea  cucumber  must  be disembowelled,  cooked  and  then
dried / salted. Disembowelling needs some skill and thus half of the total labour has to be hired. This
results in a 7 to 20% yield and in the analysis 8% conversion is assumed, which will yield about 35 gm
weighing  dried  cucumber.  Dried  sea  cucumbers  are  then  packaged  into  paper-lined  nylon  sacks,
usually  provided  by  the  farm-gate  buyer.  One  bag  is  about  20  kg  net  weight.   To  avoid  rehydrating,
vacuum packing may be necessary which will not be anticipated at the farm level. It is expected that a
good quality product  with  uniform and non-distorted  shape  with a pleasing smell  will be available at
the farm gate to get the 40% of the FOB price of US$ 77/dry kg.
Black pepper. It is assumed that one HH will replant 0.5 ha of old and low productive pepper
17.
as an effective land extent. This effective extent could be spread over a larger physical area than 0.5
ha but the for the purpose of EFA, 0.5 ha of effective extent with 900 poly-bags plants is considered.
Planting  material  will be  provided  by  community  nurseries.  The  pepper  vine  is  trained  on  a  live
support,  usually  Glyricidia  which  are  abundant.  It  is  assumed  the  newly  planted  pepper  will  start
yielding at the 4th  year  and have a  life cycle of about 30-years. Organic fertilizers and organic pest
controls methods would be applied. Harvesting, drying and semi-processing with grading can be done
by the family labour. At maturity 0.5 ha produce about 900 kg per year and has about 60% conversion
rate. About 30,770 HH will cultivate pepper in Papua and West Papua.
Coffee  replanting. About  20,500  HH  will  take  coffee  cultivation  in  the  same  provinces  as
18.
pepper. It is assumed that 1 ha of effective extent (the physical extent could be more than 1 ha) will be
cultivated  since  it  will  be  mainly  replanting  of  prevailing  coffee  as  a  mono  crop.  The  plant  density
would be brought to 2500 plants from about its 10% in the existing cultivation. Community nurseries
will  provide the  planting material. While the old plants with sporadic  density  per ha are giving some
yield at 100 kg per year, the new plants will have their full production in the 8th or 9th year, producing
about 1500 kg of dried beans.
Pig production. It is expected that 34,518 HH in the dry land provinces will raise pigs. The
19.
model assumes  pig  productivity  improvement  through  investments  in  animal  health,  nutrition,  well-
constructed  pen  and  sanitation  practices.   With  programme  technical  support  it  is  expected  that  the
knowledge  about  best  practices  related  to  the  animal  nutrition,  health  and  care  would  be  improved
and thereby the current high mortality rates about 40% would come down to 10%. In this model, each
member of the pig producer group assumed to have one sow and share a boar with another member.
The herd is assumed to be kept at 2 sows while 1-2-year-old piglets will be sold at a live weight price
of IDR. 70,000 per kg. Currently most of pigs are left outside for grazing; the mortality rates for sows
and piglets are 20% and 40% respectively; and the birth rate is 3 kidding per sow per year. This model
assumes that the mortality rates would drop to 10% for sows and 20% for piglets both starting from
the year 2; and the birth rate per sow would increase to 4 piglets per sow per year.
Cocoa cultivation. Papua and West Papua province will have 10,260 HH rehabilitating old
20.
cocoa lands, with an average effective extent of 1 ha. The investment in the model includes replanting
of  old  cocoa  to  bring  the  crop  stand  to  1125  plants  from  about  20%  of  that,  washing  facility  and
fermentation  boxes  for  fermentation  of  cocoa  beans.  Currently  the  farmers  in  the  programme  areas
have limited knowledge about pest control, farm level post-harvest processing and crop management
practices. Also, the lands that would be selected for rehabilitation would provide about 300 kg of un-
fermented  but  dried  cocoa  beans,  and  about  40%  of  cocoa  would  be  sold  as  wet  beans.  In  the
rehabilitation  model  it  is  expected  that  the  old  trees  would  be  rehabilitated  or  removed  and  newly
planted with seedlings; organic fertilizers and organic pest controls will be used; once the harvesting
starts in the 3rd year, it is expected that, with the programme- provided training and technical support,
farmers will ferment wet cocoa beans with mucilage, wash and dry them to have 12-13% moisture to
get the best price anticipated in the model. At the maximum, it is expected that only 30% of the beans
will be sold un-fermented. The full production will be reached in the 8th year.
Bee Honey Production About 41,250 HH in the dry land provinces will be expected to take
21.
up bee keeping at a scale of producing 300 kg of honey per year with 10 bee hives (10 boxes). It is
expected the this is a new enterprise for the HHs. Bee keeping requires small portion of land, capital,
labour,  knowledge and  skills  as  well  as  good  management  practices.  As  such  almost  all  the  work
done by the family labour. Initial investment includes purchasing of equipment and tools required for
69
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
starting the activity (ten complete beehives, gloves, mask, smoker etc.). About 10 beehives would be
managed by one HH. This will give about 300 kg of raw honey per year.
Sweet Potato. In the dry land provinces, it is expected that about 20,780 HH will grow sweet
22.
potatoes on an average extent of 1 ha. It is assumed that the cultivators with the technical knowledge
will  improve  the  productivity  and  reduce  production  losses. This  is  achieved  through  investments  in
improved  seeds,  biological  pest  control,  storage  facility  and  farm  practices.  Currently  sweet  potato
yields  about  50  tons per  hectare  of  which  around  15%  is  lost  due  to  an  inadequate  storage,  pest
attacks  and  crop  disease.  It  is  expected  that  the  production  will  go  up  to  about  65  tonnes,  and  the
production losses will be reduced to 5 percent; and organic fertilizer and biological pest control will be
applied.
Bamboo  cultivation. Bamboo  can  be  established  in  hilly  slopes  or  on  flat  lands.  It  is
23.
assumed  that  the  cultivation  analyzed  for  the  programme  uses  fairly  flat  land.  Petung  variety  is
assumed  and  about  48,420  HH  will  cultivate.  After  land  preparation  by  manual  labour,  clumps  of
bamboo are planted  with a spacing for of 4x5 meters, with  effective  planting  area, this  will give 250
clumps  per  ha.  Planting  is  assumed  to  be  carried  by  family  labour.  Plating  holes  are  dug  and  each
hole will have one seedling stake. Fertilizing is required at the plating stage and, thereafter 2-3 times
every  year.  Weeding  and  clumps  cleaning  will  be  assumed  to  get  the  maximum  production.
Harvesting of stems begins at the 5th year and at the maturity, 6-7 stems per clump can be extracted.
Extraction  needs  logging  skills  and  hence  the  use  of  hired  labour  for  this  operation  as  well.  The
average productive period of a clump is about 25 years46.
Table 4: Budgets of all enterprise models used for TEKAD EFA
Without Project (WOP)
Size of the
production
unit / HH
1 ha
Unit of
Production
Volume
kg
Production
[Sold
Volume/Yr]
1,010
Total labour
use (md/Yr)
147
Net benefits
(USD/Yr)
789
Incremental
Production at
FD / Yr
2,206
With Project (WP)
Incremental
labour use
(md/Yr)
365
Incremental
Net benefits
(USD/Yr)
694
1 ha
0.5 ha
1 ha
2 Sow hrd
1 ha
1 unit
1 ha
1 ha
Nb Cucumber
(each 350 g)
kg
kg
Pig - 25 kg each
kg
kg
kg
200
100
7
360
50,000
Mature Stems
300
5
18
91
15
53
2
94
577
111
154
53
2,240
900
1,500
12
1,692
55
1,485
300
65,000
676
1,750
78
15
73
183
63
110
147
41
2,539
2,038
3,095
527
1,444
758
1,685
3,128
Commodities
Seaweed farming
Sea Cucumber farming
[WOP benefits is
alternative labour use]
Black Pepper cultivation
Coffee Replanting
Pig Production Model
Cocoa cultivation
Bee Honey Production
[Alternate labour use]
Sweet potato
Bamboo Production: Spp -
Petung
FINANCIAL VIABILITY OF ENTERPRISES
24.
The  financial  viability  of  the  enterprises  was  assessed  using  the  several  indicators.  The
financial discount rate  of 9% is used  and this is the current lending rate as reported by the Bank of
Indonesia47. A 20-year production period for all the enterprises was used. This period represents one
full  cycle  of  production  of  cocoa,  coffee,  and  pepper;  several  production  cycles  for  seaweeds,  sea
cucumber,  pig,  bees  honey  and  sweet  potatoes;  and  about  three  quarters  for  bamboo.  All  the
enterprises listed in Error! Reference source not found. are financially viable to be promoted by the
programme.  The  both  sets  of  switching  values  also  demonstrate  that  these  enterprises  are  quite
robust to face decreases in benefits and increases in costs. All enterprises with their operation size as
shown in Error! Reference source not found. generate return to family labour which is higher than
the imputed family labour cost of IDR 50,000 per person-day (details in the EFA excel sheets).
46 Husnul Khotimah (2016), Feasibility Study of Bamboo Plantation Forest in Community Forest in Bali: Marketing Analysis and
Development Approach, Conference: International Conference Strengthening Indonesian Agribusiness: Rural Development
and Global Market Linkages, At Bogor, Indonesia).
47 Economic Report on Indonesia, Bank of Indonesia, 2018.
70
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
Table 5: Financial viability indicators of all enterprise models used for the EFA of TEKAD
Financial Profitability Indicators
B/C ratio
(at 9%, 20-
Yrs)
Switching
value of
Benefits
Switching
value of
Costs
Nb HH
practicing
over the
project period
10,260
71,817
30,779
20,519
34,518
10,260
41,254
20,783
48,421
Net income at
FD (IDR
1000/HH/Yr)
20,847
36,996
36,745
31,026
7,408
18,664
10,656
23,684
37,458
Commodities
Seaweed
Sea Cucumber
Black Pepper
Coffee
Pig Production
Cocoa
Bee Honey
Sweet potato
Bamboo
Note: FD = at Full Development; Net Income is what HH will get; Switching value indicates what % of
benefit should go down or % of cost to go up for the Benefit/Cost (B/C) ratio to be one.
1.12
3.51
16.88
3.85
1.15
2.64
1.72
2.75
3.59
12%
72%
578%
83%
15%
55%
32%
81%
73%
11%
72%
34%
21%
13%
21%
19%
30%
20%
NPV (9%; 20
Yrs) (USD)
1,335
13,213
6,571
5,998
971
3,860
4,084
9,700
5,891
Financial
IRR
16%
53%
34%
22%
32%
26%
61%
70%
20%
Net income
at FD
(USD/HH/Yr)
1,483
2,632
2,614
2,207
527
1,328
758
1,685
2,665
NPV (at 9%,
20-Yrs) (IDR
1000)
18,761
185,704
92,358
84,297
13,653
54,246
57,395
136,333
82,797
Return to
Family
Labour
(IDR/md)
88,174
701,426
130,926
781,841
40,589
233,197
157,636
295,850
779,146
PRODUCTION INCREASE IN ENTERPRISES
25.
The  programme  direct  beneficiaries  would  be  expected  to  increase  their  production  with
technical  advice,  financial  assistance,  and  marketing  support.  The  EFA  estimated  the  annual
production  levels  of  all  enterprises  at  full  development. Error!  Reference  source  not  found.
summarises  production  levels  of  all  enterprises  at  full  development  and  compares  them  with  that  of
the levels prior to the programme. The volumes presented in the table are dried and graded products
which are ready to sell. The production increase of all enterprises is substantial.
Table 6: Increase in production of commodities at full development
Commodities
Seaweed
Sea Cucumber
Black Pepper
Coffee
Pig Production
Cocoa
Bee Honey
Sweet potato
Bamboo
Total Production at Full
Development: WP (Mt/Yr)
22,330
160,367
27,393
29,944
139
16,973
12,455
1,335,295
82,316
Total Production:
WOP (Mt/Yr)
10,363
New
6,156
2,052
83
3,693
New
45,722
14,526
%
Increase
115%
345%
1359%
68%
360%
2820%
467%
71
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
IMPACT ON FAMILY INCOME AND POVERTY REDUCTION
in 
year 
26.
The  net  enterprise  income  that  is  expected  at  the  full  development  stage  of  the  programme
would vary from US$ 527 (IDR 7,408,000) per year per household from pig production to US$ 3,964
(IDR  55,719,200)  per  year
from 
pepper
black 
production.  In  comparison
to  average  rural  poverty
line  of  IDR  16,659,459  per
HH  per 
the
programme  area  (NTT  an
example)48,  the  expected
income  from  most  of  the
enterprises  of  the  TEKAD
beneficiaries  would 
be
notably higher. As such the
programme  will  have  a
positive  impact  on  poverty
reduction.  As  indicated  in
the  below  graph,  pig
production, and bee honey,
not
however, 
generate adequate  income that is above the annual poverty line. This is due to the smaller scale of
production  of  these  two  commodities.  These  commodities  are  financially  viable  and  as  such  worth
promoting by the programme subject to the fact that, these enterprises are practiced in combination
with others to generate adequate HH income.
would 
IMPACT ON EMPLOYMENT
27.
The  programme  has  a  net  gain  of  employment  for  22,630  persons,  or  about  6.7  million  man-
days  per  year  (see Error!  Reference  source  not  found.).  This  is  for  the  hired  labour  working  for
wages. The family labour  usage has also increased  as shown  in the table below. Since most of the
family  labour  as  a  practice  work  as  wage  labours,  the  incremental  demand  due  to  programme
activities will also generate an income to add to the family income.
Table 7: Increase in employment due to changes in the enterprises at full development
Total Labour Use at Full
Development: WP (md/Yr)
Total Labour Use at Full
Development: WOP
(Mt/Yr)
Rural employment
Generation as Wage
Labour
Commodities
Seaweed
Sea Cucumber
Black Pepper
Coffee
Pig Production
Cocoa
Bee Honey
Sweet potato
Bamboo
Hired
1,215,758
1,685,902
221,606
674,137
274,866
453,794
1,222,028
1,191,163
Family
2,836,768
3,933,771
332,410
1,011,205
6,299,560
412,298
4,084,143
1,833,043
794,109
Hired
150,303
0
0
Family
1,352,723
New
153,893
374,063
3,149,780
150,134
New
1,101,488
96,843
Days/year
1,065,455
1,685,902
221,606
674,137
0
274,866
453,794
1,222,028
1,191,163
Persons/Yr
3,552
5,620
739
2,247
0
916
1,513
4,073
3,971
Total
6,939,254
21,537,307
150,303
6,378,925
6,788,951
22,630
48 As per the data availability of the provincial poverty line (Source: Poverty Line by Province, 2013 - 2016 (Indonesia):
https://www.neliti.com/publications/poverty-line-by-province-2013-2016) NTT, East province was Rp.308,509 / capita / month.
Taking the average family size of 4.5 (TEKAD draft PDR: 1,855,350 people in 412,300 households), the annual poverty line per
HH is IDR 16,659.
72
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
OVERALL FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
28.
The  cashflows  of  all  the  enterprise  models  that  were  populated  with  appropriate  targets  over
the  programme  period  were  aggregated  to  compute  the  total  gross  benefit  flow  of  the  programme.
The  total  cost  is  comprised  of  (i)  the  TEKAD  programme  cost,  based  on  2019  prices;  and  (ii)  the
incremental  cost,  which  is  the  difference  between  the  “WOP”  production  cost  and  “WP”  production
cost of all enterprises. The incremental benefits (same as the difference between “WOP” and “WP”) of
all  enterprise  models  provided the  benefit  flow.  The  EFA  excel  sheets  present  the  details.  The
Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) is 27%. The net benefit flow was discounted at 9%, which is
the  current  average  interest  rate,  to  ascertain  the  Financial  Net  Present  Value  (NPV)  of  the
programme which is US$ 1,517 million and the break-even point of the programme cash flows. At the
10th year (2029), the programme will  be  able  to  breakeven the total  programme investment and  the
beneficiaries’ investment during the programme period and start generating a positive net benefit flow.
D. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
29.
The economic analysis was carried out by adjusting the cost and benefits flows that were used
in the financial analysis of the programme to reflect economic values. In addition to the assumptions
made in the financial analysis, the following assumptions were used in the economic analysis.
The economic investment cost is based on the programme cost during the 6-year implementation
period  generated  by  COSTAB  programme,  which  deducts  the  amounts  payable  for  taxes  and
provisions for price contingencies from the financial costs and applies the shadow exchange rate
to  convert  the  cost  portion  in  foreign  exchange  into  local  currency.  Both  taxes  and  duties  are
transfer payments which are excluded from the economic analysis.
The following procedure was used to convert all prices of farm, livestock and fisheries production
to economic prices:
o
o
o
using border prices, import parity prices were estimated to value the products with large
export  potential,  i.e.  processed  and  dried  coffee  and  cocoa  beans.  The  computation  is
presented  in  the  EFA  excel  sheets  with  the sources  of  data  that  were  used  for  the
estimation of the parity prices;
for all non-tradable goods, standard conversion factor (SCF) of 0.99 was used to adjust
the prices – the market distortion includes some degree of protection, high inefficiency of
commodity  transport  and  slight  over  valuation  of  the  real  exchange  rate.  The  SCF  was
computed  taking  the  ratio  between  the  Exchange  Rate  (ER)49 and  Estimated  Shadow
Exchange Rate (SER)50 [SCF=ER/SER]; EFA excel sheets presents details;
Shadow  wage  rate  factor is  assumed  at  0.85,  which  was  the  rate  used  by  the  YESS
programme  design  in  November  2018  to  account  the  imperfections  in  the  rural  labour
market.  Labour  is  idle  during  some  period  of  the  year  indicating  full  employment  point
has  not  reached.  The  same  shadow  rate  was  used  to  value  the  economic  cost  of  the
family labour as well.
The  economic  discount  rate  of  6.2%,  which  is  the  Opportunity  Cost  of  Capital  representing  the
Average  Annual  Deposit  Rate  (Economic  Report  on  Indonesia,  Bank  of  Indonesia,  2018),  was
used.
30.
After making the required adjustments to the cash flows of the financial analysis on the basis of
the above assumptions, the economic analysis for the TEKAD was carried out. The Economic Internal
Rate of Return (EIRR) for the 20-years period is 29% with benefit cost ratio of 2.36 (Error! Reference
source  not  found.).  The  programme  earns  an  Economic  Net  Present  Value  (ENPV)  of US$ 2,490
million  for  the  20-year  period  with  6.2%  discount  rate. The  series  of  switching  values  for  both  costs
49 Exchange Rate (ER) Feb 2019 – Draft PDR of TEKAD
50 Source: Due to lack of data, this analysis used the same SER that was estimated by the YESS PDR (IFAD) in November
2018. SCF is based on the ER and SER that were used in YESS to keep the consistency in the time. The SERF (1/SERF is the
SCF) = (M + Tm - Sm) + (X- Tx+ Sx)/( M + X); Where M and X are the total value of imports and exports respectively in foreign
currency converted to domestic currency at the Official Exchange Rate (OER), and Tm and Tx are total taxes on imports and
exports respectively and Sm and Sx are the total subsidies on imports and exports, respectively. It is assumed that these
macro figures have not significantly changed from November 2018 to June 2019.
73



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
and benefits shows the economic viability of the programme is adequately robust to face changes in
decreasing benefits and increasing costs.
31.
Sensitivity  analyses were  carried  out  to  assess  whether  the  programme  is  economically
viable  to  face  possible  risks  that  have  been  identified. Error!  Reference  source  not  found. lists
these risk factors and possible mitigation measures. The sensitivity analyses were designed to assess
whether or not the programme is economically viable even under the negative influence of these risk
factors  where  the  mitigation  measures  would  not be  effective.  Several  changes  are  made  to  the
benefit  and  the  cost  flow  to  represent  the  effect  of  the  risk  factors.  Such  changes  are  also  listed  in
Error! Reference source not found.. These include increasing the economic cost of the programme,
decreasing the benefits of all enterprises, and one-year delay in realising programme benefits.
32.
The results of the sensitivity analyses are presented in Error! Reference source not found..
Both  cost  increase  by  10%  and  20%;  benefit  decrease  by  10%  and  20%;  and  both  scenario  taking
place together yield EIRRs that are higher than the opportunity cost of capital and therefore indicate
that the enterprise models and the programme as a whole are quite stable to face risky scenarios.
Table 8: Identified potential risk factors and representing sensitivity scenarios
Risks
Mitigation measures
Variable MoV
implementation capacity
Management challenge
deriving from widespread
geographical area
Limited interest of private
sector partners to deal
with villagers because of
risks involved
Elite capture of
programme benefits
Remoteness
High turn-over of staff at
the local level
Climate change
Insecurity in Papua/West
Papua
Provide institution-building services to MoV and
different levels of local governments. Hire TA to provide
methodological guidance and capacity building.
Outsource implementation for specific activities.
Phased programme implementation. Use of ICT tools
to facilitate communication and programme monitoring.
Close monitoring of performance with dashboards and
weekly assessment. Capacity building to MoV.
De-risking measures including: financial and business
education; technical advisory services; support to
contract farming and business linkages.
Community empowerment, including organizations
strengthening, mobilization and capacity building,
emphasizing the poorest and more vulnerable
segments, for them to participate and make their rights
and priorities prevail in villages' decisions on the Village
Fund resources allocation. Furthermore, districts will be
supported to fulfil their role for mobilization and
empowerment.
In this first phase, focus on villages with reasonable
connectivity. Support village clusters to increase impact
while minimising management costs. Select high-value
commodities that can be stored and easily transported.
Use ICT as tool to bridge remoteness.
Hiring local staff with right set of incentives.
Promoting climate smart practices through capacity
building packages. Building farmers’ resilience through
savings.
MoV has selected districts were risks are minimal and
the same criterion will be applied to village selection.
Broad and inclusive participatory approach at village
level. Inclusion of traditional authorities. Strong
involvement of district mayors. Full on-demand
approach.
Sensitivity
Scenario
Benefit delayed
by 1 year
Benefit delayed
by 1 year
Benefit
reduction by
10% and 20%
Benefit
reduction by
10% and 20%
Increase
producers’ cost
by 10% and
20%
Benefit delayed
by 1 year
Benefit
reduction by
10% and 20%
Benefit delayed
by 1 year
74
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and financial analysis (EFA)
Table 9: Results of the Economic Analysis
Sensitivity Analyses
Base Case
All cost increase by 10%
All cost increase by 20%
All benefits decrease by 10%
All benefits decrease by 20%
Cost increase by 10% and
benefits decrease by 10%
1-year delay in getting benefits
EIRR
29%
26%
23%
25%
22%
23%
22%
B/C
Ratio
2.36
2.15
1.97
2.12
1.89
1.93
2.25
NPV (US$
mn)
2,490
2,307
2,124
2,058
1,626
NPV (IDR
mn)
34,993,727
32,420,729
29,847,730
28,921,356
22,848,984
Benefits
58%
53%
49%
53%
47%
1,875
2,039
26,348,357
28,662,715
48%
50%
Costs
136%
115%
97%
112%
89%
93%
111%
Switching Value:
33.
Qualitative benefits These include enhanced financial and social service delivery capacities of
the  implementing  agencies;  improved  technical  capacities  of  service  providers,  including  good,
climate-resilient agronomic practices; food safety in the programme area; improved animal health (pig
and  fisheries);  and  improved  market  access,  and  development  and  expansion  of  rural  businesses.
The  programme  will  support  perennials  such  as  cocoa,  coffee  and  bamboo,  which  will  have
environmental  benefits  such  as  carbon  sequestration,  watershed  improvement  and  lowering  soil
erosion etc. TEKAD will also generate employment opportunities for women and men, particularly the
youth  through  their  involvement  of  the  enterprise  development  and  related  backward  and  forward
linkages.
The EFA Excel sheets, both for financial and economic values, provide the detail tables listed
34.
below.
List of tables
Parity-Prices'!A1
Target_Spread!A1
Prices!A1
Sub_Programmes!A1
SeaW!A1
SeaCucumber!A1
Pepper_Prod!A1
Coffee_Prod!A1
Pig_prod_Model!A1
Pig_UnitModel!A1
Cocoa_Prod!A1
BeeHoney!A1
SweetPotato_Prod!A1 Enterprise Budget of Sweet Potatoes
Bamboo_Prod!A1
Description
Estimation of Parity Prices for Coffee and Cocoa
Total targets and distribution of HH as uptake over the programme period
All input and output prices
Aggregation of all enterprises with total targets
Enterprise Budget of Seaweed
Enterprise Budget of Sea Cucumber
Enterprise Budget of Pepper cultivation
Enterprise Budget of Coffee cultivation
Enterprise Budget of Pig production with 5-Year cycles for 20-years
Unit production parameters of pig farming for 5-year cycle
Enterprise Budget of Cocoa cultivation
Enterprise Budget of Bee Honey and Wax Production
Enterprise Budget of Bamboo production
75
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
ANNEX 5:
SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT (SECAP) REVIEW NOTE
1.
The Project will target  up  to twenty five districts  within the following five provinces of Indonesia:
Papua,  West  Papua,  Maluku,  North  Maluku  and  East  Nusa  Tenggara.  The  final  selection  of
districts within these provinces will be decided by the Ministry of Village, Underdeveloped Regions
and  Transmigration  (MoV)  and  based  on  demographic  density,  economic  potential,  road
connectivity,  complementarities  with  other  ongoing  or  previous  development  programmes  (such
as  the  Smallholder  Livelihood  Development  Project  or  SOLID),  and  the  Village  Development
Index  (IDM)  scores  of  their  villages.  The  latter  guarantees  that  geographic  targeting  is  broadly
based  on  the  latest  available  data  on  multi-dimensional  poverty  indicators  at  the  village  level.
Within  the  five  districts,  1,720 target  villages  (including  500  core  villages  and  1,220  cluster
villages) will be selected based on a set of project specific criteria explained in the PDR (see PDR
Section II.A.b. Geographic area of intervention – target villages).
I. Major  landscape  characteristics  and  Issues  (Social,  natural
resources, and climate)
Population
2.
Indonesia is the world’s fourth most populous country with a current population of approximately
265 million. Provided below are the estimated population of the five target provinces according to
the Statistics of the Indonesian Central Statistics Agency (BPS-Statistics):
Papua: 3,265,202 people51 based on 2017 estimate
-
- West Papua: 893,362 people52 based on 2016 estimate
- Maluku: 1,715,548 people53 based on 2016 estimate
-
-
North Maluku: 1,209,342 people54 based on 2017 estimate
East Nusa Tenggara: 5,203,514 people55 based on 2016 estimate.
Livelihood and Economy
3.
Agriculture  is  the  most  important  sector  in  the  five targets.  Based  on  the  BPS-Statistics  of
provinces  cited  in  the  earlier  section,  the  estimated number  of  households  engaged  in  these
sectors  is as  follow: 306,490  households  in  Maluku;  199,027  households  in  Maluku  Utara;
1,214,060  households  in  East  Nusa  Tenggara; 148,661  in  West  Papua; and  1,163,328
households  in  Papua. The  second  dominant  sector  in  these  provinces  is  community,  social  and
personal services56, whilst mining, construction, and trading are also present although in smaller
percentage.
4.
The  Indonesian economy  has  grown  steadily  over  the  past  10  years  at  5–6  percent  annually
(World  Bank  2016).  The  agricultural  and  marine  sectors  remain  the  main  source  of  income  for
51 Statistics of Papua Province, Papua Province in Figures 2018 (BPS-Statistics of Papua Province: 2018) p121.
52 Statistics of Papua Barat Province. Papua Barat Province in Figures 2017 (BPS-Statistics of Papua Barat Province: 2017)
p37
53 Statistics of Maluku Province. Maluku Province in Figures 2017 (BPS-Statistics of Maluku Province: 2017) p77.
54 Statistics of Maluku Utara Province. Maluku Utara in Figures 2018 (BPS-Statistics of Maluku Utara Province: 2018) p50
55 Statistics of Nusa Tenggara Timur Province. Nusa Tenggara Timur Province in Figures 2017 (BPS-Statistics of Nusa
Tenggara Timur Province: 2017) p83
56 Personal (or household) service is defined as a personal (or household) business entity wherein the associated risks are
borne personally or by the member of the concerned household. It is usually not a legal entity and there is no separation
between the owner's and the entity's wealth (e.g. small grocery store, beauty salon, electronics equipment reparation service,
electricity token seller, etc. (BPS: National Labor Force Survey 2017 - Guidelines for Enumerators. Retrieved on June 2019
from
https://sirusa.bps.go.id/webadmin/pedoman/2017_5_ped_Pedoman%20Pencacah%20Survei%20Angkatan%20Kerja%20Nasio
nal%20Agustus%202017.pdf)
76
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
over one third of the population and for 59 per cent of the poor57. However, issues relating to the
agriculture  sector  often  arise,  including  the  conflicting  interests  of  agricultural  (including  estate
crop) expansion and indiscriminate resource extraction; intensive extraction by local communities
often oblivious to environmental  impacts; the illegal  extraction of resources  and  the  use  of toxic
chemicals in agricultural cultivation and mining58).
Poverty and Nutrition
5.
6.
The  Central  Statistics Agency  (BPS)  stated  that  Indonesia’s  poverty  rate  in  September  2018  of
9.66%, was approximately 0.46% lower than in September 2017. Similarly, the population living in
poverty as of September 2018 was 25.67 million people, compared to 26.58 million in September
2017.  The  poverty  line  as  of  September  2018  is  estimated  at  IDR  410,670/capita/month.  Since
poor households in Indonesia have 4.63 members on average, the average poverty line per poor
household is estimated at Rp1,901,402/household/month. (BPS, 2019)59.
In  2018,  Indonesia's  Human  Development  Index  has  reached  71,39,  increasing  by  0.58  points
compared to 2017. Since 2016, the status of human development in Indonesia remains as "high".
In 2018, as many as 21 provinces have achieved "high" human development status or at intervals
of 70,1 – 79,9 (except of DKI Jakarta Province which had very high status). Papua, West Papua,
Maluku, North Maluku and East Nusa Tenggara provinces were categorized as medium (between
55, 0 – 69,0), with the growth rate between 0,83 – 1,64, which is above the national growth rate.
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX IN THE TEKAD PROVINCES
Human Development Index
Province
MALUKU
NORTH MALUKU
WEST PAPUA
PAPUA
EAST NUSA TENGGARA
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
64.27
62.79
59.60
54.45
59.21
64.75
63.19
59.90
55.01
60.24
65.43
63.93
60.30
55.55
60.81
66.09
64.78
60.91
56.25
61.68
66.74
65.18
61.28
56.75
62.26
67.05
65.91
61.73
57.25
62.67
67.60
66.63
62.21
58.05
63.13
68,19
67,20
62,99
59,09
63,73
68,87
67,76
63,74
60,06
64,39
INDONESIA
Source: BPS, 2019 – Human Development Index by Province60
66,53
67,70
67,09
68,31
68,90
69,55
70,18
70,81
71,39
7.
The number of people deemed to be in poverty in the TEKAD provinces are increasing in North
Maluku,  Papua  and  West Papua,  and  decreasing  in  Maluku  and  East  Nusa  Tenggara,  but  the
overall percentage of the population in poverty has decreased for all TEKAD provinces from 2017
– 2018.
POVERTY POPULATION IN THE TEKAD PROVINCES
Poverty Population (in 000)
City
Village
TOTAL
Province
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
MALUKU
NORTH MALUKU
47.83
12.93
46.92
14.90
272.59
65.35
270.92
67.03
320.42
78.28
317.84
81.93
57 Country Strategic Opportunities Programme (Executive Board 118th Session, 21-22 September 2016. Retrieved June, 2019,
from https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/118/docs/EB-2016-118-R-13.pdf
58 https://crawford.anu.edu.au/acde/ip/research/agriculture/
59 Badan Pusat Statistik 2019, Retrieved May, 2019, from https://www.bps.go.id/pressrelease/2019/01/15/1549/ persentase-
penduduk -miskin-pada-september-2018-sebesar-9-66-persen.html
60 Badan Pusat Statistik, 2019, Retrieved June 2019, from Badan Pusat Statistik 2019, Retrieved June 2019, from
https://www.bps.go.id/dynamictable/2016/06/16/1211/indeks-pembangunan-manusia-menurut-provinsi-2010-2018-metode-
baru-.html
77
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
WEST PAPUA
PAPUA
EAST NUSA
TENGGARA
19.02
41.06
21.25
37.78
193.83
869.36
192.42
877.44
212.86
910.42
213.67
915.22
119.04
114.06
1015.70
1020.05
1134.74
1134.11
INDONESIA
Source: BPS, 2019 – Number of Poor People by Province
10,131.28
10,272.55
16,310.44
15,543.31
26,582.99
25,674.58
The poverty percentage in the TEKAD provinces can be seen in the table below (BPS, 2019)61.
POVERTY PERCENTAGE IN THE TEKAD PROVINCES
Poverty Percentage
City
village
TOTAL
Province
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
Semester 2
(September)
MALUKU
NORTH MALUKU
WEST PAPUA
PAPUA
EAST NUSA
TENGGARA
6.58
3.70
5.16
4.55
10.11
6.15
4.21
5.57
4.01
9.09
26.60
7.55
35.12
36.56
24.59
INDONESIA
7.26
Source: BPS, 2019 - Percentage of Poor Population by Province
13.47
62
6.89
26.61
7.58
34.29
36.65
24.65
13.10
18.29
6.44
23.12
27.76
21.38
10.12
17.85
6.62
22.66
27.43
21.03
9.66
8.
The double  burden  of  malnutrition  in  Indonesia  entails  high  social  costs:  stunting  which  can
reduce  an  individual’s  productivity  at  a  young  age  and  increases  risks  of  developing  non-
communicable  diseases  when  older.  It  is  estimated  that  out  of  the  24.5  million children  under  5
years  of  age  in  Indonesia,  approximately  9.2  million  (37  percent)  are  stunted.63 People  do  not
only  feel  the  effects  of  the  double  burden  of  malnutrition,  they  are  also  felt  by  the  economy.
Losses  due  to  stunting  and  malnutrition  are  estimated  to  be  2-3  percent  of  Indonesia’s  GDP.
Traditionally, Indonesia has paid more attention to severe underweight as a way to determine the
country’s state of nutrition. By this measure alone, nutritional issues appear largely resolved, as
the  prevalence  of  severe  underweight  is  just  5.4  percent  in  children  under  five-years.  However,
the fact that 37.2 percent of children under five are stunted and 12 percent are wasted64 should
be of greater concern, given the life long consequences.
Indigenous People
9.
Indigenous peoples in Papua and West Papua consist of 193 tribes with 193 different languages.
There  are  hundreds  of  regional  languages,  causing  difficulties  in  communicating  between  one
tribe  and  another  tribe.  The  number  of  tribes  in  Papua  also  results  in  a  number  of  community
philosophies  that  are  unique  in  their  respective  social behaviours and  also  each  tribe  has  a
different knowledge system. For example the Tribe of Asmat, who reside in remote natural muddy
environments  overgrown  with  mangroves,  palm trees,  sago  palm,  and  others,  are  able  to  use
indigenous knowledge systems to estimate the difference in tides in the Asmat environment and
are  thus  able  to  relocate  from  one  place  to  another  mindful  of  tidal fluctuations When  the  sea
61 Badan Pusat Statistik 2019, retrieved May 2019, https://www.bps.go.id/dynamictable/2016/01/18/1120/garis-kemiskinan-
menurut-provinsi-2013---2018.html
62 Badan Pusat Statistik 2019, retrieved May 2019, https://www.bps.go.id/dynamictable/2016/08/18/1219/persentase-penduduk-
miskin-menurut-provinsi-2007---2018.html
63 USAID and FANTA (2014); Indonesia Nutrition Profile; https://www.fantaproject.org/sites/default/files/download/Indonesia-
Nutrition-Profile-Apr2014.pdf
64 According to UNICEF, wasting is defined as moderate and severe - below minus two standard deviations from median weight
for height of reference population. See https://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/stats_popup2.html.
78
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
water  recedes,  the  tribe  of  Asmat  bounces  downstream  or  to  the  coast  and  returns  upstream
when  the  sea  water  rises.  Some  of  the  tribes  in  Papua  are  Bauzi,  Bgu,  Citak,  Dani,  Ekagi,
Hattam,  Iha,  Inanwatan,  Kamoro,  Korowai,  Kupol,  Kwerba,  Kwesten,  Lani,  Mairasi,  Mandobo,
Muyu, Tehid and Yali.
10.
11.
12.
13.
East Nusa Tenggara has diverse tribes who live in accordance with local traditions and customs.
These tribes inhabit all districts in East Nusa Tenggara Province. The tribes in habiting East Nusa
Tenggara  Province  include Adona, Alor  Solor,  Bali Aga, Atoni,  Belu,  Bodha,  Nage  Keo,  Damar,
Dawan,  Dodongko,  Flores, Manggarai,  Mambaro,  Marea,  Ende,  Dompo,  Kisar,  Leti,  Helong,
Kupang,  Lombleng,  Lio,  Sabu,  Boti,  Bajawa,  Kemang,  Ngada,  Larantuka,  Lamahot  and  Solor
(Solor island), Rote (Rote island), Sawu (Sawu island) and Deing (Pantar island).
North  Maluku  also  has  diverse  tribes,  i.e.  Mangole  (Mangole  island),  Madole,  Pagu,  Ternate
(Ternate  island), Makian  Barat,  Kao,  Tidore  (Tidore  island),  Patani,  Sawai,  Weda,  and  Bacan,
Galela,  Gebe,  Buli,  Maba,  Gane  and  Wayoli  (Halmahera  island),  Makian  Timur,  Kayoa,  Bacan
(Halmahera  island),  Sula,  Ange,  Siboyo,  Kadai,  Galela  (Halmahera  island), Tobelo  (North
Halmahera  island),  Loloda,  Tobaru,  Togutil  /  Tobelo  Dalam  (Halmahera  island),  and  Sahu  (data
from www.malukuutaraprov.go.id).
Tribes  in  Maluku  province  include  Ambon  (Ambon  island),  Aru  (Aru  islands),  Asilulu  (Ambon
island),  Banda  (Banda  islands),  Wai  Apu  and  Buru  (Buru  island),  Siriatun  and  Esiriun  (Geser
island, Seram), Kei (Kei islands), Wemale, Alifuru, Huaulu, Lumoli, Manusela, Mausu Ane, Naulu
(Seram island), Pelauw (Haruku island), Tanimbar (Tanimbar islands).
In  general,  the  socio-economic  conditions  of  customary  communities  of  East  Nusa  Tenggara,
North Maluku,  Maluku, West  Papua  and  Papua  are  less  developed  than  those  of  the  dominant
society,  particularly  communities  in  remote  areas  (such  as  the  highlands,  coastal  areas,  and
protected  forests)  with  limited  transport  access,  and  away  from  public  facilities  such  as  schools
and health centers.
14.
Most of the rural land in East Nusa Tenggara, Maluku, North Maluku, West Papua and Papua is
subject  to  customary  law  and  managed  as  customary  land  (tanah  adat  or  tanah  ulayat).  From
Costum Territory Register Body data, there are 30 Costum territory in East Nusa Tenggara, 6 in
Maluku, 3 in North Maluku, 3 in West Papua and 8 in Papua.
Natural resources and NRM
15.
16.
17.
Two  thirds  of  Indonesia’s  area  is  a  water  territory.  Not  surprisingly,  Indonesia  is  included  in  10
countries  that  are  rich  in  water  resources  (World  Bank,  2014).  Indonesia  has  huge  water
resources  potential,  reaching  3.9  trillion  cubic  meters  per  year.  This  potential  can  be  utilized  to
support  agricultural,  raw  water  for  urban  and  industrial  communities,  power  plants,  to  tourism
sector.  From  total  3.9  trillion  cubic  meters  per  year,  only  about  17.69  percent  or  about  691.3
million cubic meters per year can be utilized.
However  the  3.9  trillion  cubic  meters  potentially  available  water  in  Indonesia,  is  not  evenly
distributed  in  all  regions.  According  to  data  from  the  Research  Center  for  Water  Resources  in
2012,  estimated  that  Papua  is  ranked  second  with  regard  to  potential  water  availability  in
Indonesia (reaching 1,062.1 billion m3 / year), while Nusa Tenggara is ranked seventh (lowest) in
Indonesia (reaching 49.6 billion m3 / year)65.
Protected  forests  constitute  the  largest  forest  lands  Indonesia,  which  is  29.6  million  hectare  or
about 15.8 percent of Indonesia as a whole. Protected forests in Papua Island cover an area of
9.4  million  hectare.  Similarly,  limited  production  forests  are  mostly  located  in  Kalimantan and
Papua. On the Islands of Nusa Tenggara, forest areas are smaller than other areas of use (APL).
In contrast, forests in Papua and Maluku are larger than APL.
65 http://www.wateranddisaster.org/cms310261/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/04.-Outlook-of-Water-Resources-Management-in-
Indonesia-UN-2015%E3%80%80.pdf
79
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
18.
19.
The  condition  of  critical  land66 is  declining  though,  but  it  contributes  to  the  decrease  in  forest
cover  of  Indonesia,  or  better  known  as  deforestation.  In  the  data  of  2013,  Papua  include  in  the
provinces  with  the  largest  critical  lands  (2.2  million  ha), while it is  also  include  as  the  highest
deforestation rate (20.4 ha/year) in 2013-2014.
Number of natural  disasters in Indonesia  in  2016  was as many  as 2,382 events, an increase of
83.9  percent  compared  to  2015  which  amounted  to  1,295  events.  While  the relatively  rare
provinces that experienced less than 10 events were Papua, Papua Barat, Maluku, Maluku Utara,
and  Sulawesi  Barat,  while  28  events  happened  in  East  Nusa  Tenggara.  In  most  instances  the
disasters were triggered by hydrological disasters (flood and landslide), and 1 event in East Nusa
Tenggara is tidal wave /abrasion. Meteorological disaster also happened in East Nusa Tenggara
(whirlwind).
Climate
20.
21.
Historical climate profile: The climate in most regions of Indonesia is hot and humid, with rainfall
occurring  mostly  in  low-lying  and  mountainous  regions.  For  the  purpose  of  this  SECAP,  an
assessment on historical climate conditions  was done using secondary data generated from the
Climate Knowledge Portal of the World Bank67. Based on the historical data from 1901 to 2016,
the mean annual temperature is 25.8º C whilst the mean annual precipitation is 2,858.6 mm. It is
also observed that since 1990, the mean annual temperature has increased by about 0.3º C while
the  overall  annual  rainfall  has  decreased by  2-3%.  Further,  precipitation  patterns  have  changed
during  the  wet  and  dry  seasons,  where  the  average  annual  rainfall  is  declining  in  the  southern
regions, while an average increase in rainfall is coupled with decreased dry season rainfall in the
northern regions.
Projected climate profile: Projected climate changes by 2050 include: (i) Increased temperature of
0.8–2.0°C,  with  greater  warming  over  large  western  islands  (i.e.,  Sumatra,  Java,  Borneo);  (ii)
Increased duration of heat waves; (iii) Projections for rainfall differ, but point to increased rainfall
during  the  wet  season;  (iv)  Slight  increase  in  duration  of  dry  spells  (+  2  days);  (v) Increased
frequency (3–23 percent) and intensity (2–7 percent) of heavy rainfall events; (vi) sea level rise of
150–450  mm  by  2056;  (vii)  Disappearance  of  Papua  glaciers68. This  is  aligned  with  the  rate  of
averaged global temperature increase which is about 0.7ºC ± 0.2 per century based on IPCC AR-
4.  The  increase  in  temperature  is  seen  as  the  main  climate  change  issue  caused  by  the
anthropogenic  driven  increase  of  CO2  and  other  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  Meanwhile,  the
projected  rainfall  changes  in  Indonesia  during  the  period  of  2010-2020  (relative  to  1980-2007
period)  is  predicted  to  increase  particularly  in  December  and March,  including  in  Maluku,  Nusa
Tenggara and Papua. In Nusa Tenggara, the rainfall changes based on the similar prediction are
not very significant with the majority of months (April-August) remaining unchanged. However for
Papua, it is predicted that the rainfall will increase in most months.
22.
Although  given  the  abundance  of  water  resources,  Indonesia  has  already  experienced  water
shortage in some areas during dry season, and flood events during rainy season. 80% of its rain
falls during rainy season within five months while the remaining 20% occur within seven months
or even shorter because of rainfall pattern variation due to climate change. In addition, there is a
large variation in the rainfall all over the country. It ranges from very arid areas of Nusa Tenggara,
Maluku and some parts of Sulawesi Islands (less than 1,000 mm), to very  wet  areas in  parts of
Irian Jaya, Java and Sumatra (more than 4,000 mm).
23.
Water scarcity issues will become a significant problem throughout Indonesia, especially in urban
areas. Northern Java, Bali, East and West Nusa Tenggara, North and South Sulawesi, Gorontalo,
Lampung  and  South  Sumatra  are  expected  to  be  exposed  to  long  periods  of  water  deficits.
Decreased rainfall during critical times of the year may translate into high drought risk, uncertain
66 Critical land is defined as land which is located within or outside of the forest area that has been damaged, wherein the loss
or decrease in its function has reached a certain/specified limit (BP-DAS Unda Anyar, 2019) Retrieved on 27 June 2019 from
http://www.bpdas-undaanyar.net/data-informasi/lahan-kritis/.
67 Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Indonesia. Retrieved June 2019 from
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/indonesia/climate-data-historical
68 USAID Climate Risk Profile Indonesia Fact Sheet August 2017. Retrieved May, 2019.
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_USAID_ATLAS_Climate%20Risk%20Profile_Indonesia.pd
f
80
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
water  availability,  and  consequently,  uncertain  ability  to  produce  agricultural  goods,  economic
instability, and higher level of undernourishment. Farm labourers and the urban poor are expected
to be disproportionately impacted, as are rice farmers.
II.
24.
Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks
The  potential  environmental,  social  and  climate  related  impacts  and  corresponding  mitigation
measures of each subcomponent are detailed in the table below.
81
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Figure 1 below presents the TEKAD Project Components as detailed in the PDR.
GOAL
DEVELOP
MENT
OBJECTIV
Empowered village communities contribute to rural
transformation and inclusive growth
in Eastern Indonesia
Rural households secure stable and sufficient income from
village-based productions through sustainable and inclusive
access to services and resources
OUTCOM
ES
Village communities plan and implement
profitable economic initiatives taking
advantage of village resources
Village households have sustainable
access to markets and to public and
private services in support of village
economic initiatives
Innovative, replicable models for
supporting village economic
development by leveraging Village Fund
and village resources
COMPON
ENTS
COMPONENT 1
VILLAGE ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT
COMPONENT 2
PARTNERSHIPS FOR VILLAGE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
COMPONENT 3
INNOVATION, LEARNING AND POLICY
DEVELOPMENT
SUB-COMPONENT 1.1
VILLAGE GOVERNANCE
SUB-COMPONENT 2.1
DISTRICT SUPPORT FOR VILLAGE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
SUB-COMPONENT 3.1
INNOVATION, LEARNING AND
INSPIRATION
SUB-
COMPON
ENTS
SUB-COMPONENT 1.2
VILLAGE ECONOMIC INITIATIVES
SUB-COMPONENT 2.2
ECONOMIC SERVICES
SUB-COMPONENT 3.2
POLICIES FOR VILLAGE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
SUB-COMPONENT 2.2
FINANCIAL SERVICES
SUB-COMPONENT 3.3
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
82
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Table 1. Environment and Social Mitigation Plan
Project Intervention
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors
Mitigating Measure
Outcome 1. Village Communities Plan And Implement Profitable Economic Activities Taking Advantage Of Village Resources
1.1.
Village Governance
Component 1. Village Economic Empowerment
Social :
●
lack of community interest in participating in
village fund planning
Social :
●
●
●
●
Lack of mechanisms for participative and
consultative planning involving communities
vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, youth and
women.
process of monitoring and reporting the planning
process and the use of the village and other
funds not transparent
Perspectives of vulnerable, youth and women,
and Indigenous people, if any, not adequately
incorporated into village fund planning and
management.
●
●
●
83
Awareness campaign, capacity building and
facilitation for government and community
leaders for community participation and
inclusiveness.
Village Facilitators trained to identify vulnerable
groups, ensure they are represented and build
capacities of communities to manage their
groups more effectively especially to facilitate the
inclusion of women and youth in groups
prepare guidelines that contain all the processes
of village fund planning and the importance of
community involvement in the local language,
and are easy to understand
A gender-sensitive livelihoods and nutrition
analysis along with an assessment of the village
social structure will be undertaken. In addition
livelihood and economic activities will follow a
household approach, with focus on the family
unit in order to empower women decision making
alongside the men.
An FPIC plan is being developed specifically for
the local indigenous communities, and the will
have strong coordination with head of IP (ketua
adat)
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Project Intervention
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors
Mitigating Measure
●
Rejection of women and youth, and IP, if any, to
participate in village fund planning
●
Not representative village mapping
●
Social gap between the rich and the poor
community and between the indigenous people
and the transmigrant
●
●
●
●
●
1.2.
Village Economic Initiatives
Social :
●
The TEKAD district team skills do not match with
the target products selected by village clusters
●
Social :
84
Village facilitators must aim to understand the
existing social conditions and provide problem
solving in accordance with local wisdom while
being respectful to local culture and social
norms. It is recommended that community /
cultural leaders are involved fully in the process.
Campaign on the importance of community as a
whole including men and women, as well as the
role of youth in participating in village
development
When conducting village mapping, some steps
have to be done, such as the incorporation of the
results from the participatory ranking process
which should be used to make a base map of the
village area. Then use codes (symbols) to
represent relative indicators (or ranking) of the
households in the village area.
Facilitation of village/community leaders’
participation in village fund planning and
implementation processes through a mentoring
system.
Facilitator must involve all village communities
including the poor, rich, IP, and transmigrant in
all stages of the village economic development
strategies
Facilitators liaise regularly with Village Head,
Village Council and Community Leaders to keep
them informed and involved with village fund
activities
The capacities of the TEKAD district Team will
be built in line with the priority commodities
selected by village clusters, building on the
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Project Intervention
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors
Mitigating Measure
●
●
●
●
●
●
Reluctance to learn and change from traditional
to modern farming/ fisheries/ business systems
Farmers are reluctant to take on the risk of more
intensive farming in a prevailing context of
uncertain climate and other scenarios.
Lack of community participation/engagement
and empowerment that will ensure the operation
and maintenance of the machineries
Existing experts are not in line with what is
needed by the community
Farmers / fisheries / small business are reluctant
to learn new methodology because they don't
know the market
85
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
The facilitator needs to provide not only
technical information but also information
about expected benefits of modern agriculture,
fisheries and livestock by providing a comparison
of the results obtained by traditional methods
and modern methods, building on the Orientation
and Capacity Building Packages. Awareness of
the issues surrounding unsustainable extractive
uses and environmentally sensitive activities will
also be employed.
The formation of farmer groups to help enable
small-holder farmers to aggregate their produce
and have easier access to markets
Capacity building for village government and
farmers/fisheries/ business groups on challenges
and opportunities and modernized agriculture/
fisheries/ business following the value chain
approach, and on climate smart technologies
The machine given should be selected to be
responsive to community needs
TEKAD will introduce a demand driven approach
to source additional support from a range of
government line agencies, the private sector or
the technical support that will be made available
through the project. The need for additional
specialists can be identified at various stages
and through various channels,
Promote business mentoring systems.
The project will provide business development
training to facilitate bottom-up business model
approach.
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Project Intervention
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors
Mitigating Measure
●
Environment / Climate:
Farmers / fisheries / small business are reluctant
to learn new methodologies because they are
afraid that the methods proposed cannot be
applied to their location due to unpredictable
weather conditions.
●
Environment / Climate :
Awareness programme and capacity building
training programmes designed to educate
participating communities on the potential risks
of climate change and natural disaster impacts
and how these may be mitigated against using
more sustainable and ‘informed’ practices.
Outcome 2. Village Households Have Sustainable Access To Markets And Services In Support Of Economic Initiatives
2.1.
District Support For Village
Economic Development
2.2.
Economic Services
Component 2: Partnerships for Village Economic Development
Social :
Social :
●
●
●
●
The lack of coordination between district
departments (dinas) and differing opinions about
the program
Annual budget for ToT already phase out by
MoV (TEKAD) while the district resources are
not allocated
Environment / Climate:
The number of extension agents in the district
are limited and they don’t have adequate time to
train farmers on good agricultural methods that
may lead to more sustainable farming practices
such as using organic pesticides and employing
other ecosystem based approaches
●
●
●
●
Social :
●
Lack of support from village officials for the
program
Social :
●
●
Limited small holders' capacity on business
development
●
Focal points within key participating district
departments will be trained by the project to take
the lead for undertaking coordination among
respective district departments (dinas)
The district must prepare a budget for further
training to ensure sustainability of activities
Environment / Climate :
Strong coordination and liaison with extension
agents will be required including identifying
champions with strong knowledge regarding
climate change adaptation and also indigenous
practices which are noted to be environmentally
sustainable that may be rolled out as part of the
project interventions.
Facilitators liaise regularly with Village Head and
Community Leaders to keep them informed and
involved with village fund activities
Giving more training on business development
86
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Project Intervention
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors
Mitigating Measure
2.3.
Financial Inclusion
●
●
Social :
●
●
The mapping process does not go well so it does
not get good results
Lack of interest from government personnel and
lack of capacity and interest to take up new
approaches.
The existence of middlemen causes unfair
financial access to farmers and fishermen, and it
will give impact to the community welfare
●
●
Social :
●
All parties participating in the mapping process
must actively participate and provide the correct
data
Clear guideline and training for every
government personnel, facilitator, and extension
agent before approaching the village
provision of alternatives for financial services
The financial risks to the individual in
undertaking loans from financial institutions often
exclude farmers and fishermen obtaining
financial assistance
●
To access loans in financial institutions farmers
or fishermen need to form a group that consist of
fishermen or farmers. In this way the risk is
evenly distributed amongst the group as
opposed to one individual.
Outcome 3. Innovative, Replicable Models For Supporting Village Economic Development Are Generated From TEKAD Experience
3.1.
Innovative, Learning and Inspiration
Social :
Social :
Component 3. Innovation, Learning and Policy Development
●
●
●
The process for identification of investment
opportunities, individual farmers, groups,
enterprises is not effective i.e. due to weak
community participation - more top down
approaches etc.
Women & vulnerable households lack capacities
to take up full potential on their own.
Inadequate opportunities for participation of
women, youth and disadvantaged groups, and
also indigenous people
●
●
●
To start the identification process a needs
assessment is required which would seek to
incorporate farmers, fisheries and small business
holders (women, men and youth) on their needs;
and incorporate their feedback to the design.
Campaign on the importance of all people, both
men and women, as well as the role of youth in
participating in village development
Understand the local context and ensure
participation of local people/small holder farmers
including women, indigenous people and
disadvantage group
87
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Project Intervention
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors
Mitigating Measure
●
There is a chance that the lessons learned are
applied to the same person/groups. Thus
chances of uptake limited.
Environment / Climate :
●
Lack of understanding of environmental impacts
and climate change impacts and risks in farming
activities / changed and more uncertain rainfall
erosion, land degradation, contamination from
fertilizer and pesticides
●
●
●
●
3.2.
Policy development and institution
Building
Social :
●
Increased use of fertilizer and pesticides and
increased use of pumped irrigation thereby
depleting water resources
Move to more intensive agriculture results in
higher risk of climate change and water
uncertainty impacting agricultural production
Environmental impacts due to improper handling
of processing waste and oil from equipment
Environmental impacts due to improper handling
of agricultural waste
The Community is not aware of the program to
be implemented, in addition there is a possibility
that the program is not accordance with the
custom culture
●
●
●
●
Social :
●
88
●
●
●
Equal opportunity to get lessons in the form of
training and mentoring, comparative studies and
others
Understand the local context and ensure
participation of local people/small holder farmers
including women, indigenous people and
disadvantaged group
Every single person has the same opportunity to
have the same lesson learned
Environment / Climate :
●
Provincial Climate Risk and Vulnerability
Assessments
Awareness and stakeholder engagement in
relation sustainable and environmentally
appropriate and climate resilient farming
systems.
Promote water efficient irrigation and water
conservation and management including
catchment management and restoration
activities
Promote efficient and environmentally sound
management systems relating to agrochemical
inputs. Where appropriate develop organic
farming and non-chemical fertilizer and
pesticides.
Develop and encourage environmentally sound
processing and other waste management
technologies.
Improve capacities for waste production and
management.
The project is based on a community approach
where the interventions will be discussed and
approved by the local community before
implementation.
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Project Intervention
Social/Environmental/ Climate Risk Factors
Mitigating Measure
●
Decision making involves the local customary
council
Environment / Climate :
●
Lack of or weak awareness of environmental
risks in project areas including climate, land,
water and seismic risks.
Environment / Climate :
●
Capacity building and technical support for
government and farmers /fisheries / small
business holders on best practices of farm
management and land development and
management, and how to reduce impact to the
environment
Development of an independent grievance
redresses mechanism.
A participatory approach will be adopted to
ensure consent of participants through
village meetings, formation of inclusive
farmer/fisherman's/small business holders
groups and building government capacity to
facilitate and enhance community
participation
●
●
Poor technical capacity to plan and design
Lack of clarity on local land and water
resource access rights
●
●
89
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
25.
26.
27.
28.
Key potential social and environmental impacts of the project.. This project will enhance the ability
of  villagers  to  promote  inclusive  and  sustainable  local  economic  development,  and  build  village
potential, hence it can improve the welfare of the villagers. Capacity building carried out in stages
starting from the Village Government and the existence of district/sub-district facilitators will assist
villagers in increasing the capacity of village communities so that they can actively participate in
planning  and  managing  village  resources.  The  ability  and  understanding  of  the  community  in
cultivating farms, livestock, fisheries and aquaculture organically and environmentally friendly will
also increase which will have an impact on improving the quality of the environment at the project
site, and also on the health of rural communities and consumers in general. The project will also
improve  food  security  by  increasing  production,  understanding  nutrition  and  increasing  villagers'
income.
By facilitating access to  land, farming (with mechanization), TEKAD  will also have an impact on
the return of young people to their original villages to be able to work in developing villages. For
women with gender sensitive activities can increase their capacity, also all household members to
jointly  utilize  the  benefits  of  the  project  to  improve  family  welfare,  as  well  as  raise  awareness
about  good  nutrition  practices  and  be  involved  in  creating  a  supportive  environment  for  home-
level  activities  stairs  and  for  broad  inclusion.  With  the  provision  of  technical  advisory  services,
training, business development and facilitation services (in various fields such as good agricultural
practices,  climate  smart  agriculture,  nutrition  education,  nursery  management,  production
planning,  post-harvest  management,  value  addition  and  processing,  marketing)  encourage  the
community  play an  active  role  in  developing  the  region,  and  indirectly  also  create  harmony
between citizens.
Climate change and adaptation. The impacts of climate change are well recognised in the east of
Indonesia which covers the project location. In recent years, coast lines in this region have been
eroded. In West Papua, highland frosts and blizzards have claimed the lives of villagers. Lowland
river country people have been affected by floods. In the south, people’s drinking water has been
contaminated  by  sea  water. The  extreme  heat  and  cold  have  vastly  impacted  food  production,
making  staple  crops  like  sago,  sweet  potatoes  and  taro  hard  to  come  by.  Village  community
discussion  groups  conducted  as  part  of  the  project  design  in  Papua  highlighted  prolonged  dry
seasons and strong winds, prolonged rains and floods, long droughts, and some extreme events
having been experienced.
Climate change does not only represent a risk for the country as a whole but also specifically for
the project locations. As a result of the increasing temperature, water and agriculture sectors are
facing the greatest risk. The increased variability of monsoons, the increased risks of floods and
droughts  and  the  severe  water-stressed  conditions  in  arid  and  semi-arid  region  of  East  Nusa
Tenggara -have  been  exacerbated.  It  is  estimated  that  the  drop  in  crop  yields  due  to  rising
temperatures  is  likely  to  cause  shortfall  in  rice  production  and  vegetables.  The  land  resources
have been degraded due to water logging and salinity, water and wind erosion, and are likely to
experience further degradation due to existing farming practices. Most of the population depends
on  shallow  wells,  hand  pumps  and  even  in  many  cases  open  ponds  for  drinking  water. Water
borne  diseases  are  especially  prevalent  in  the  rural  areas,  and  rural  sanitation  remains  a
challenge.
29.
This  project  will  have  a  number  of  environment,  social  and  climate  risks,  where  mitigation
measures have been proposed in order to mitigate these as can be seen in the above table 1.
30.
Environmental and social category
31.
Based  on  preliminary  screening  for  Environmental  and  Social  Categorisation  (attachment  1),
TEKAD  is  assessed  to  be  a  Category  “B”  project.  Overall  the  project  is  expected  to  contribute
positively  to  strengthen  village-based  economic  development, by  focusing  on  limited  priority
commodities and promotion of sustainable rural transformation in Eastern Indonesia. The overall
approach  of  the  project  would  be  based  on  promoting  different  levels  of  interventions  so  that
village  communities  not  only  can  build  their  capacities  to  invest  in  successful  economic
undertakings,  but  they  also  can  rely  on  an  enabling  environment  that  secures  sustainable  and
inclusive access to markets and services. Any potential adverse environmental impacts that may
occur due to increased levels of agricultural intensification can be readily remedied by supporting
climate-smart  agriculture  and  ecosystem  based  approaches  to  mitigate  against  them.  Similarly
potential social impacts may be mitigated by offering channels to widely advertise on successful
90
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
business models and approaches (through an online platform, applications and social networks)
and in this manner being more inclusive. The project will also follow a community-based approach
where  the  communities  will  have  a  key  role  in  decision  making  on  project  interventions.  By  this
approach, TEKAD is expected to positively contribute to climate change impacts and promotion of
the sustainable use of natural resources.
III.
32.
33.
34.
Climate Risk Category
Some regions in Indonesia, including parts of western and northern Sulawesi, and south eastern
Papua  Islands  are  highly  vulnerable  to  multiple  climate  hazards,  including  drought,  floods,
landslides and sea level rise. According to the World Bank (2019)69, sea level rise has threatened
42 million Indonesians  who live  less than 10 meters above sea  level.  It  is noted that  one meter
rise in sea level could  potentially  inundate 405,000  hectares of land  which can contribute  to the
loss of Indonesia's territory by flooding low-lying islands. Sea level rise and other oceanic climate
change will result in salinization, flooding and erosion and affect human and ecological systems,
including freshwater, biodiversity, agriculture, fisheries, and other services.
Climate  change  will  also  have  adverse  impacts  on  Agriculture.  Due  to  shifting  rainfall,
evaporation,  run-off  water  and  soil  moisture,  production  of  crops  and  thus  food  security  will  be
severely  affected.  These  are  exacerbated  by  the  El  Niño  occurrence,  whereby  its  effects  have
also been experienced through the reduction in average rainfall and water storage capacity, while
imposing large regions to drought and fire. In 1997, the El Niño-related droughts have adversely
impacted 426,000 hectares of rice, reduced the  yields of coffee, cocoa, and rubber, and caused
widespread water shortages and wildfires. In 2011, a subsequent El Niño event in Indonesia was
estimated  to  cause  an  increasing  drought  in  the  paddy  rice  areas  from  0.3-1.4%  to  3.1-7.8%.
Additionally, the La Niña event has also contributed to an increase in areas with crop failure from
0.004-0.41% to 0.04-1.87%, and an increase in the flood-affected areas from 0.75-2.68% to 0.97-
2.99%. Eventually, the decrease in production due to flooding and drought will increase 2.4-5% to
more than 10% (IAARD, 2011). Specifically in the project target areas, there is a fairly high climate
variation in East Nusa Tenggara where rainfall occurs only at most 3 months a year. In Maluku, a
study  conducted  by  the  Maluku  Institute  of  Agricultural  Technology  Assessment  Centre (2016)
shows  that  soybean  is  the  most  sensitive  crop  to  climate  change,  wherein  it  had  the  biggest
impact  on  production  with  declining  yields  on  both  El  Niño  (10.7%)  and  La  Niña  (11.4%)
occurrences.
Based  on  the  above  information  and  the  preliminary  screening  on  Climate  Risk  Category
(attachment  1),  TEKAD  is  expected  to  fall  within  the  High  category  in  terms  of  climate  risks,
mainly due to climatic variability and occasionally weather-related hazards. In light of this TEKAD
will  undertake an in-depth  climate risk assessment in project target provinces  during the  project
implementation phase, with a view to identify major risks and in order to fully integrate mitigation
measures in capacity building packages. This will be achieved largely through secondary sources
of  information  and  where  necessary  with  field  studies  and  ground  truthing  for  verification
purposes.  A  thorough  literature/desk  review  and  analysis  of  existing  climate-related  secondary
data that are  widely  available for Indonesia  will be undertaken during the  early phase of project
implementation to inform TEKAD interventions and to ensure they are robust and climate resilient.
For example, the detailed historical and projected climate data as well as general information on
climate  vulnerabilities  and  impacts  can  be  sourced  from  the  Climate  Change  Knowledge  Portal
developed by the World Bank and the website70 of the Indonesian Meteorological, Climatological
and  Geophysical Agency  or  BMKG.  This  will  be  supplemented  by  local  studies  that  have  been
conducted  in  the  target  provinces  and  with  inputs  from  project  beneficiaries.  Preliminary  focus
areas identified in this assessment will include awareness, dissemination and skills development
on  climate-smart  practices  (e.g.  building  farmer's  resilience  towards climate  change  impacts
through insurance and savings) provided through project partners and digital technologies.
69 Climate Change Knowledge Portal, the World Bank. Retrieved July 2019 from
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/indonesia/vulnerability
70 https://www.bmkg.go.id/iklim/?p=proyeksi-perubahan-iklim&lang=EN
91
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
IV. Recommended Features of Project Design and Implementation
35.
36.
Environment and social mitigation measures. TEKAD will promote climate smart practices through
the implementation  of  capacity  building  packages  (e.g.  promoting  savings  and  insurance)  in
support  of  climate  resilience.  Through  the  facilitator  and  trainings,  communities  should  be
supported  to  be  better  cognizant  of  climate  risks,  environment  and  natural  resources
management  and  thereafter  be  suitably  trained  in  order  to  (self)-identify  adaptation/mitigation
measures.
The  other  things  that  TEKAD  will  do  to  introduce  best  practices  and  technologies  in  support  of
climate  resilience  will  be  undertaken  in  partnership  with  the  relevant  research  centres  and
university for identification and introduction of climate-adapted varieties of crops and horticulture
and other  high  value crops for various  agro-ecological  zones, climate adapted crop-rotation and
crop  cycles,  including  contributing  to  improve  resilience  and  mitigate  vulnerability  at  community
level with regard to agricultural area. The relevant partners will be identified during consultations
with  the  various  communities,  local  governments,  MoV,  MoA  and  other  stakeholders.  IFAD  also
has  a  longstanding  partnership  with  ICIMOD  and  ICRAF  that  can  potentially  be  tapped  into.  In
that  regard  the  following  could  be  recommended:  practical  trainings  for  preparation  of  small
compositing  sites  at  Village  and  Community  levels,  climate  Change  Adaptation  Trainings  on
Natural  Resource  Management,  Infrastructure,  Livelihoods,  awareness  raising  seminars  and
sessions  on  climate  change  and  environmental  issues  and  their  solutions  at  district  and
community levels.
37.
There are no infrastructure activities envisaged as part of the project.
38.
39.
40.
Climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation.  The  programme  will  also  include  capacity  building
initiatives  on  climate  risks  to  reinforce  the  community  awareness  at  field  level  on  the  threat  of
climate  change  hazards  on  agriculture,  livestock  and  fisheries.  In  overall  and  finally  the  design
and 
into  consideration  any  possible  cumulative
environmental  impacts  and  propose  adaptation/mitigation  measures  for  any  possible  negative
impact to be monitored through regular direct supervision by IFAD and the Government
implementation  process  will  be 
taking 
Multi-benefit  approaches.  TEKAD  design  and  implementation  should  encourage  and  promote
more  rigorous  planning,  practices  of  farming  at  household  level  despite  smallness  of  the  plot,
agriculture,  and  horticulture,  so  as  to  avoid  widespread  erosion,  mitigate  desertification,
deforestation, loss of biodiversity, resource depletion. Foster communities to protect environment
by  reducing  the  level  of  fire  wood  consumption  and  then  stopping  tree  cutting  and  land  use
change  on  steep  slopes.  In  that  regard,  people  should  be  allowed  to  continue  to  practice  all
suitable  land  use  forms  and  should  be  encouraged  to  do  so  in  a  scientific  manner  and  policies
and practices should be developed that reduce social pressures on natural resources and benefit
of environment services.
Incentives  for  good  practices.  Most  of  the  project  challenges  related  to  environment  protection
can  be  met  by  developing  some  appropriate  adaptive  measures  such  as  alteration  in  sowing
dates, use of new crop varieties, introduction and adoption of irrigation methods/technologies as
for  example,  drip  irrigation,  changes  in  planting  techniques  for  rice  if  any,  tillage  practices,
precision land levelling techniques,  and  use  of  technologies  such  as  planters,  training  for  and
better  use  of  chemical  and  insecticide  treatment,  use  of  animal  dejection  to  replace  chemical
fertilizers,  etc. The current  project should introduce  these technologies  where  appropriate in the
project  area  through  an  intensified  awareness  programme.  The  project  funding  should  take  in
consideration some of these actions which go beyond the initial activities proposed to be financed
by the TEKAD additional financing.
41.
Participatory  processes.  In  conformity  with  IFAD’s  emphasis  on  participation  in  programme/
project  design  and  implementation,  greater  consultation  and  involvement  of  communities
(especially  the  marginalized  poor)  and  stakeholders  have  been  employed  during  the  TEKAD
design, and will continue during implementation. Consultations have generated feedback as well
as broad community support to the project and have ensured that affected people in the project
area  endorse the proposed mitigation/ risk reduction and management measures. Strategies  on
targeting, gender equality and women’s empowerment, improvement of livelihood and modalities
of  access  to  project  benefices  must  be  applied.  Particularly,  on  the  strengthening  of  the  local
92
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
institutions  (village  organizations) to  ensure  their  sustainability  and  their  maturity  to  take  part  in
development planning and implementation of project-supported activities.
42.
Furthermore the TEKAD will apply a participatory approach where the local communities will play
a  central  role  in  defining  and  planning  the  interventions.  In  addition,  an  FPIC  plan  is  being
developed  to  ensure  that  local  indigenous  communities  are  fully  on  board  with  the  project.  As
such, project activities will not be implemented in targeted areas until the FPIC is obtained from
the communities.
V. Analysis of Alternatives
43.
It  is  generally  admitted  that  climate  change  adaptation  is  consistent  with  good  development
practice and therefore the research of alternatives could be oriented towards these five categories
of adaptation activities: Climate risk reduction, Policy and administrative management for climate
change,  Education,  training,  and  awareness  on  climate  change,  Climate  scenarios  and  impact
research, coordination on climate change measures and activities across relevant actors.
VI.
Institutional Analysis
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
Institutional framework. As a signatory to the UNFCCC and a country that has ratified the Kyoto
Protocol  on  climate  change,  Indonesia  is  under  obligation  to  contribute  to  efforts  to  mitigate
climate change throughout all the country.
Given its pivotal geographic position in the global ocean conveyor belt (thermohailne circulation),
and its extensive tropical rainforests, with high biodiversity, high carbon stock values and energy
and mineral resources, Indonesia recognizes its role to play in combatting global climate change,
Nevertheless, Indonesia  is also  vulnerable to natural  disasters that  will likely  be  exacerbated by
climate  change,  especially  in  low-lying  areas  throughout  the  archipelago.  Therefore  Indonesia
views integrated  land- and  ocean-based  climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation  efforts  as  a
critical strategic consideration in achieving climate resilience in food, water and energy.
Indonesia  has  also  enacted  legislation  and  established  institutional  mechanisms  aimed  at
translating  its  commitments  under  the  MEAs  as  well  as  for  protecting  and  developing  its
environment and natural resources. In 2011, Indonesia finalized its Presidential Regulation for the
National  Action  Plan  for  Reducing  Greenhouse  Gas  Emissions  (Rencana  Aksi  Nasional
Penurunan  Emisi  Gas  Rumah  Kaca - RAN-GRK)  which  serves  as  the  foundation  for  relevant
Ministries/Institutions,  as  well  as  the  Regional  Governments,  to  implement  greenhouse  gas
(GHG) emission reduction activities. And as complement the RAN-GRK, GoI have the Indonesian
Climate  Change  Sectoral  Roadmap  (ICCSR)  guides  policy  instruments  and  regulations,
programmes  and  projects,  funding  schemes  and  capacity  building  for  investments  in  clean
energy,  improved  forestry  and  improved  resilience.  To  this  end,  the  ICCSR  serves  as  a  policy
guide  for  mainstreaming  and  implementing  national  adaptation  and  mitigation  responses  to
climate change into national mid-term development plans for 2010 – 2030 (RPJMN).
TEKAD  will  build  on  the  existing  institutional  and  implementation  arrangements  in-place.
Following  on  the  basis  of  the  strong  partnership  and  institutional  arrangements  of  TEKAD,  the
MoV will continue to be the lead programme agency, with overall oversight and responsibility for
programme  implementation  through  a  Programme  Steering  Committee  (PSC).  Day  to-day
implementation  is  delegated  to  be  managed  by  the  Programme  Management  Unit,  established
under the supervision of the MoV, and based in Jakarta.
Capacity building. Overall, all components in TEKAD include capacity building, both for the village
community, as well as the MoV and the district government. Within the scope of component 1, it is
expected to include capacity building on environmental activities and climate change. This can be
in the form of implementation training and climate change adaptation measures such as activities
to improve clean water and water for livestock and fisheries, organic farming activities and so on.
In addition to training, a field visit to pilot model location is also needed.
49.
Additional  funding.  Proposed  measures  do  not  need  additional  funding  at  this  stage  of  the
development (though this will be confirmed during project implementation).
93
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
VII. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
50.
The  project  uses  an  integrated participatory  rural  development  approach.  Details  of  community
participation  throughout  the  project  cycle  from  initial  social  mobilization  and  formation  of
community organizations to the identification, selection, design, implementation, supervision, and
operation  and  maintenance  stages  will  be  described  in  the  PIM.  Under  the  project  design,  the
process of environmental monitoring through the communities will built in. The social mobilization
and community organization formation will include capacity building, training and sensitization on
environmental  and  health  issues.  The  training  will  be  supported  by  an  effective  information,
education  and  communications  activity.  Monitoring  of  projects  will  be  carried  out  throughout  the
project  life  cycle  and  reported in  quarterly  reports  and  also  directly  through  regular  IFAD
supervision missions to ensure issues highlighted in this review note are addressed.
VIII. Budgetary Resources and Schedule
51.
TEKAD  is  assessed  to  be  a  Category  “B”  project  as  it  is  expected  to contribute  positively  to
improving  the  livelihoods  of  rural  communities.  TEKAD  is  expected  to  be  highly  sensitive  to
climate  risks,  mainly  due  to  climatic  variability  and  occasionally  weather-related  hazards.  Given
those  rating,  a  full-scale  ESIA  is  not  necessary,  however  TEKAD  will  undertake  an  in-depth
climate  risk  assessment  in  project  target  provinces  during  the  project  implementation  phase  in
order  to  identify  major  risks  and  to  fully  integrate  mitigation  measures  in  capacity  building
packages. Such assessment will be undertaken largely through secondary sources of information
that  are  widely  available  for  Indonesia,  and  where  necessary  with  field  studies  and  ground
truthing  for  verification  purposes.  Mid-term  assessments  on  environmental  and  climate  relevant
indicators will inform the need to revise the environment and climate strategy.
IX. Stakeholder Consultations
52.
The  SECAP  review  notes  were  compiled  by  drawing  literature  and  discussions  with  institutional
stakeholders  and  community  members  and  their  reunited  organizations,  especially  women  and
youth,  during this design  mission in the field. The mission met  with several potential beneficiary
communities during field missions in Papua (January 2019) and East Nusa Tenggara (April 2019).
In  addition,  the  Design  Team  conducted  detailed  consultations  with  all  key  stakeholders  in  the
Stakeholder  Workshops  in  Jayapura  (Papua  Province)  and  Kupang  (Nusa  Tenggara  Province).
The  mission  also  consulted  staff  from  the  Office  of  Environment  and  Forestry  of  East  Nusa
Tenggara  Province,  Desk  Papua,  and  also  with  the  Indigenous  Peoples  Alliance  of  the
Archipelago (AMAN) in Jakarta(April2019).
94
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Attachment 1: Check List and Preliminary Screening for Environmental and Social Categories
and Climate Change
53.
IFAD classifies all projects into one of three environmental and social categories (A, B or C) and
one of three climate risk classifications (high, moderate and low). Where IFAD is jointly financing
a  project  with  other  agencies,  IFAD  will  cooperate  with  the  partner  agency  and  agree  on  a
common approach for the assessment and the categorization of the project.
54.
A positive response to any question between 1 and 23 will categorize the project as A. Similarly, a
positive  response  to  question  24  to  40  will  categorize  the  project  as  B.  In  case  all  answers  are
negative, the project will be categorized as C.
55.
This list of questions can be used at different stages of the project design and should be used in
conjunction with the respective guidance statements.
56.
The checklists for environmental and social and climate risks:
Initially  be filled  in  during  concept  development  to  help  guide  in  the  identification  of
opportunities  and  possible  risks  and  activities  that  will  need  to  be  considered  in  the  project
design;
Be attached to the SECAP review note; and
Be reviewed during project design phases and updated as required.
Project title:
(Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu )TEKAD Project
IFAD project no.:
Country:
Checklist prepared by (name,
title and institution)
Version of checklist:
Version 2
Indonesia
Ratih Widyaningsih, IFAD Consultant
Date of this version:
21/05/2019
57.
In  completing  the  checklist  both  short- and  long-term  impacts  should  be  considered. This  list  of
questions can be used at different stages of the project cycle and should be used in conjunction
with  the respective  guidance  statements.  Capitalize  on  information  based  on  reports  and  field
visits  during  design.  The  details  of  the  elaboration  on  issues  that  arise  as  a  result  of  screening
should be clearly articulated in the SECAP review note.
95



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
No
No
Yes/No
Comments/explanation
The project does not intend to develop any
wetlands.
Project would work only in existing or
abandoned areas of agricultural land and in the
case of the latter seek to rehabilitate existing
agricultural lands.
Guiding questions for environment and social
screening
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily remedied adverse
environmental and/or social implications.
Project location
1. Would the project develop any wetlands?
(Guidance statement GS1)
2. Would the project cause significant adverse
impacts to habitats and/or ecosystems and their
services (e.g. conversion of more than
50 hectares of natural forest, loss of habitat,
erosion/other form of land degradation,
fragmentation, and hydrological changes)? (GS
1, 2 and 5)
3. Does the proposed project target area include
ecologically sensitive areas,71 areas of
global/national significance for biodiversity
conservation and/or biodiversity-rich areas and
habitats depended on by endangered species?
(GS1)
4. Is the project location subjected to major
destruction as a result geophysical hazards
(tsunamis, landslides, earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions)?
All the investments and activities will be located
in existing agriculture lands, which do not fall
within ecologically sensitive areas.
Indonesia and some of the locations are
vulnerable to earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions. Risks of impact to project
investments in agriculture and small scale
infrastructure are however considered minimal.
No
No
Natural resources
5. Would the project lead to unsustainable
natural resource management practices
(fisheries, forestry, livestock) and/or result in
exceeding carrying capacity. For example, is
their development happening in areas where
little up-to-date information exists on
sustainable yield/carrying capacity? (GS 4, 5
and 6)
6. Would the project develop large-scale72
aquaculture or mariculture projects, or where
their development involves significant alteration
of ecologically sensitive areas?
7.Would the project result in significant use of
agrochemicals which may lead to life-
threatening illness and long-term public health
and safety concerns? (GS 14)
8. Does the project rely on water-based (ground
and/or surface) development where there is
reason to believe that significant depletion
and/or reduced flow has occurred from the
No
No
No
No
Project design is to develop improved and
sustainable agricultural, fisheries, livestock. The
scale of the interventions and the current low
levels of productivity mean that the interventions
will not lead to unsustainable natural resource
management practices
The project will promote the safe and efficient
use of agrochemicals including review of
requirements, safety, health. In parallel the
project will promote the use of organic
pesticides.
The scale of potential activities will not lead to
significant depletion or reduced flow of water
based resources.
71 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere reserves) and their buffer
zones; areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests;
wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to
climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation and areas
that include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance) and areas with high
social vulnerability.
72 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context
and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to
50 hectares) and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25
hectares as an aquaculture unit size to trigger ESIA.
96
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Guiding questions for environment and social
screening
effects of climate change or from
overutilization? (GS7)
9. Does the project pose a risk of introducing
potentially invasive species or GMOs which
might alter genetic traits of indigenous species
or have an adverse effect on local biodiversity?
(GS1)
10. Does the project make use of wastewater
(e.g. industrial, mining, sewage effluent)? (GS7)
Infrastructure development
11. Does the project include the construction/
rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s)/reservoir(s)
meeting at least one of the following criteria?
(GS8)
more than 15 metre high wall or
more than 500 metre long crest or
more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity or
incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s
12. Does the project involve large-scale
irrigation schemes rehabilitation/development
(above 100 hectares per scheme)?73 (GS7)
13. Does the project include drainage or
correction of natural water bodies (e.g. river
training)? (GS7)
Social
14. Would the project result in economic
displacement74 or physical resettlement of more
than 20 people, or impacting more than 10 per
cent of an individual household’s assets?
(GS13)
15. Would the project result in conversion
and/or loss of physical cultural resources?
(GS9)
16. Would the project generate significant social
adverse impacts to local communities (including
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and
indigenous people) or other project-affected
parties? (GS13)
Yes/No
Comments/explanation
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
There will be no big infrastructure funded in this
project
The project will not fund any development or
rehabilitation of irrigation schemes.
Project interventions will focus on existing
agricultural land and will not result in economic
displacement or physical resettlement
The project activities will have a positive social
effect as the project aims to include vulnerable
groups such as women, women-headed
households, youth, and also indigenous people
in community’s groups through a well-designed
social mobilization strategy. In addition, the
project is based on a community approach
where the communities will be fully involved in
the definition of the interventions in their
villages. Nonetheless an FPIC plan will be
prepared to ensure that there are no adverse
effects on local and indigenous communities.
Other
17. Does the project include manufacture and
transportation of hazardous and toxic materials
which may affect the environment? (GS2)
No
73 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context
and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations determining size of irrigation development requiring a full
ESIA and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares
as an irrigation development unit size to trigger an ESIA.
74 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources or means of livelihoods (guidance
statement 13).
97
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Guiding questions for environment and social
screening
18. Does the project include the construction of
a large or medium-scale industrial plant?
Yes/No
Comments/explanation
No
Project investment would be restricted to small
scale fisheries, livestock and agro-processing,
at village level.
No
No
19. Does the project include the development of
large-scale production forestry? (GS5)
Rural finance
20. Does the project support any of the above
(Q1 to Q22) through the provision of a line of
credit to financial service providers? (GS12)
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications which can
be readily remedied.
Location
21. Does the project involve agricultural
intensification and/or expansion of cropping
area in non-sensitive areas that may have
adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems and/or
livelihoods? (GS1, 2 and 12)
The project will involve agricultural
intensification on existing agricultural lands. In
addition, the current levels of productivity are
low and this the intensification will not lead to
adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems or
livelihoods.
No
Natural resource management
22.Do the project activities include rangeland
and livestock development? (GS6)
23. Does the project involve fisheries where
there is information on stocks, fishing effort and
sustainable yield? Is there any risk of
overfishing, habitat damage and knowledge of
fishing zones and seasons? (GS4)
No
No
No
No
24. Would the project activities include
aquaculture and/or agriculture in newly
introduced or intensively practiced areas? Do
project activities include conversion of wetlands
and clearing of coastal vegetation, change in
hydrology or introduction of exotic species?
(GS4)
25. Do the project activities include natural
resources-based value chain development? (GS
1, 6 and 12)
26. Do the project activities include watershed
management or rehabilitation?
27. Does the project include large-scale soil and
water conservation measures? (GS 1 and 5)
Infrastructure
28. Does the project include small-scale
irrigation and drainage, and small and medium
(capacity < 3 million m3) dam subprojects? (GS 7
and 8)
29.Does the project include small and
microenterprise development subprojects? (GS
12 and 13)
30. Does the project include the development of Yes
Yes
No
No
No
98
TEKAD is not expected to invest in large scale
rangeland or livestock activities. Rather, it is
expected that demand for support will focus
mainly on small scale homestead production of
poultry and small livestock (pigs and goats).
The project will include support to small scale
aquaculture (inland), marine fisheries and
mariculture (seaweed, sea cucumber etc.) The
impact of these small scale interventions will be
minimal. Nonetheless, the project will provide
sensitization workshops, environment
assessment (mapping), and capacity building
on sustainable marine resource management,
also based on experiences with CCDP.
The planned aquaculture and agriculture
activities will take place in existing practiced
areas that are not intensively used. Furthermore
the scale of the interventions will not require
conversion of wetlands, clearing of coastal
vegetation or changes in hydrology.
Minor initiatives for soil and water conservation
Small scale agriculture processing
Some increase in traffic but this would be farm
access traffic
Some land may be required for small farm
roads but this would be small and less than
10% of an individual households land holding.
Land for storage and other buildings would in
most cases use village or government land. In
all cases land would be donated. The project
would ensure that any land donation is properly
documented including measurement and
agreement by landholder, culture head and
village and district government.
The project is promoting a gender and nutrition
sensitive approach to value-chain development.
In case there is any potential health concern in
the production or post-harvest processing of
commodities, this will be systematically
identified in the proposed Nutrition value-chain
studies and measures implemented to address
it through the nutrition intervention.
The project is working with small-holder farmers
with family members working on the farms and
or other villagers hired as wage labourers
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Yes/No
Comments/explanation
Guiding questions for environment and social
screening
agro processing facilities? (GS 2, 6 and 12)
31. Would the construction or operation of the
project cause an increase in traffic on rural
roads? (GS10)
Social
32. Would any of the project activities have
minor adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources? (GS9)
33 Would the project result in physical
resettlement of less than 20 people, or
impacting less than 10 per cent of an individual
household’s assets (GS13)?
Yes
No
No
34. Would the project result in short-term public
health and safety concerns? (GS14)
No
35.Would the project require a migrant
workforce or seasonal workers (for
construction, planting and/or harvesting)?
(GS13)
Rural finance
36.Does the project support any of the above
(Q24 to Q37) through the provision of a line of
credit to financial service providers?(GS12)
No
No
99
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Guidance for categorization:
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment or an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (full or
specific) are required depending on availability of
information.
Also some specific questions would require the below
specific actions:
Yes to Q16 – A Resettlement Action Plan or a
Resettlement Action Framework is required depending
on availability of information.
Yes to Q17 – A Physical Cultural Resources
Management Plan is required that includes provisions
for managing chance finds at implementation.
Yes to Q18 – Free, prior and informed consent should be
obtained/Free, Prior and Informed Consent
Implementation Plan is required depending on whether
the affected communities are identifiable. In instances
where indigenous peoples are affected an Indigenous
Peoples Plan is required. A Social Impact Assessment is
required.
Yes to Q8 and/or Q15 – A water resources management
plan for the project is required.
Yes to Q7, Q9 and/or Q19 – A Pest Management Plan is
required.
An environmental and social analysis to develop an Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is required.
No further analysis is required.
"Yes" response to
any questions
between 1 and 22
''No'' responses to all
Q1-Q22 and "Yes"
response to any
questions between
23 and 38
"No" response to all
questions between
1 and 38
Environmental
and social
category is A
Environmental and
social category is B
Environmental and
social category is
C
58.
In case projects fall under both Category A and B, the highest category will be taken as reference.
The  determination  of  the  project  category  and classification  will  depend  on  the  magnitude  of
impacts and would depend on the scale of such activities; a cautious approach to the concern of
cumulative  impacts  is  considered  essential.  In  such  cases,  the  necessary  environmental  and
social analysis and associated budget should be  incorporated into project design. Such projects
may be considered for Category B.
59.
Determining  the  environmental  and  social  Category A,  including  the  extent  of  assessments  and
studies to be conducted, will also take into account available information, i.e. recent studies and
assessments,  including  other  initiatives  in  the  country,  to  the  extent  these  are  relevant  to  the
proposed project.
60.
Declassification (from A to B or from B to C) may also be possible in case negative externalities
are being addressed by other projects or activities implemented by third parties.
100





Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Guiding questions for climate risk screening
1. Is the project area subject to
extreme climatic events such as
flooding, drought, tropical storms
or heat waves?
2. Do climate scenarios for the
project area foresee changes in
temperature, rainfall or extreme
weather that will adversely affect
the project impact, sustainability
or cost over its lifetime?
3. Would the project make
investments in low-lying coastal
areas/zones exposed to tropical
storms?
4. Would the project make
investments in glacial areas and
mountains zones?
5. Would the project promote
agricultural activity in marginal
and/or highly degraded areas that
have increased sensitivity to
climatic events (such as on
hillsides, deforested slopes or
floodplains)?
6. Is the project located in areas
where rural development projects
have experienced significant
weather-related losses and
damages in the past?
7. Would the project
develop/install infrastructure in
areas with a track record of
extreme weather events?
8. Is the project target group
entirely dependent on natural
resources (such as seasonal
crops, rainfed agricultural plots,
migratory fish stocks) that have
been affected by in the last decade
by climate trends or specific
climatic events?
9. Would climate variability likely
affect agricultural productivity
(crops/livestock/fisheries), access
to markets and/or the associated
incidence of pests and diseases
for the project target groups?
10. Would weather-related risks or
climatic extremes likely adversely
impact upon key stages of
identified value chains in the
project (from production to
markets)?
No
Yes
X
Additional explanation of “yes” response*
Climate change and El Niño events will further challenge
water and agriculture, here remains uncertainties in the
projections however it is concluded that extreme climatic
events will occur and more detailed climate change
analysis adaptation initiatives must be incorporated into
the project design
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
The TEKAD project includes land at higher levels. Some
projects would be in foothills of mountains however no
projects would be in the mountain zones.
101
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
11. Is the project investing in
climate-sensitive livelihoods that
are diversified?
X
The project will promote climate smart practices through
capacity building packages. These will include promoting
savings and insurance to build farmer's resilience
among others.
X
X
X
X
Farmers have developed basic capacities to adjust to
climatic uncertainties.
12. Is the project investing in
infrastructure that is exposed to
infrequent extreme weather
events?
13. Is the project investing in
institutional development and
capacity-building for rural
institutions (such as farmer
groups, cooperatives) in
climatically heterogeneous areas?
14. Does the project have the
potential to become more resilient
through the adoption of green
technologies at a reasonable cost?
15 Does the project intervention
have opportunities to strengthen
indigenous climate risk
management capabilities?
16. Does the project have
opportunities to integrate climate
resilience aspects through policy
dialogue to improve agricultural
sector strategies and policies?
17. Does the project have potential
to integrate climate resilience
measures without extensive
additional costs (e.g. improved
building codes, capacity-building,
or including climate risk issues in
policy processes)?
18. Based on the information
available would the project benefit
from a more thorough climate risk
and vulnerability analysis to
identify the most vulnerable rural
population, improve targeting and
identify additional complementary
investment actions to manage
climate risks?
*The additional explanation, where possible, will provide the justification for classification. Consideration should
be given particularly to provide additional explanations for questions 13 to 17.
Yes adaptation initiatives would be carefully targeted
and can be incorporated into the mainstream initiatives
for production, processing and marketing.
X
X
X
102
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Guidance for classification:
Yes response to any of the
questions 1 to 7
Yes response to any of the
questions 8 to 17
Yes response to question 18
The climate risk classification is
high
The climate risk classification is
moderate
GHG assessment
No response to almost all
questions
The climate risk classification is
low
A detailed analysis is required
A basic analysis is required
For example, EX ACT tool
No further analysis is required, but
voluntary measures can be
incorporated
103
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Attachment 2: Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
Actions
Indicator
Responsibility
PIM includes
guidelines on
Household
methodologies
PIU and
consultants
Time
Frame
2019
Budget
Source
Subcomponent
1.1 and 1.2
Key
Requirements
Gender equitable
approaches are
developed for
improving income,
food and nutrition.
Disadvantaged
groups including
rural youth are
effectively
incorporated into
the district
activities.
Institutional
Local governments
have the capacity
to s to assess,
supervise and
monitor social and
environmental
requirements.
Project requires an
independent
grievance redress
Gender-sensitive
livelihoods and nutrition
analysis along with an
assessment of the
village social structure.
Livelihood and
economic activities will
follow a household
approach, with focus on
the family unit in order
to empower women
decision making
alongside the men.
A Gender Equality and
Social Inclusion
consultant will prepare
guidelines HH
methodologies.
The mobilization of
customary governance
systems structures and
of community activists
(such as youth as well
as women’s, farmers’ or
religious groups) to
facilitate broad
community participation
The setting up of a
Village Management
Information System run
by village youth,
building on KOMPAK
successful pilot in
Papua
Guidelines of
responsibilities at
District level for
ensuring social and
environmental
requirements.
Capacity building will
rest on guidelines and
tools developed by
P3PD75, which will be
adapted to match the
specificities of economic
planning in the primary
sector as well as
specific features of the
target provinces
Requirements and
approach exist under
the current government
Monitoring and
evaluation of the
HH methodology
program.
Initiatives to
support
disadvantaged
and youth
identified and
programmed.
Monitoring and
evaluation of
disadvantaged
and youth
programs.
DPIU
2020-
2024
Sub-
Component
3.2
PIU
2019
Sub-
component 1.1
DPIU
2020-
2024
Sub-
Component
3.2
Social and
Environmental
Guidelines
PIU/DPIU and
consultants.
Training and
institutional
strengthening of
BLH and other
related agencies
BLH
2019
Sub-
Component
2.1
Approved GRM
DPIU
2019
Village
development
fund/ Ministry
75 Program Penguatan Pemerintahan dan Pembangunan Desa (Improved Village Service Delivery Program) of the World Bank.
104
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review
Actions
Indicator
Responsibility
Time
Frame
Budget
Source
of Villages
Key
Requirements
mechanism.
Need an active
institutional
framework for the
participation of
disadvantaged
groups, women
and youth..
Monitoring
Overall monitoring
and evaluation
needs to be
coordinated and
effective to meet
project evaluation
requirements.
Routine monitoring
of social and
environmental
activities especially
progress of ESMP
implementation
and active
participation of
disadvantaged
groups.
Notes:
Village Development
Fund mechanism
Grievance redress
mechanism (GRM) is
place and effective
Institutional framework
defined and approved
within the planning
process of the VDF.
Monitoring and
evaluation requirements
would be defined;
requirements to include
expenditure, physical
progress, production
Quarterly and annual
reports
Requirements to be
defined
Independent
Agency to be
defined
2020-
2024
PIU and
consultants
DPIU
2020-
2024
Sub-
components
1.1 and 2.1
GRM reports
Monitoring and
evaluation of
institutional
framework for
disadvantaged,
women and youth
Approved plan for
monitoring and
evaluation.
PIU and
consultants
2019
Monitoring and
evaluation
reports.
Routine ESMP
Reports
DPIU
DPIU
PIU
2020 -
2024
2020
to
2024
Sub-
Component
3.2
Sub-
Component
3.2
AMAN-Alliance  of  Indigenous  Communities;  BLH-District  Environment  Offices;  ESMP-Environmental
and  Social Management  Plan,  PIU-Project  Implementation Unit  ,  DPIU-District  Project Implementation
Unit, MOEF-Ministry of Environment and Forests.
TEKAD  budget  includes  allocations  for  all  of  the  abovementioned  actions.  If  needed,  additional  funds
will  be  provided  by  the  Government  under  the  Village  Development  Fund  program  or  from  TEKAD
government contributions.
105


Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget
Total Budget for FY1 (2020)
ANNEX 6: FIRST ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGET
(IDR'000,000)
IDR
US$
IDR
US$
IDR
US$
IDR
U
S
$
IDR
US$
International Fund for
Agricultural Development
(Loan)
International Fund for
Agricultural Development
(Grant)
The Government
Benefici
aries
Total
1
11
12
2
21
22
23
3
31
32
Village Economic Empowerment
Village Governance
Village Economic Initiatives
Partnerships for Village Economic
Development
District Support for Village Economic
Development
Economic Services
Financial Services
Innovation, Learning and Policy
Development
Innovation, Learning and Inspiration
Policy Development and Institution Building
4
Project Management
Categories by Financiers
I. Investment Costs
A. Civil Works
B. Equipment and Materials
C. Vehicles
D. Training and Studies
E. Technical Assistance
International TA
National TA
1 735 650.0
-
-
-
85 767 772.0
11 584 195.0
768 862.5
-
-
711 149.9
8 167 516.5
-
35 152 526.4
119.7
-
5 915.0
798.9
53.0
49.0
563.3
2 424.3
-
-
353.5
-
-
1 046.5
100.0
-
-
-
-
-
5 125 750.0
-
-
-
-
15 174 256.4
-
1 450 000.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 291 379.4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
8 154 555.7
-
-
502.9
-
-
-
562.4
143 887 672.3
9 923.3
21 750 006.4
1 500.0
15 445 935.1
1 065.2
2 742 840.1
26 211 401.3
17 998 950.3
-
14 037 232.5
54 083 662.4
-
189.2
1 807.7
1 241.3
968.1
3 729.9
106
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 735 650.0
-
-
-
93 059 151.4
16 709 945.0
768 862.5
-
-
711 149.9
23 341 772.9
-
44 757 082.1
-
-
119.7
-
6 417.9
1 152.4
53.0
49.0
1 609.8
3 086.7
181 083 613.8
12 488.5
-
2 742 840.1
26 211 401.3
17 998 950.3
-
14 037 232.5
54 083 662.4
-
189.2
1 807.7
1 241.3
-
968.1
3 729.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget
Subtotal Technical Assistance
F. Operating Costs
G. Village Grants
H. IFAD Grant
I. Beneficiary Contribution
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Incremental Operating Costs
Other Operating Costs
Equipment O&M
Vehicle O&M
Subtotal Incremental Operating Costs
B. Incremental Salaries
Salaries
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
136 596 075.5
68 120 894.9
6 778 722.4
-
4 698.0
467.5
-
-
136 596 075.5
-
9 420.4
14 743 266.5
14 743 266.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 420.4
-
-
-
1 016.8
-
1 016.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
68 120 894.9
6 778 722.4
-
14 743 266.5
-
151 339 342.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 698.0
467.5
-
1 016.8
-
10 437.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 065.2
1 065.2
11 502.4
-
-
1 016.8
15 445 935.1
15 445 935.1
15 445 935.1
1 065.2
1 065.2
1 065.2
14 743 266.5
107
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan
ANNEX 7: PROCUREMENT PLAN FOR FIRST 18 MONTHS
LOAN
Procutement Plan for GOODS (2020-2021)
SL No.
 Description of
Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons.
Serv
NPMU
Quantities
 Unit Cost 000
Unit
 Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Year
 Goods/
Works/
Non.Cons/
Cons. Serv
Proc.
Owner
Fund Source
 Estimated Cost
(Rp)
Estimated Cost
($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method of
Selec-tion
#
Pack/
Lot
Avg. value per
pack or lot
(Rp)
 Avg. value
per package
($)
Domes-tic Pre-
ference
(yes/no)
Prequa-
lifica-tion
(yes/ no)
CPPShopping
 Tablets for village cadres
 Per cadre      1 000
4 216 500  DT 1.1
2020
Goods
MoA
4 216 500 000
300 000
Prior
NCB
1000 Pack
4 216 500
 Demonstration Plots /d
 Demo plot
     5 000
3 513 750  DT 1.2
2020
Goods
MoA
17 568 750 000
1 250 000
Post
e-Purchasing
5000 Pack
3 513 750
300
250
4x4 /b
 Province
         15
562 200 000  DT 4
2020
Goods
MoA
8 433 000 000
600 000
Post
e-Purchasing
5001 Pack
562 200 000
40 000
Office furniture and filing cabinet /c
All electrical equipment /d
Laptops /e
Desktop computers /f
TOTAL
DISTRICT
4x4 Vehicle
 set
 set
 laptop
 unit
         49
           6
         49
           6
28.531.650  DT 4
70.275.000  DT 4
12.649.500  DT 4
11.244.000  DT 4
2020
2020
2020
2020
Goods
Goods
Goods
Goods
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
1 398 050 850
421 650 000
619 825 500
67 464 000
32 725 240 350
99 470
30 000
44 100
4 800
2 328 370.0
Post
Post
Post
Post
e-Purchasing
Shopping
e-Purchasing
e-Purchasing
5002 Pack
5003 Pack
5004 Pack
5005 Pack
28.531.650
70.275.000
12.649.500
11.244.000
2 030
5 000
900
800
Per District
25
562 200 000  DT 2.1
2020
Goods
District
14 055 000 000
1 000 000
Post
e-Purchasing
25.0 Pack
562 200 000
40 000
Motorcycles for facilitators /c
Motorcycle
Tablets for facilitators /d
Laptops
Office furniture and filing cabinet
TOTAL
TOTAL OVERALL GOODS
tablets
Per District
Set per
district
250
250
4
25
35 137 500  DT 2.1
4 216 500  DT 2.1
12 649 500  DT 2.1
2021
2021
2021
Goods
District
Goods
District
Goods
District
8 784 375 000
625 000
Post
e-Purchasing
250 Pack
35 137 500
1 054 125 000
75 000
Post
e-Purchasing
250 Pack
4 216 500
50 598 000
3 600
Post
e-Purchasing
4
Pack
12 649 500
28 531 650  DT 2.1
2020
Goods
District
713 291 250
50 750
Post
e-Purchasing
25
Pack
28 531 650
2 500
300
900
2 030
90 107 869 950
122 833 110 300.0
1 754 350.0
4 082 720.0
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
108
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan
Procurement Plan of Firm Selectin for Consulting Services (2020-2021)
100 000
CPPCV Comparison
SL No.
 Description of Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
NPMU
Quantities
 Unit Cost 000
Unit
 Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Year
Goods/Work
s/Non.Cons/
Cons. Serv
Proc. Owner Fund Source
 Estimated Cost (Rp)
Estimated
Cost ($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/P
ost)
Method of Selec-
tion
 # Pack
Avg. value per
pack or lot (Rp)
 Avg. value per
package ($)
Domestic Pre-
ference (yes/no)
Prequa-
lifica-tion
(yes/ no)
 NGO for implementing family-based approach /b
 Village
         248
21 082 500  DT 1.1
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
5 228 460 000
372 000.0
Prior
Community for
Participation
248
21 082 500
1 500.00
Yes
Yes
Consulting Firm for District Implementation Team (DIT)
 Package               5
22 862 887 047  DT 2.1
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
District
22 862 887 047
1 626 672.9
Prior
QCBS
5
22 862 887 047
1 626 672.86
Yes
No
 District Coordinator
District Marketing Specialist
 MIS/M&E Specialist
Village Governance Facilitator
 Economic Initiatives Advisor
 Communications - District
 Office rental - District
 Travel allowances - District
 Vehicle O&M
 Communications - Sub District
 Office rental - Sub District
 Travel allowances - Sub District
 M. Bike O&M
 Cost of meetings
National consultancies - Market opportunities and value
chain analyses
National consultancies - Services mapping
BUMDes assessment study
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
 PA
 PA
 PA
 PA
 PA
 PA
 PA
 meetings
 Study
 Study
 Study
Climate risk and vulnerability assessment + Database
 Study
Training modules for local market agents
 Provice
Consulting Firm for National Project Manajement Unit
(NPMU)
 Package
31.3
31.3
31.3
210
210
31.3
31.3
31.3
31.3
125
125
125
250
100
5
5
5
1
5
1
        9 172 803 197
6 158 901 000
6 158 901 000
35 418 600 000
35 418 600 000
422 324 640
791 858 700
3 079 450 500
791 858 700
1 686 600 000
1 581 187 500
12 298 125 000
1 054 125 000
281 100 000
421 650 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
2 108 250 000
150 000.0
Prior
QCBS
210 825 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 054 125 000
75 000.0
Prior
QCBS
210 825 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 054 125 000
75 000.0
Prior
FBS
1 827 150 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 827 150 000
130 000.0
Prior
QCBS
210 825 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 054 125 000
75 000.0
Prior
QCBS
10 715 981 760  DT 4
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
10 715 981 760
762 432.0
Prior
QCBS
5
5
5
1
5
1
421 650 000
30 000.00
210 825 000
15 000.00
210 825 000
15 000.00
1 827 150 000
130 000.00
210 825 000
15 000.00
10 715 981 760
762 432.00
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
109
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan
 National Team Leader
 Financial Management and Administrative Expert
 Procurement Expert
 Senior GESI Specialist
 Senior M&E Expert
 KM and Policy Development Expert
 Senior Village Governance Expert
 Senior Economic Development Expert
 Senior Financial Services Expert
 Office rent
 Communications
 Travel allowances
 Office Consummables
 Car rental allowances
Consulting Firm for Province (Province Project
Implementation Unit)
 Provincial Team Leader
 Financial Management Expert
 Procurement Expert
 M&E/KM Expert
 MIS/GIS Expert
 GESI Expert
 Village Governance Expert
 Economic Development Expert
 Financial Services Expert
 Office rent
 Communications
 Travel allowances
 Office Consummables
 Vehicle Operating costs /a
Baseline Survey
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Package
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
Province
Province
Province
Province
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
5
5
5
5
1
1 124 400 000
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
365 430 000
281 100 000
843 300 000
140 550 000
281 100 000
12 097 166 610  DT 4
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
12 097 166 610
860 702.0
Prior
QCBS
586 121 610
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
1 124 400 000
702 750 000
4 216 500 000
281 100 000
632 475 000
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
12 097 166 610
860 702.00
Yes
No
1 405 500 000  DT 4
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
1 405 500 000
100 000.0
Prior
FBS
1
1 405 500 000
100 000.00
Yes
No
 TOTAL OVERALL CONSULTING FIRM
      59 407 770 417.3      4 226 806.9
110
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan
Procurement Plan of Individual Consultant  (2020-2021)
100 000
CPP
CV Comparison
SL No.
 Description of Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Quantities
 Unit Cost
Unit
Total
 (Rp)
Com p
Year
Goods/W
orks/Non.
Cons/Con
s. Serv
Proc.
Ow ner
Fund Source
 Estim ated Cost
(Rp)
Estim ated
Cost ($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method of
Selection
 #
Pack
Avg. value
per pack or
lot (Rp)
 Avg. value
per
package
($)
Dom es-
tic Pre-
ference
(yes/no)
Pre-
qualifica-
tion
(yes/
no)
NPMU
 Adapting KOMPAK/developing methodology
 PM
4
210 825 000  DT 1.1
2020
Cons.Serv
 Village cadres /a
 Cadre
1000
12 143 520  DT 1.I
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
MoA
843 300 000
60 000 Prior
12 143 520 000
864 000
Post
QBS
Individual
Selection
4
210 825 000
15 000
No
1000
12 143 520
864
Yes
No
No
 International technical assistance - Family-based approach
 International technical assistance  - Market opportunities and value
chain analyses
 International technical assistance - Services mapping
International Technical Assistance -  District marketing strategies
 Adaptation of existing training modules
Programme expeditor (programme management)
Programme expeditor (technical)
TA for GESI strategy and follow -up
International consultant to set-up M&E/KM system
TA on demand
TOTAL INDIVIDUAL CONSULTANT
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
4
4
5
5
5
6
4
4
4
2
2
4
5
5
5
6
4
4
4
2
351 375 000
25 000
No
Yes
351 375 000
25 000.00
351 375 000
351 375 000
351 375 000
351.375.000
351.375.000
351.375.000
351.375.000
351.375.000
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
351 375 000  DT 1.1 2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
1 405 500 000
100 000 Prior
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
351 375 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 405 500 000
100 000.0 Prior
1 756 875 000
1 756 875 000
1 756 875 000
2 108 250 000
1 405 500 000
1 405 500 000
1 405 500 000
702 750 000
125 000.0 Prior
125 000.0 Prior
125 000.0 Prior
150 000.0 Prior
100 000.0 Prior
100 000.0 Prior
100 000.0 Prior
Post
50 000.0
28 095 945 000.0 1 999 000.0
351 375 000  DT 2.2
351 375 000  DT 2.2
351 375 000  DT 2.3
351.375.000  DT 4
351.375.000  DT 4
351.375.000  DT 4
351.375.000  DT 4
351.375.000  DT 4
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
Cons.Serv
Cons.Serv
Cons.Serv
Cons.Serv
Cons.Serv
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
111
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan
Procurement Plan of Non-Consulting Services  (2020-2021)
100 000
SL No.
 Description of
Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Quantities
 Unit Cost
Unit
 Total
 (Rp)
Com p
Year
 Goods/
Works/
Non.Cons/
Cons. Serv
Proc.
Ow ner
Fund Source
 Estim ated Cost
(Rp)
Estim a-ted
Cost ($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method
of
Selectio
n
 #
Pack
Avg. value
per pack
(Rp)
 Avg. value
per
package ($)
CPP
Shopping
Dom esti
c Prefe-
rence
(yes/no)
Prequal
i-
fication
(yes/no
)
No
Objection
from  Bank
for Draft
Prequalifi-
cation doc.
(Date)**
NPMU
 Aw areness Campaigns
Capacity Building
 TOT of Facilitators for Household
Methodology
 Economic development strategy -
Facilitation Expenses
  Study tour to Philippines /f
TOTAL
DISTRICT
 Distric
Village
 Per
facilitator
 per
district
      25
500
14 055 000  DT 1.1
1 405 500 DT 1.1
 1 000
35 137 500  DT 1.1
2021
2021
2021
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
      25
70 275 000  DT 1.1
2021
Non. Cons
 Lumsump         6
70 275 000  DT 2.1
2021
Non. Cons
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
351 375 000
702 750 000
25 000
50 000
Post
Post
Shopping
Shopping
25
500
14 055 000
1 405 500
1 000.00
100.00
35 137 500 000
2 500 000 Prior
NCB
1000
35 137 500
2 500.00
Yes
Yes
Yes
1 756 875 000
125 000 Prior
421 650 000
30 000 Prior
38 370 150 000.0 2 730 000.0
Direct
Purchase
NCB
25
6
70 275 000
5 000.00
Yes
70 275 000
5 000.00
No
 Provincial Start Up Workshops
 w orkshop         5
140 550 000  DT 2.1
2020
Cons.Serv
District
702 750 000
50 000.0
Post
NCB
5
140 550 000
10 000.00
 Skills Assessment
 Distric
   25.0
19 677 000  DT 2.1
 Trainee accomodation 2 w eek course /i
 Distric
     1.0
245 962 500  DT 2.1
2020
2020
Non. Cons
District
Non. Cons
District
491 925 000
35 000 Post
245 962 500
17 500 Post
25.0
19 677 000
1 400.00
1.0
245 962 500
17 500.00
 Distric
 556.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1 2020-2021 Non. Cons
District
6 485 320 220
461 424 Prior
 Distric
 556.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1 2020-2021 Non. Cons
District
6 485 320 220
461 424 Prior
 Distric
 556.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1 2020-2021 Non. Cons
District
6 485 320 220
461 424 Prior
 Distric
 Distric
     1.0
     1.0
28 110 000  DT 2.1
14 055 000  DT 2.1
2020
2020
2021
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
District
District
Non. Cons
District
28 110 000
14 055 000
2 000 Post
1 000 Post
Shopping
Direct
Purchase
Direct
Purchase
Direct
Purchase
Direct
Purchase
Shopping
Shopping
556.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
556.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
556.0
11 664 245
829.90
1.0
1.0
28 110 000
14 055 000
2 000.00
1 000.00
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
 Trainee accomodation 2 w eek course /I -
Village Governance Facilitators
 Trainee accomodation 2 w eek course /I -
Economic Initiative Advisors
 Trainee accomodation 2 w eek course /I -
PPLs
 Delivery support
 Course materials
 Village Governance Facilitators - Skill
Assessment
 Village Governance Facilitators - Trainee
accomodation 2 w eek course
 Economic Initiative Advisors - Skill
Assessment
 Economic Initiative Advisors - Trainee
accomodation 2 w eek course
 PPLs - Skills Assessment
 PPLs -Trainee accomodation 2 w eek
course
 Meetings of Value Chain Analysis
Reference Group
 Provincial Validation Workshops
 Translation and publication
 Training for data input and system
operation
 District Start Up Workshops
 w orkshop       25
70 275 000  DT 2.1
1 756 875 000
125 000.0
Post
NCB
25
70 275 000
5 000.00
 District
   25.0
19 677 000  DT 2.1
2020
Non. Cons
District
491 925 000
35 000 Post
Shopping
25.0
19 677 000
1 400.00
Yes
 District
 250.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1
2020
Non. Cons
District
2 916 061 250
207 475 Post
Direct
Purchase
250.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
 District
   25.0
19 677 000  DT 2.1
2020
Non. Cons
District
491 925 000
35 000 Post
Shopping
25.0
19 677 000
1 400.00
Yes
 District
 250.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1
2020
Non. Cons
District
2 916 061 250
207 475 Post
 District
   25.0
19 677 000  DT 2.1
 District
 250.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1
2020
2020
Non. Cons
District
Non. Cons
District
491 925 000
35 000 Post
2 916 061 250
207 475 Post
Direct
Purchase
Shopping
Direct
Purchase
250.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
25.0
19 677 000
250.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
 Province      5.0
42 165 000  DT 2.2
2020
Non. Cons
 Province      5.0
 Province      1.0
140 550 000  DT 2.2
421 650 000  DT 2.2
 Province      1.0
200 000 000  DT 3.1
2020
2020
2020
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
 Project & Fiduciary Management Training
 Lumpsum      1.0
281 100 000  DT 4
2020
Non. Cons
 Project Steering Committee meetings
 meeting
     4.0
70 275 000  DT 4
2020-2021 Non. Cons
 National Start-up Workshop
 w orkshop      1.0
281 100 000  DT 4
2020
Non. Cons
TOTAL
TOTAL NON CONSULTING SERVICES
210 825 000
15 000 Post
Shopping
702 750 000
421 650 000
50 000 Post
30 000 Post
Shopping
Shopping
200 000 000
14 230 Post
Shopping
5.0
5.0
1.0
1.0
42 165 000
3 000.00
140 550 000
421 650 000
10 000.00
30 000.00
200 000 000
14 229.81
281 100 000
20 000 Post
281 100 000
20 000 Post
Direct
Purchase
Shopping
281 100 000
20 000 Post
Shopping
1.0
281 100 000
20 000.00
4.0
1.0
70 275 000
5 000.00
281 100 000
20 000.00
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
35 298 121 910.0 2 511 428.1
73 668 271 910.0 5 241 428.1
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
112
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan
GRANT
Procurement Plan of Firm Selectin for Consulting Services (2020-2021)
100 000
SL No.
 Description of
Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Quantities
 Unit Cost 000
Unit
Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Goods/W
orks/Non.
Cons/Con
s. Serv
Year
Proc.
Owner
Fund
Source
 Estimated Cost
(Rp)
Estimate
d Cost ($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/Post)
Method of
Selec-tion
 #
Pa
ck
Avg. value per
pack or lot
(Rp)
 Avg. value
per
package ($)
CPPCV Comparison
Domesti
c Pre-
ference
(yes/no)
Prequ
a-
lifica-
tion
(yes/
no)
NPMU
National consultancies - Market opportunities
and value chain analyses
 Study
Climate risk and vulnerability assessment
 Study
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages
Policy development
 TOTAL OVERALL CONSULTING FIRM
Lumps
 PA
5
1
1
1
421 650 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
2 108 250 000 150 000.0
Prior
QCBS
1 405 500 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 405 500 000 100 000.0
Prior
QCBS
7 838 473 500  DT 3.2+H10:WH10:I10
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
7 838 473 500 557 700.0
Prior
QCBS
702 750 000
2021
Cons.Serv
MoA
702 750 000
50 000.0
Post
LBS
5
1
1
1
421 650 000
30 000.00
Yes
1 405 500 000
100 000.00
Yes
7 838 473 500
557 700.00
Yes
702 750 000
50 000.00
Yes
No
No
No
No
 12 054 973 500    857 700
Procurement Plan of Individual Consultant  (2020-2021)
100 000
CPP
CV Comparison
SL No.
 Description of Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Quantities
 Unit Cost
Unit
Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Year
Goods/W
orks/Non.
Cons/Con
s. Serv
Proc.
Owner
Fund Source
 Estimated Cost
(Rp)
Estimated
Cost ($)
Revie
w
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method of
Selection
 #
Pac
k
Avg. value per
pack or lot
(Rp)
 Avg. value
per
package
($)
Domes-
tic Pre-
ference
(yes/no)
Pre-
qualific
a-tion
(yes/
no)
NPMU
 International technical assistance  - Market opportunities and
value chain analyses
 Programme expeditor (technical)
TOTAL INDIVIDUAL CONSULTANT
 PM
 PM
4
4
351 375 000
 DT
2.2
2020
351 375 001  DT 4
2020
Cons.Ser
v
Cons.Ser
v
MoA
MoA
1 405 500 000 100 000.0 Prior
QBS
1 405 500 004 100 000.0 Prior
QBS
2 811 000 004.0 200 000.0
4
4
351 375 000
25 000.00
No
351 375 001
25 000.00
No
No
No
113
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan
Procurement Plan of Non-Consulting Services  (2020-2021)
100 000
CPPShopping
Quantities
 Unit Cost
SL No.
 Description of
Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Unit
 Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Year
 Goods/
Works/
Non.Cons/
Cons. Serv
Proc.
Owner
Fund Source
 Estimated
Cost  (Rp)
Estima-ted
Cost ($)
Revie
w
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method of
Selection
 #
Pack
Avg. value per
pack (Rp)
 Avg. value per
package ($)
Domestic
Prefe-
rence
(yes/no)
Prequal
i-
fication
(yes/no
)
No
Objection
from Bank
for Draft
Prequalifi-
cation doc.
(Date)**
NPMU
 Policy Workshops
 PA
        1
140 550 000
 DT
3.2
2021
Non. Cons
MoA
140 550 000
10 000 Post Shopping
Printing and dissemination of policy studiesLumsump
1
70 275 000 DT 3.2
2021
Non. Cons
MoA
70 275 000
5 000 Post Shopping
TOTAL NON CONSULTING SERVICE
210 825 000
15 000
1
1
140 550 000
10 000.00
Yes
70 275 000
5 000.00
Yes
No
No
No
No
114
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
ANNEX 8: PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL (PIM)
I. PROGRAMME SUMMARY DESCRIPTION
1.
Objectives. TEKAD’s overall  goal is  empowered  village  communities  contribute  to  rural
transformation  and  inclusive  growth  in  Eastern  Indonesia by  leveraging  the  potential  of  the  Village
Law and the Village Fund. The programme development objective is to enable rural households to
develop  sustainable  livelihoods,  taking  advantage  of  strengthened  village  and  district  level
governance.
2.
TEKAD will assist MoV in developing an evidence-based approach for empowering villages to
make  a  better  use  of Village  Fund  and  other  village  resources  in  support  of  economic  development
by: (i) building village and household capacities in planning, implementing and monitoring a significant
share  of  Village  Fund  resources  for  inclusive  economic  initiatives  bringing sustainable  revenues;  (ii)
developing an enabling environment, whereby: districts/sub-districts will provide support services and
better  integrate  village  needs  into  district  economic  development  planning;  market  players  will  be
linked  to  village-based  producers;  and  financial  and  non-financial  service  providers  will  extend
services  meeting  the  needs  of  villages;  and  (iii)  raising  MoV  capacities  to  implement  TEKAD’s
innovative  approach  and  to  develop  evidence-based  replicable  models  for  village  economic
development in Eastern Indonesia.
3.
TEKAD will operate in twenty-five districts in the five eastern provinces of Indonesia - Papua,
West  Papua,  Maluku,  North  Maluku,  and  East  Nusa  Tenggara.  In  these  districts,  TEKAD  will  target
1,720 villages and around 412,300 households, benefiting approximately 1,855,350 people.
4.
Lessons  learnt. The  TEKAD  design  builds  on  the  experience  gained  from  GoI’s  National
Program for Community Empowerment - Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM), and
the
from 
implementation  of  the  2014  Village  Law  (Village  Development  Programme)  in  Papua  and  West
Papua. Main lessons are as follows:
IFAD’s  past  programmes  supporting  PNPM 
(PNPM  Pertanian/Agriculture)  and 
5.
points to the following lessons learnt:
TEKAD’s  design  builds  on  the  experience  gathered  from  VDP  and  PNPM Pertanian,  which
Village economic planning focuses on very short-term priorities, often
Strategic  development.
under the form of inputs. The planning of economic investments should adopt a longer-term, more
strategic perspective, with a view to gradually build a dynamic, village-based productive sector;
Improving villagers’ production without consideration for market
Access to markets.
opportunities leaves villagers with products that cannot be sold beyond traditional traders. This
fails to generate sufficient incentives to keep up with improved agricultural practices, especially
where these involve higher production costs. Market information needs to be made available as a
tool to help villagers in selecting priority commodities that can meet market demand and that can
provide them with a good, sustainable income worth the effort of changing their traditional
practices;
Access to finance. Village Fund allocations for productive activities are often used for the
purchase of inputs or perishable fishing gear, which is prompted by the lack of access to finance,
limited financial literacy, and a general expectation to receive free goods from the government.
This prevents the utilisation of Village Fund resources for more sustainable productive
investment, generates villagers’ dependency and hinders the sustainable growth of their farming
or fishing enterprises. Diversified approaches for improving villagers’ financial literacy, promoting
savings and making available suitable financial products should be promoted, so that village
producers can build resilience and access credit for the financing of working capital.
Enabling environment. VDP activities were entirely village-focused, with limited involvement of
village existing structures, whether traditional or created for the implementation of the Village Law.
Sustainability rests on the creation of new capacities at village level, building on the existing
structures. But it also calls for developing an enabling environment whereby villagers will find
support throughout the transformational process and especially once the programme is over. This
level,
involves building the capacities of public agencies at sub-district, district and provincial
developing the capacities of service providers who can provide assistance to villages and be paid
115




Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
facilitating the clustering of villages around common economic
by Village Fund resources,
objectives, and strengthening market linkages.
Role of facilitators. Programme facilitators have had a key role in mobilising villagers, building
their capacities and in facilitating their access to markets. Both MoV and the Ministry of
Agriculture (MoA) have facilitators at district and sub-district level, which offer a good basis to
develop a steady supply of support services to villagers. However, their skills are limited and their
mobility is constrained by limited operational resources. There is therefore a need to build their
capacities and to promote a more efficient planning of district budget resources so that they can
become qualified public service providers extending the right mix of services to support village
economic development.
Accountability and inclusion. While the Village Law does support community participation and
accountability, the risk of elite capture is strong, particularly where village structures are not
involved, village capacities are limited and there is no tradition of transparency, inclusion or
accountability in the use of public resources. This risks will be mitigated through community
empowerment,
including organizations strengthening, mobilization and capacity building,
emphasizing the poorest and more vulnerable segments, for them to participate and make their
rights and priorities prevail in villages' decisions on the Village Fund resources allocation. Villages
need capacity building support and incentives to ensure that village resources are programmed
based on inclusive participation, that their implementation is monitored, and that Village Heads
are accountable to the community and the district, in line with the Village Law. Similarly, capacity
building is required at district level so that districts can provide guidance and oversight to villages
in the use of public resources, in line with the Village Law.
Long term approach. Programmes have limited durations, which are not sufficient to fully build
the capacities and institutions required for the sustainable improvement of livelihoods, especially
in traditional Melanesian societies. Expected changes are substantial and it should not be
anticipated that
they can easily be adopted. A longer-term approach is needed to support
sustainable transformation and to phase it in gradual stages.
Building sustainability into programme design. The capacities (institutions, processes and
skills) required to ensure that villagers will still be able to access support services beyond
programme completion must be built into programme design, so that they can be patiently and
solidly supported throughout programme implementation and that related costs are reflected in
the initial programme budget.
6.
Components. TEKAD  support  is  conceived  as  an  accelerator  of  village  economic
development  in  underprivileged  areas  of  Indonesia – a  temporary  intervention  that  aims  at  boosting
the  capacities  of  existing  players,  in  the  villages  and  in  their  environment,  so  they  can  build  on
economic  opportunities  and  leverage  village  resources  to  generate  growth  at  village  level.  The
programme  strategy  and  activities  are  therefore  driven  by  the  primary  concern  that,  by  the end  of
programme  implementation,  sustainable  mechanisms  have  been  established  to  ensure  sustainable
planning and implementation of village resources for economic growth.
7.
TEKAD includes three interrelated components:
Component  1 – Village  Economic  Empowerment will  be  implemented  at  village  level  and  will
gather  activities  aimed  at  improving  the  abilities  of  village  governments  and  communities  to
promote  and  implement  inclusive  and  sustainable  village  economic  development,  leveraging
Village Fund and other resources.
Component  2 – Partnerships  for  Village  Economic  Development will  take  place  at  district  and
provincial level and will aim at promoting an ecosystem whereby villages will be connected to their
environment and will access services, markets and financing;
Component 3 – Innovation, Learning and Policy Development will be implemented at the national
level  and  will  promote  proof-ready  and  evidence-based  learning,  policy  development  and
institutional strengthening in support of village economic development in Eastern Indonesia.
8.
sub-components.
Figure  1  represents  the  hierarchy  of  goal,  development  objectives,  outcomes,  components,
116







Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
GOAL
DEVELOPM
ENT
OBJECTIVE
Figure 1 – Programme objectives and components
Empowered village communities contribute to rural transformation
and inclusive growth in Eastern Indonesia
Enable rural households to develop sustainable livelihoods, taking
advantage of strengthened village and district level governance
OUTCOME
S
Village communities plan and implement
profitable economic initiatives taking
advantage of village resources
Village households have sustainable access to
markets and to public and private services in
support of village economic initiatives
Innovative, replicable models for supporting
village economic development by leveraging
Village Fund and village resources
COMPONE
NTS
COMPONENT 1
VILLAGE ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT
COMPONENT 2
PARTNERSHIPS FOR VILLAGE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
COMPONENT 3
INNOVATION, LEARNING AND POLICY
DEVELOPMENT
SUB-COMPONENT 1.1
VILLAGE GOVERNANCE
SUB-COMPONENT 2.1
DISTRICT SUPPORT FOR VILLAGE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
SUB-COMPONENT 3.1
INNOVATION, LEARNING AND INSPIRATION
SUB-
COMPONE
NTS
SUB-COMPONENT 1.2
VILLAGE ECONOMIC INITIATIVES
SUB-COMPONENT 2.2
ECONOMIC SERVICES
SUB-COMPONENT 3.2
POLICIES FOR VILLAGE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
SUB-COMPONENT 2.2
FINANCIAL SERVICES
SUB-COMPONENT 3.3
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
117
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
9.
Implementation  arrangements. TEKAD  will  be  implemented  by  MoV.  The  NPMU  will  be
operated  under  the  authority  of  MoV’s  Director  General  of  Village  Development  and  Community
Empowerment, which will be delegated to the Director of Natural Resources and Applied Technology.
A Provincial Programme Implementation Unit  will be established  in each of the five target provinces
and will be responsible for overall implementation, guidance and coordination support in the province.
Every target district will have a District Programme Implementation Unit that will be embedded into the
district administration and will work in close collaboration with the District Head and staff involved in
the promotion of economic development at district and village level. At both the provincial and district
level,  multi-stakeholder  platforms  (Province/District  Coordination  Teams)  will  be  set  up,  building  on
existing  systems,  to  facilitate  coordination  and  knowledge  management.  Facilitation  services  will  be
organised at the sub-district level, in line with current MoV systems.
Costs. Total  TEKAD  cost  inclusive  of  taxes  and  duties  is  estimated  at US$ 702.03  million
10.
over a six-year implementation period. Programme investments are organized into three components:
Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment (86.5% of the costs); Component 2 – Partnerships
for  Village  Economic Development (10.4%);  and  Component  3 – Innovation,  Learning  and  Policy
Development (3.1%).
11.
Financing. TEKAD will be financed from an IFAD loan of US$ 32.85 million, an IFAD grant of
US$ 1.50 million, beneficiary contribution estimated at US$ 27.08 million, GoI contribution under the
Village Fund estimated at US$ 541.60 million, and GoI contribution in taxes and staff salaries of US$
18.99 million; the financing structure presents a gap of US$ 80 million, which will be financed by IFAD
with  resources  from  its  next  funding  cycle  (2022-2024)  or  by  a  co-financier  willing  to  partner  and
acceptable to the GoI..
II. TARGET AREAS AND TARGET GROUPS
12.
Target provinces. TEKAD will focus its  interventions on five  Eastern Indonesian provinces:
Papua, West Papua, Maluku, North Maluku and East Nusa Tenggara. Four out of the five provinces
have  the  country’s  highest  poverty  rates,  as  indicated  in  Table  1.  Although  GoI  has  been
concentrating  its  development  efforts  on  improving  infrastructure,  especially  in  remote  rural  areas,
Human  Development  Indicator  (HDI)  rates  are  still  among  the  lowest  in  the  country.  Literacy - and
numeracy - rates  can  be  as  low  as  25%  in  the  Papuan  highlands  (especially  among  women;  the
provincial average is 68%) and up to almost 100 percent elsewhere – for example in villages close to
urban  centres  in  East  Nusa  Tenggara.  Malnutrition  is  significantly  higher  in  Eastern  Indonesia,  and
stunting of children under 5 years of age is above 40% in East Nusa Tenggara and Maluku.
13.
deprived categories.
Table 2 further shows that 90% of the 6,072 villages in the target provinces are in IDM more
Table 2 – Villages IDM ranking in target provinces
IDM categories
Highly disadvantaged
Disadvantaged
Developing
Advanced
Independent
Total
Source: MoV, 2019.
Number of villages
1,984
3,447
569
40
32
6,072
14.
The target provinces are also amongst Indonesia’s areas most vulnerable to climate change.
Significant local micro-climatic differences are expected, due to the complex topography and different
altitudes,  with  average  temperatures  increasing  between  1.0-1.5  C°  by  2060.  Rising  sea  levels  and
coastal flooding will particularly affect the Maluku provinces and East Nusa Tenggara. With respect to
the impacts of climate change on agriculture, some the biggest  losses in per capita terms are to be
expected in West Papua76.
76 Policy brief: Indonesia: costs of climate change 2050, USAID 2016.
118
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
15.
Target districts. TEKAD will operate in 25 districts, of which 13 are the districts where VDP
was implemented for two years in Papua and West Papua, and 12 are ‘new districts’ in Maluku, North
Maluku, and East Nusa Tenggara (Table 3). Districts were selected by MoV based on: demographic
density;  economic  potential;  road  connectivity;  complementarities  with  other  ongoing  or  previous
development  programmes 
IFAD-financed  Smallholder  Livelihood  Development
Project/SOLID,  which  was  recently  completed  in  Maluku  and  North  Maluku);  and  the  Village
Development  Index  (IDM)77 scores  of  their  villages.  This  guarantees  that  geographic  targeting  is
based on the latest available data on multi-dimensional poverty indicators at village level.
(such  as 
Papua
West Papua
Maluku
North Maluku
Table 3 – TEKAD target districts
Boven Digoel
Jayawijaya
Kepulauan Yapen
Nabire
Sarmi
Yahukimo
Fak Fak
Kaimana
Manokwari
Manokwari Selatan
Maybrat
Pegunungan Arfak
Raja Ampat
Buru
Maluku Tengah
Seram Bagian Barat
Seram BagianTimur
Halmahera Barat
Halmahera Selatan
HalmaheraTengah
Halmahera Utara
East Nusa
Tenggara
Manggarai
Ngada
Sumba Timur
Timur Tengah
Selatan
16.
which will be distributed across the five provinces as shown in Table 4.
Target villages. Within the target districts, TEKAD will implement activities in 1,720 villages,
Table 4 – Village distribution per province
Number of villages
Province
566
Papua
290
West Papua
288
Maluku
288
North Maluku
288
East Nusa Tenggara
1,720
TOTAL
17.
TEKAD  will  support  the  development  of  village  clusters  that  will  pool  production  and
resources to facilitate the access to larger and better remunerated markets. Village clusters will also
ensure the profitability of collective investments for storage and processing, facilitate village-to-village
learning and  increase the  efficiency of programme delivery. The following approach  will  be  used for
selecting villages participating in clusters:
Out  of  the  1,720  villages,  a first  batch  of  500  core  villages  will  be  identified  in  PY1  and  start
activities in PY2. Criteria for the selection of core villages will include: (i) potential for developing
target commodities (see below); (ii) reasonable road access; (iii) levels of social capital (from the
IDM database); and (iv) not participating in P3PD  to  avoid  overload for sub-district staff. Priority
will be given to villages that are priority villages in district plans, that have an active BUMDes or
cooperative,  and  that  have  access  to  electricity.  Consideration  will  also  be  given  to  have  a
minimum number of villages classified as ‘developing’ (berkembang) against IDM. In addition, in
Papua and West Papua, villages involved in VDP will be considered as priority if they fit the other
selection criteria. Similarly, in Maluku and North Maluku, former SOLID villages will be considered
in the selection. All of the core villages will receive four year of support (PY2-PY5).
Another  1,220  villages  will  be  pre-identified  in  PY1  and  start  activities  in  PY3  (second  batch  of
610 villages) and PY4 (third and last batch of 610 villages).The main criteria for selecting cluster
villages are that: (i) they will be within reasonable distance of a core village; and (ii) they will have
potential  for  developing  the  same  target  commodity  as  in  the  core  village.  Villages  in  the  first
batch  will  receive  four  years  of  support  (PY3-PY6),  whereas  villages  the  second  batch  will  only
receive  three  (PY4-PY6).  However,  it  is  expected  that  they  will  benefit  from  the accumulated
77 MoV has developed the Village Development Index (IDM), a composite index based on 22 variables and 52 indicators that
focus on four dimensions, namely social, economic, ecological and environment. IDM classifies villages into five categories:
Highly Disadvantaged Villages (IDM value <0.491); Disadvantaged Villages (IDM value 0.491 - 0.599); Developing Villages
(IDM value 0.599 - 0.707); Advanced Villages (IDM value 0.707 - 0.815); and Independent Villages (IDM value > 0.815).
119


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
experience in villages that joined in earlier and that the shorter duration of programme support will
be compensated by stronger peer-to-peer learning opportunities;
The  participation  of  both  core  and  cluster  villages  will  hinge  on  the  willingness  of  their  Village
Heads  to  sign  an  agreement  with  TEKAD,  whereby  they  will  commit  to  implement  Village  Law
prescriptions with regard to participation, inclusion, transparency and accountability, as well as to
allocate an adequate share of the Village Fund to the development of economic activities78;
Both core and cluster villages will participate in awareness campaigns in PY1.
18.
potential, connectivity, village willingness). One cluster can therefore include several core villages.
It is expected that village clusters will assemble around 10 villages (depending in particular on
19.
Primary  beneficiaries. Target  groups  will  consist  of  smallholder  farming  households,
microentrepreneurs  as  well  as  households  in  coastal  communities  involved  in  fisheries  and  the
production of marine products. Primary beneficiaries will mostly be semi-subsistence households (low
input-low  output  producers  with  some  though  limited  engagement  with  the  market),  who  will  have  a
minimum  range  of  assets  and  resources,  including  labour,  required  for  the  production  of  target
products,  and  who  will  be  willing  to  enhance  their  production  activities  for food  security  and  income
generation. It  is  expected  that  TEKAD  will  directly  benefit  approximately  412,300  households,  or
1,855,350 people based on a household of 4.5.
20.
The target groups are part of a very heterogeneous universe of population groups in the five
provinces - in  the  case  of  the  Papua  provinces  alone,  it  is  comprised  of  over  375  ethnic  groups
speaking over 250 languages. This wide socio-cultural diversity is furthermore subject to the complex
interplay  between  traditional  social  structures  (including  ethnic  and  clan  affiliations),  statutory
government structures, public sector interventions as well as market forces. Poverty levels among the
programme  target  groups  are  high,  but  defy  easy  standardization:  poverty  is  to  some  extent
correlated  with  food  security  and  remoteness  (road  connectivity)  as  well  as  origin  of  the  household
head (autochthonous, migrant from the same province, ‘transmigrant’ from another province), but not
with family size, asset ownership, or land holding.
Women’s time poverty is ubiquitous and most severe in the Papuan highlands. Women in all
21.
provinces are actively engaged in agricultural production and, in the highland areas, may carry out 80
to 90% of all agricultural activities. Furthermore, in Papua and West Papua, intra-household violence
on the part of men is among the most pronounced in the world - a recent report79 shows that nearly
two  in  five  women  aged  14-64  (38%)  have  experienced  at  least  one  form  of  physical  and/or  sexual
violence by a male intimate partner in their lifetime.
22.
Women  will  therefore  constitute  a  specific  target  group,  because  of  their  disempowerment,
lack of access to services and markets as well as elevated gender-based violence, which altogether
negatively  affect  household  revenues  and well-being. The  programme  will  also  benefit  youth,  by
creating new economic opportunities in the production and marketing of primary commodities and in
agro-tourism,  facilitating  access  to  innovation  and  new  technologies  and  services  (including  through
digital applications), supporting small business growth, and engaging them as agents of change.
Secondary beneficiaries. Secondary beneficiaries include service providers that will extend
23.
business  development  services  (including  technical  services)  and  financial  services  to  village
producers, as well as buyers of target commodities in the target provinces.
III. DETAILED ACTIVITIES
A. COMPONENT 1 – VILLAGE ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT
24.
Component  1  will  improve  villagers’  ability  to  promote  inclusive  and  sustainable  local
economic  development,  building  on  the  village  potential  and  using  Village  Fund  and  other  village
revenues. The expected outcome is that village communities envision, plan and implement profitable
economic initiatives taking advantage of village resources.
78 Unless justified by extraordinary events such as, for example, natural disasters or other emergencies.
79 Study on Women’s and Men’s Health and Life Experiences in Papua, Indonesia, UNDP, 2016.
120


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
25.
Strategic orientations for Component 1 include the following: (i) activities will be rooted in the
Village  Law  and annual planning  will  be  aligned  with the regular annual  planning cycle; (ii) strategic
choices and planning  will rest on broad-based participation and agreement of different village social
and economic groups; (iii) a village medium-term economic strategy, focusing on a limited number of
commodities/trades,  will  be  prepared  to  orient  annual  planning,  building  on  village  potential  and
features  (agro-ecological  zone,  remoteness,  existence  of  economic  organizations,  existence  of
traditional settlements and  on information on  available market opportunities); (iv) clusters of villages
pooling  production  and  resources  will  be  promoted  to  facilitate  the  access  to  larger  and  better
remunerated markets, to ensure the profitability of collective investments for storage and processing,
to  facilitate  village-to-village  learning  and  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  programme  delivery.  Most
importantly,  the  component  will  be  implemented  with  maximum  flexibility  to  accommodate  different
potentials, needs (food security and/or market-driven production), distance to markets, initial levels of
capacity and learning paces of participating villages.
26.
Component  1  comprises  two  sub-components:  (i) Village  Governance;  (ii)  Village  Economic
Initiatives.  Activities  will  focus  on  the  village  level,  with  villages  phased  in  over  three years,  as
explained in Section II A c. They will be complemented by activities implemented under Component 2
(especially  mapping  studies,  cluster  development,  facilitation  of  market  linkages,  and  facilitation  of
access  to  financing)  at  district  and  provincial  level.  Guidelines  and  tools  will  be  embodied  in  the
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages that will be developed under Component 3.
Main indicators are: (i) 70% of households reporting increase in production; (ii) average 30%
27.
increase in both marketed volume and value of sales of agricultural/marine products; and (iii) at least
30% of Village Fund (DD) and District Village Allocation (ADD) planned for economic development.
Sub-component 1.1 - Village Governance
This  sub-component  aims at  building the  capacities  of  village  communities  to  envision,  plan
28.
and  implement village resources in support  of economic initiatives bringing sustainable revenues,  in
accordance with the Village Law and through inclusive community participation. Activities will include
the following.
Activity 1.1.1 – Awareness Raising
29.
Programme  information. The  first  implementation  step  in  Sub-Component  1.1  will  be  to
engage with pre-identified core villages (see Section II – Target Areas and Target Groups) to provide
information on programme objectives and activities. In particular, it will explain:
the Village Law and mechanisms for implementing the Village Fund, including general principles
of  participation,  transparency  and  accountability  of  village  governments  to  their  constituents,
which the Village Law supports to ensure good governance;
the  TEKAD  focus  on  enhancing  village  economic  development  within  the  wider  village
development approach already supported by MoV – including the preparation of a medium-term
inclusive economic development strategy supported by annual planning of expenditure to achieve
the strategy;
the flexibility of the TEKAD approach to meet pre-existing village realities, especially in respect of
food security challenges, remoteness or natural resource base;
the  approach  and  methodology  that  will  be  taken  in  the  delivery  of  TEKAD,  including  village
commitment  to  use  an  adequate  share  of  the  village  resources  in  support  of  economic
development, gender equity and social inclusion objectives, the village cluster approach, the role
of the district management team and benefits deriving from participation into TEKAD;
the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  core  village  head  and  village  government – including  with
regard  to  broad  community  participation,  transparency,  gender  and  social  inclusiveness  and
accountability towards all their village constituents;
the obligations of the village head in regular reporting – “upwards” to the district team and district
mayor,  “downwards”  to  the  various  stakeholders  within  the  village  community  and  “across”  to
assisting  cluster  villages  to  plan  and  prepare  for  their  later  engagement  with  TEKAD – with
assistance from the Village Governance Facilitators;
how TEKAD proposes to link to existing services from MoV (P3MD facilitators).
121







Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
to 
the  cluster. 
Information  drawn 
30.
Information  on  mapping  studies. Awareness  campaigns  will  also  include  a  broad
presentation  of  the  outcomes  of  the  provincial  mapping  studies  (Sub-component  2.2)  of  direct
relevance 
the  value  chain  studies  and  market
opportunities/Orientation  Capacity  Building  Packages  (Sub-component  3.2)  will  help  villagers
understand the opportunities that exist, required investments both at village and household level and
potential return to women and men, young people, as well to marginalised groups. Information drawn
from the climate  risk  and  vulnerability  assessment  will  enlighten  potential  risks  as  well  as  mitigation
measures that could be enacted (as reflected  in the Orientation Capacity Building Packages), along
with costs and expected return.
from 
31.
Organisation. Awareness  raising  will  involve  the  entire  village  community.  After  an  initial
meeting  with  the  Village  Head,  village  government  and  Village  Council  to  agree  on  the  best  way  to
ensure inclusive activities, the Village Governance Facilitator80 will engage with other levels of village
leadership,  including  traditional  leaders,  sub-village  heads,  leaders  of  existing  groups  (including
PKK81 and  other  women  groups,  youth  groups,  producers’  groups),  existing  economic  organisations
(including BUMDes and cooperatives) and sub-village communities. This process may take place over
a  number  of  days  to  ensure  there  is  adequate  time  to  absorb  and  understand  the  details  being
presented, and to allocate sufficient time to discuss and decide within the village community.
32.
Phasing. Awareness campaigns will be phased as follows.
Year 1: awareness will be provided to a first batch of 500 core villages at the end of PY1, so they
are ready to start activities in PY2;
Year 2: awareness campaigns implemented in a second batch of 610 villages, to start activities in
PY3;
Year  3: awareness  campaigns  implemented  in  a  third  and  final  batch  of  610  villages,  to  start
activities in PY4.
33.
Additionally, it is suggested to organise a meeting of Village Heads/Village Councils and key
leaders of villages identified as potential cluster villages in Year 1 (and thus likely to start activities in
PY 2 and 3), so they get generic information about the programme, including phasing, and how their
villages will have an opportunity to participate within the next two years.
Activity 1.1.2 – Village Commitment
34.
Further to the awareness campaign, villages willing to participate in TEKAD activities will be
requested to sign an agreement, which will outline respective roles and obligations of the signatories -
Village, District and Sub-District Heads and TEKAD. Village obligations will cover the following:
inclusive community participation;
the establishment of a Village Management Information System;
accountability and transparency obligations, including monitoring and reporting;
engaging with the village cluster;
allocating  an  adequate  share of  the  Village  Fund  resources  to  support  economic  initiatives
identified by the village community through the planning process described below;
facilitating access to land, in particular for young people;
support regular loan recovery where applicable;
support the work of TEKAD village volunteers and facilitate the implementation of the household-
based approach (see Sub-component 1.2).
35.
Free, Prior and Informed Consent will be required from local indigenous communities.
36.
provided to the village to support programme implementation.
District,  Sub-District  Heads  and  TEKAD  obligations  will  spell  out  the  services  that  will  be
37.
After  a  reflection  period to  allow  debate,  full  ownership  and  ratification  of  the  agreement  by
the community (2-4 weeks), each village will sign up to participation by not later than the end of Q1 of
80 There will be one Governance Facilitator fielded per 9 villages.
81 Pembinaan Kesejahteraan Keluarga - PPK are women’s groups established under the Indonesian Family Welfare Guidance
Programme and are present in the majority of villages.
122











Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PY2 (initial batch of 550 villages)/PY3 (second batch of 610 villages)/PY4 (final batch of 610 villages).
Agreements will be signed by the Village Head, District Head, Sub-District Head and TEKAD District
Coordinator.  The  agreement  will  be  for  the  duration  of  TEKAD  support,  but  if  required  can  be
reviewed  by  either  party  at  the  time  of annual  review. Where  there  are  local  government  elections
resulting in changes of personnel, especially District and Village Heads, the agreement will stand but
the TEKAD District Coordinator will ensure all new signatories are fully briefed on TEKAD.
38.
Where  a  village  fails  to  meet  its  obligations,  the  Village  Governance  Facilitator,  the  District
Head  and  TEKAD  District  Coordinator  will  assess  reasons  and  look  for  solutions  that  would  enable
village full participation. If such remedial measures bear no effect and the village still does not comply
with its obligations, the issue will be brought to consideration of the TEKAD Provincial Team Leader,
first, and then of the National Programme Manager, who will be entitled to terminate the agreement.
Activity 1.1.3 - Village Information System and Village Mapping
Village Information System. Based  on  the successful KOMPAK82 pilot  in Papua and West
39.
Papua, which has shown that evidence-based decision making in village planning leads to significant
improvements in outcomes, TEKAD will set up a Village Information System (VIS) covering economic
data, which will be used to orient village planning and monitor progress. The VIS will also constitute
an  important  tool  for  establishing  the  programme  baseline  and  ensuring  monitoring  of  results,  for
which  it  will  be  developed  under  the  overall  responsibility  of  TEKAD  Senior  M&E  Specialist  and  in
collaboration with the short-term international technical assistance on M&E.
The  system  will  build  on  the  KOMPAK  Village  Information  System,  gender- and  age
40.
differentiated  categories  of  information,  and  especially  those  related  to  civil  status,  education,  basic
facilities  and  infrastructure,  poverty  and  vulnerability,  village  financing,  village  assets,  village
organisations,  village  area  information.  It  will  also  add  economic  data  required  to  support  economic
development planning, including the following:
Connectivity: type and quality of roads/time needed to sub-district and district capital/time needed
as well as main marketing centers in the province; number of households holding a mobile phone;
Food security: insecure households based on number of weeks without capacity to provide food;
Economic organisations: BUMDes, producer groups (by gender, by commodity/with membership)
and other
Land use: arable land (total arable and currently cultivated), forest land (different types), protected
areas,
Main  sources  of 
including  agriculture  crops  (with  cultivated
surface/crop),  livestock  breeding  (with  herd  size  and  age  by  type  of  animals),  fisheries,
aquaculture, collection and marketing of non-timber forest resources…
livelihoods  and  revenues, 
Production/marketing data per crop: productivity, % sold, returns per ha…
Economic infrastructure.
41.
System will be developed as follows:
Data  will  be  disaggregated  by  gender  and  age  where  relevant.  The  Village  Information
TEKAD  will  recruit  a  national  MIS  consultant  to  work  with  KOMPAK  to  design  the  TEKAD  MIS
system.  The  consultant  will  work  closely  with  the  KOMPAK  team,  TEKAD  Senior  M&E  Expert,
MIS Expert, Village Governance Expert, Economic Development Expert, and GESI Expert (all at
national level), a group of TEKAD District M&E/MIS Coordinators and a gender and age-balanced
focus group of villagers (including Village Heads). The system will enable easy data collection by
village cadres using tablets and will generate different types of reports suiting the needs of Village
Heads  and  communities,  district  government  and  TEKAD  different  levels  of  organisation.  The
system will  be  compatible  with  TEKAD  MIS  (see  Section  VI – M&E/KM)  and  other  relevant
databases83.  Guidelines  will  be  developed  describing  how  to  operate  data  collection  and
processing and how to provide feedback to villages. Consideration will be given to the possibility
82 http://kompak.or.id/en.
83 To be further agreed with MoV – relevant databases might include IDM, MoHA village database (SIPD), upcoming P3PD
Smart Village database and BAPPENAS’ KRISNA database.
123








Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
of  implementing  the  Village  Information  System  in  stages  in  any  given  village  (along  increased
complexity/volume of data);
The system will be tested in a small sample of districts. While it might be good to have one test
district  per  province,  ease  of  logistics  will  also  be  a  criterion.  Based  on  feedback  from  every
category  of  stakeholders  and  territorial  level,  the  consultant  will  refine  the  software  and  the
guidelines as required;
The national consultant will then train TEKAD M&E/MIS staff from every level;
District  M&E/MIS  Coordinators  will  train  district  staff  as  relevant,  as  well  as  TEKAD  Village
Governance Facilitators. These in turn will train, and later coach and monitor, two village cadres
per village in the initial collection and regular update of VIS data.
Village cadres will be young volunteers, a woman and a man, and will be responsible for: (i)
42.
gathering  data  at  village  level  and  keeping  it  updated  (on  a  quarterly  or  semi-annual  basis);  and  (ii)
mobilizing  the  community  to  participate in  the  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  village
economic  development  (see  Activity  1.1.5).  Volunteers  will  work  closely  with  the  Village  Head  and
village leaders, and will be supported by the TEKAD Village Governance Facilitator. TEKAD will pay a
monthly allowance to two village cadres per village to cover expenses and will provide training – both
workshop training and on-the-job mentoring.
43.
Village mapping. As a starting point in the planning for economic development, each village
will  undertake  a thorough  assessment  of  existing  potential  and  constraints  to  village-led  economic
development. Village mapping will draw on the Village Information System and will include:
a rapid, participatory, gender-sensitive livelihoods and nutrition status analysis;
mapping of natural resources and their suitability for the envisaged commodities;
mapping of existing land use;
mapping of existing market linkages by main commodity;
social mapping focusing on both village traditional social structures (including adat), lines of
power, village groups (producers’, women, youth, religious or others) and businesses;
assessment of available human skills and resources (including of the Village Head and village
apparatus, BUMDEs and economic groups), using available P3PD tools.
44.
Social Inclusion Strategy.
More  information  on  the  social  mapping  is  provided  under  Section  III – Gender  Equity  and
45.
This  activity  will  follow  the  same  implementation  pattern  as  the  Village  Information  System.
Guidelines will be designed by the consultant who will be responsible for preparing the GESI Strategy,
in  collaboration  with  a  team  composed  of  the  national-level,  Village  Governance  Expert,  Economic
Development Expert, GESI Expert and their counterparts at provincial/district level. The system will be
tested  in  a  small  sample  of  districts.  Based  on  feedback  from  every  category  of  stakeholders  and
territorial level, the consultant will refine the guidelines as required. Cascade training will be organised
from national down to village level.
Activity 1.1.4 – Capacity Building and Village Activists
46.
Capacity building. Capacity building will be provided to Village Heads, Village Councils and
village  governments,  sub-village  heads  and  leaders  of  village  businesses  (including  BUMDes)  and
groups (producers’ groups, women groups, youth groups, religious groups, other traditional groups…)
so  they  can  engage  in  village  planning  and  monitoring  and  facilitate  broad  community  mobilisation
and participation.
47.
Capacity  building  and  advisory  services  will  be  delivered  by  a  district  technical  team,  which
will  be  led  by  TEKAD  District  Coordinator,  and  will  be  composed  of  TEKAD  Village  Information
System/M&E Coordinator and TEKAD Village Governance Facilitators; and of existing sub-district and
district  staff,  namely:  (i)  Village  Community  Empowerment  Facilitators84 and  Participatory
Development  Facilitators85 under  the  district  Community  Empowerment  department;  and  (ii)  sub-
84 Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Desa - PMD.
85 Pembangunan Partisipatif - PP.
124









Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
district Village Community Empowerment Facilitators86. Village Governance Facilitators will gradually
decrease the  intensity of their support to  villages,  as existing sub-district and  district staff build their
capacities  and  gradually  take  over  support.  The  district  technical  team  will  receive  initial  training
(under Component 2), building on the Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages. Special sessions
will be arranged for female participants as necessary.
48.
The  team  will  use  the Village  Governance  for  Economic  Development package  of  the
Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages. Modules will cover the Village Law, budgeting, reporting,
accountability,  good  and  transparent  governance  and  inclusiveness,  as  well  as  leadership  and
facilitation skills. To account for the lower rates of literacy and general education standards in Eastern
Indonesia, training will be delivered using visual presentation tools wherever possible (e.g. video, flip
charts and other graphic handouts).
Community  mobilization. Furthermore,  Village  Governance  Facilitators  will  identify  and
49.
appoint two village cadres selected among community participants, one young woman and one young
man, who  will be responsible for disseminating  information and for mobilizing  community social and
economic  groups  to  participate  in  the  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  village  economic
development.  They  will  also  be  responsible  for  implementing  the  Village  Information  System,  as
described under Activity 1.1.3.
50.
Village  cadres  and  community  leaders  will  build  on  existing  social  and  economic  village
structures and particularly seek to mobilise young people to promote a network of village activists that
will  further  support  broad-based  village  participation.  Village  cadres  will  receive  a  small  fee,  mostly
covering travel expenditure, and a tablet for VIS data collection and for accessing the Orientation and
Capacity Building Packages. This will be complemented by incentive-based rewards, such as public
recognition  by 
training  and
local  governments  and  programme  staff,  and  participation 
communication events.
in 
51.
hired using Village Fund resources.
It is expected that, building on good achievements, a larger number of village cadres could be
Activity 1.1.5 – Inclusive Economic Development Strategy
Building  on  the  Village  Information  System  and  on  the  village  mapping,  villages  will  be
52.
supported  in  developing  a  simple  medium-term  economic  development  strategy  (or  roadmap),
outlining  how  the  community  intends  to  promote  the  production  and  marketing  of  a  limited  (one  or
two)  number  of  commodities/trades  over  the  medium-term.  The  strategy  will  be  developed  through
broad community participation, and will lay out:
Expected outcomes, for example with regard to production, food security, marketing, revenues;
Target market(s) and their specifications;
Value adding opportunities, through grading and sorting, packaging, primary processing;
Required  actions,  such  as  capacity  building,  linking  to  markets  and  services  and  capital
investment, with a timeframe as well as main investments required at village and household level;
Measures  aiming  at  inclusiveness, i.e. ensuring  the  participation  of  women,  youth  and  other
special groups identified through the village mapping in activities and benefits;
Responsibilities  of  the  various  players - village  head  and  government,  village  BUMDes,  village
economic and other groups, households, village cadres.
53.
agencies or district budget (see Component 2).
The strategy will also identify services and expenditure that should be covered by the district
54.
The village strategy will define a gradual build-up in developing production, processing/adding
value and marketing activities within the village (at household level and on a collective basis through
BUMDes  or  other  types  of  economic  organisations),  as  well  as  in  partnership  with  villages  in  the
cluster.  The  respective  importance  attributed  to  producing  for  food  security  or  for  income-raising
through marketing will also vary according to villagers’ priorities and key factors such as remoteness
and food availability.
86 Pendamping Desa Pemberdayaan – PDP.
125






Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
55.
The  strategy  should  remain  a  simple document  that is  understood  and  owned by  the
village community (rather than an exhaustive document prepared by outsiders). TEKAD support
will aim at laying out options, facilitating discussions and decision-making, and ensuring gender equity
and social inclusion. However, the responsibility for deciding on products, markets, actions and their
financing will rest with the village. Annual reviews (see Activity 1.1.5) will give an opportunity to amend
and refine the strategy based on actual progress.
56.
A district technical team will provide support to the preparation of village strategies. It will be
led by TEKAD District Coordinator, and will be composed of TEKAD Village Information System/M&E
Coordinator, TEKAD Village Governance Facilitators and Economic Initiatives Advisor; and of existing
sub-district  and  district  staff,  namely:  (i)  Village  Community  Empowerment  Facilitators87 and
Participatory Development Facilitators88 under the district Community Empowerment department; and
(ii)  sub-district  Village  Community  Empowerment  Facilitators89.  Village Governance  Facilitators  will
gradually  decrease  the  intensity  of  their  support  to  villages,  as  existing  sub-district  and  district  staff
build  their  capacities  and  gradually  take  over  support.  The  district  technical  team  will  receive  initial
training (under Component 2), building on the Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages.
57.
TEKAD support to the development of the village strategies will include:
Information on  available  options,  building  on:  (i)  village  potential  as  laid  out  by  the  village
mapping/Village  Information  System,  and  (ii)  options  for  economic  development  laid  out  in  the
Orientation  and  Capacity-Building  Packages  (described  under  Component  3).  These  will  clarify
available  market  opportunities  for  agriculture,  marine,  non-timber  forest  products  and/or  agro-
tourism, technical and economic options, required investments at household and village level, and
financial returns that could be expected;
Facilitation  and  advisory  services, particularly  to  ensure  broad  and  inclusive  community
participation;
Capacity building, as described in the next activity.
58.
Once it is prepared and the village has had enough time to discuss and approve, the village
economic development strategy will be formally approved by the Village Consultative Body set up in
implementation of the Village Law.
59.
Village  economic  development  strategies  will  be  developed  and  approved  in  the  first  half  of
PY2  in  the  core  villages.  Strategies  will  be  developed  in  cluster  villages  in  PY3  and  PY4.  It  is
expected  however  that  these  villages  will  decide/accept  to  engage  into  the  same  crops  than  those
selected by core villages. This may require that there is some consultation and agreement of cluster
villages during the preparation of strategies in core villages.
Guidelines  and  tools for  developing,  monitoring  and  reviewing  the  village  economic
60.
development strategy  will  be described  in the Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages prepared
in PY1 (see Component 3).
Activity 1.1.6 –Annual Planning and Monitoring
Every  year,  as  part  of  the  regular village  annual  planning  process,  TEKAD  will  support  the
61.
preparation of a detailed annual economic development plan and budget, which will describe activities
that will be undertaken and financed during the year to implement the village economic development
strategy.  The  plan  will  describe  activities  to  be  developed,  required  investments  (collective  pre- and
post-harvest  equipment90 and  support  services),  costs  and  sources  of  financing,  including  Village
Fund  and  other  village  resources,  expected  outputs  and how  they  relate  to  the  strategy’s  expected
outcomes.  Financing  will  be  provided  by:  the  Village  Fund  and  other  village  resources,  and
households.
Economic  development  investments  planned  as  part  of  the  annual  plan  will  be  made  to
62.
businesses  or  village  groups  where  the  group  leaders  have  completed  the  leadership  capacity
87 Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Desa - PMD.
88 Pembangunan Partisipatif - PP.
89 Pendamping Desa Pemberdayaan – PDP.
90 Such as nurseries, storage sheds, processing equipment, pack houses, transport equipment, start-up kits…
126



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
building modules outlined in Activity 1.1.4 above. Additional pre-conditions to receiving annual funding
allocation will be agreement to participate in appropriate business or technical training.
63.
TEKAD  will  also  support  the  village  government  and  village  groups  in  monitoring  plan
implementation, building  on the  Village  Information System. Every  year a  participatory review  of the
plan  implementation  will  be  conducted  to  assess  performance  globally  and  for  each  participating
entity, and identify success, innovations and constraints.
Annual reviews will measure performance against plan expected outputs as well as outcomes
64.
defined  in  the  strategy,  building  on  data  provided  by  the  Village  Information  System.  They  will  also
assess  the  timing  of  funding  availability  in  the  previous  year,  including  any  negative  impacts  of  late
fund disbursements and the reasons for late disbursements. Annual reviews will be led by the Village
Head,  with  support  from  the  two  village  cadres  and  TEKAD  Village  Governance  Facilitator  and
Economic Initiatives Advisor. Based on the annual review, a new annual economic development plan
and budget will be developed and the strategy will be amended as required.
65.
Regular  monitoring  in  between  annual  reviews  will  be  ensured  by  the  Village  Head,
Government  and  Council  and  the  two  village  cadres.  Monthly  meetings  with  them  and  TEKAD
Facilitators/sub-district  facilitators  will  review  progress  based  on  the  Village  Information  System
dashboards. These meetings will also decide on measures to be taken to improve performance and
raise  constraints.  Measures  could  include  coaching  from  the  facilitators  or  the  village  cadres,  or
liaising with the district or other key players.
66.
Guidelines  and  tools  for  annual  planning  and  budgeting,  regular  monitoring  and  annual
reviews  will  be  available  in  the Village  Governance  for  Economic  Development package  of  the
Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages.
Implementation of village resources. TEKAD will provide capacity building and coaching to
67.
village  governments  to  support  the  implementation  of  the  annual  plan  and  budget  for  economic
development  and  ensure  compliance  with  the  Village  Law.  This  will  cover  in  particular  budget
discipline, accounting, financial management, procurement, reporting and accountability.
Capacity  building  and  coaching  will  be  jointly  provided  by  TEKAD  Village  Governance
68.
Facilitator and the sub-district Village Community Empowerment Facilitators91, using P3PD guidelines
and tools.
69.
Household-based  approach. The  household-based  approach  will  be  conducted  on  a  trial
basis  in  Papua  and  West  Papua.  It  has  successfully  been  tried  in  Papua  New  Guinea  (and
implemented by  IFAD in other countries) to propose  a more equitable distribution of agricultural  and
household work done by women, men and youth. Specifically, the Family Team approach will aim at:
increasing the capacities of household members to jointly taking advantage of programme benefits to
improve  family  welfare,  through  family  planning  and  budgeting;  empowering  women  so  that  they
access programme benefits alongside men, within the family unit; raising awareness on good nutrition
practices;  and  engaging  the  community  to  create  a  supportive  environment  for  household  level
activities and for broad inclusion. More details are under Section IV B, GESI Strategy/Targeting and
Inclusion Mechanisms.
Sub-component 1.2 - Village Economic Initiatives
70.
The objective of the sub-component is to enable village households in developing economic
initiatives for the production, processing and marketing of target product, in line with the annual plan
developed  under  Sub-component  1.1.  Economic  initiatives  will  be  supported  through  the  following
activities.
Activity 1.2.1 - Capacity building and advisory services
71.
Village  households  will  receive  capacity  building  and  advisory  services  to  help  them
developing  the  target  products  selected  in  their  village  economic  development  strategy  and  annual
plan, so that they can meet market demand in terms of volume and quality,  and fetch remunerative
prices.  Capacity  building  and  advisory  services  will  be  based  on  the Support  to  Village  Economic
Initiatives Orientation and Capacity-Building Packages, which will be organized by product. These will
be  prepared  under Subcomponent  3.2  and  will  cover  good  production  practices  and  technologies,
91 Pendamping Desa Pemberdayaan – PDP.
127
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
land  management  practices,  pre-
sustainable 
and  post-harvest  management,  primary
processing/value adding and business management, in relation to selected target products. They will
also  reinforce  the  community  awareness  at  field  level  on  the  threat  of  climate  change  hazards  on
agriculture,  livestock  and  fisheries  and  propose  adaptive  measures  such  as  alteration  in  sowing
dates, use of new crop varieties, introduction and adoption of irrigation methods/technologies, tillage
practices,  precision  land levelling techniques,  and  use  of  technologies  such  as  planters,  training  for
and  better  use  of  chemical  and  insecticide  treatment,  use  of  animal  dejection  to  replace  chemical
fertilizers, etc.
72.
The  packages  will  help  TEKAD  technical  support  staff  to  enhance  their  skills  and  provide
training  and  advisory  services  on  good  practices,  technologies  and  innovation  to  village  producers,
BUMDEs, cooperatives and other relevant village-based small businesses. They will be available both
online92 and offline to facilitate wide access to support, including in most remote areas. In recognition
of lower literacy and numeracy skills among beneficiary communities, TEKAD technical and business
staff will adopt visual learning tools including graphics and videos.
73.
Capacity  building  and  advisory  services  will  be  delivered  by  a  district  technical  team,  which
will be led by TEKAD District Economic Initiative Manager, and will be composed of TEKAD-financed
Economic  Initiatives  Advisors;  and  of  existing  sub-district  and  district  staff,  namely:  (i)  Village
Economic  Development  Facilitators  (PED)93 and  Appropriate  Technology  Facilitators  (TTG)94 under
the  district  Community  Empowerment  department;  and  (ii)  sub-district  MoA Field  Agriculture
Extensionists (PPL)95 under the district agriculture department. They will receive initial training in the
(up  to  4)  most  relevant  commodities. TEKAD  Economic  Initiatives  Advisors  will  be  equipped  with
digital  tablets  to  enable  multi-media presentations  using  the  product-based  capacity-building
packages as the basis for training content.
Monthly  follow-up  meetings  will  be  organized  with  village  entities  developing  economic
74.
initiatives. The TEKAD-financed Economic Initiatives Advisor will be gradually phased out, so that by
the  end  of  the  fourth  year  (for  the  core  villages  and  first  batch  of  cluster  villages)/third  year  (for  the
second batch of cluster villages) of support, they are entirely replaced by PEDs and PPLs.
Additionally,  every target district  will  have access to  an annual programme budget for hiring
75.
specialised  service  providers  to  complement  available  skills  and  to  make  up  for  skills  deficiencies
within  the  district  technical  team,  by  offering  on-demand  support  services  to  producers.  This  is
described under Sub-component 2.2 – Economic services.
Activity 1.2.2 – Peer to Peer Learning
76.
Peer  to  peer  learning  (P2P)  is  intended  to  develop  the  growth  of  creativity,  critical  attitude,
confidence,  and  entrepreneurial  spirit  among  village-based  producers.  The  approach  involves
exchange  with  and  mentoring  by  respected  peers.  Different  peer-to-peer  learning  activities  will  be
conducted  to  facilitate:  (i) the  exchange  of  ideas  between  peers/producers;  (ii)  the  dissemination  of
information; and (iii) trigger household/producers’ engagement. The anticipated result will be a higher
rate  of adoption  of  new  technologies  and  trialling  of  new  practices  by  villagers. P2P  activities will
include both male and female producers and will involve the following.
Village-owned training centres. This will build on the existing network of village owned and
77.
operated  training  centres  (POSYANTEK)96 and  community  learning  centres  planned  as  part  of  the
World  Bank/MoHA  P3D  Programme.  In  PY1,  the  TEKAD  district  team  will  undertake  a  district
mapping  exercise  to  assess  the  capacities  of  existing  P4S  and  identify  P3D  planned  sites  for
community learning centres in the target areas. The mapping will also assess and identify needs and
interest for the establishment of new POSYANTEK centres. Ideally, every cluster should have a P2P
training centre, established in a core village.
78.
TEKAD  will finance: (i) related cost of construction; (ii) a small operation allowance to cover
transport  expenses  around  villages  and  a  small  recognition  of  their  donation  of  time,  which  will  be
92 Through TEKAD Online Platform and dedicated application, see Subcomponent 3.1.
93 Pengembangan Ekonomi Desa – PED.
94 Technologi Tepat Guna – TTG.
95 Penyuluh Pertanian Lapangan – PPL.
96 Pos Pelayanan Teknologi Desa or Rural Technology Center, as stipulated in PERMENDES (Minister of Village Regulation)
No. 23/2017.
128
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
gradually  phased  out  and  replaced  by  Village  Fund  financing;  (iii)  costs  of  training  of trainers  (lead
producers)  in  the  relevant  commodity  production/value  adding/marketing  skills,  provided  by  TEKAD
staff;  (iv)  capacity  building  for  the  planning  and  delivery  of  training  and  exchange  activities  for  both
existing and new POSYANTEK centres, provided by TEKAD staff.
79.
Production groups from within the village cluster will be rotated through the training centre in
“courses” of flexible duration according to village group needs, with trained lead producers and group
leaders taking the lead in facilitating learning delivery.
80.
Demonstration  plots. They  will serve  as  external  teaching  facilities  of  the  village-owned
training centres, motivate adoption of new technologies and provide hands-on P2P training at village
level.  The  first  10  producers  in  each  village  who  are  willing  to  participate  will  sign  a  partnership
agreement  defining  their  obligations  to  adopt  the  technology  at  their  farm/household.  These  will
include the completion of demonstration plot training and the organization of visits to the plot by other
villagers – within or beyond their home village. In return, these 50 producers will receive a one-time
start-up kit of basic inputs and tools, including fencing as appropriate and sign boards – up to a value
of US$250.  Successful  recipients  will  receive  training  and  support  from  the  TEKAD  Economic
Initiatives  Adviser,  the  PPL  and  Village  Cadres.  At  least  one  centrally  located  demo  plot  will  be
established in all of the target villages in their first  year of TEKAD participation. Economic Initiatives
Advisers will ensure that women and youth are thoroughly informed about the opportunities lying with
demonstration  plots  and  attached  obligations,  so  that  they  can  be  represented  among  the  50
beneficiaries.
81.
District  study  tours. They will  enable  producers  to  learn  about  production,  business
development,  value  adding  and  marketing  successes  as  well  as  innovations  developed  within  the
district. These tours will be organized by the TEKAD district team from PY3 until PY6.
Activity 1.2.3 – BumDes and Village Businesses
82.
While  production  activities  will  continue  to  be  carried  out  at  household  level,  input  supply,
business  development  functions  such  as  input  supply,  quality  control/certification,  collection  and
aggregation, storage, processing and marketing will require collective action to pool higher volumes of
better  quality  produce,  access  larger  and  better  remunerated  markets  and  earn  better  prices.
Guidance  will  be  provided  by  the  Support  to  Village  Economic  Initiatives  package  part  of  the
Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages,  and  Economic  Initiatives  Advisers  will  provide  further
assistance to villagers in identifying and agreeing on functions that should be undertaken collectively
as  well  as  relative  modalities  and  business  organisations.  It  will  be  preferable  to  start  with  one  or  a
few simple activities and develop them based on needs, progress and capacities.
83.
TEKAD will  support  existing  village-based  business  organisations  (primarily  BUMDEs  and
cooperatives,  but  possibly  also  other  groups  such  as  women  or  youth  groups,  or  individual
businesses such as a lead farmer aggregating and marketing produce) in developing simple business
plans,  and  in  setting  up,  managing  and  financing  business  development,  in  line  with  the  economic
strategy/annual  planning,  and  based  on  annual  capacity  assessments.  Criteria  will  be  developed  to
identify  eligible  organisations  and  to  measure and  rank  their  progress.  The  BUMDes  assessment
(Activity  2.2.1)  will  help  in  shaping  assistance  to  BUMDes.  Support  to  BUMDEs  and  economic
organisations will build on MoV’s guidelines for BUMDes establishment, operation and management.
84.
Where  there  are  no  pre-existing  organisations,  TEKAD  will  promote  individual  (for  example
lead  farmers)  or  group-owned  businesses  (for  example  women  group),  including  BUMDEs  where
conditions are met.
85.
The  TEKAD  District  Manager  will  source  business  management  specialists  to  provide  both
new  start-up  businesses  and  existing  businesses  (including  BumDes)  basic  business  training to
address the lack of essential business preparation and planning. Topics will be adjusted to commodity
and  location  specifics  as  identified  in  the  MTS  and  Value  Chain  Studies,  but  will  likely  include
cashflow management, annual budgeting, capital structures, business planning, market development,
and  staff  management.  Depending  on  scale,  trainees  will  include  owners,  managers,  assistant
managers, and accountants. Ten-day courses will be run annually in PY 3-6. TEKAD will finance the
trainer and other costs will be met by the business owner or village fund.
86.
To  supplement  the  work  of  the  annual  business  development  workshops,  TEKAD  Village
Economic Initiatives Advisers will monitor village businesses – who will be required to report to them
on  a  monthly  basis.  TEKAD  will  further  strengthen  this  regular  support  by  the  provision  of  on-going
129
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
business support services either through the Economic Initiatives Advisers, or as part of the Strategy
for  Access  to  Business  Development  Services.  Thus,  new  and  existing  businesses  will  enjoy  a
comprehensive “wrap around” support system for the years of TEKAD engagement. After this period,
businesses will be expected to pay for services themselves or have the Village Fund or other village
sources of revenue pay.
87.
Finally,  building  on  social  and  indigenous  entrepreneurship,  TEKAD  will  support  the
adaptation  of  cooperative/’mainstream’  entrepreneurship  models  to  encompass  economic  and  non-
economic  benefits,  which  could  lead  to  closer  alignment  with  traditional  forms  of  collectivism  and
redistribution and would support the emergence of future Papuan microentrepreneurs97.
Activity 1.2.4 - Access to financing
88.
Capital  investment  for  collective  production,  processing  and  marketing,  as  well  as  power
generation, water conservation or other climate change mitigation equipment or infrastructure, will be
identified in the annual plan and financed by the Village Fund and other village resources. Short-term
investment such as seasonal inputs will be financed by producers’ own resources or by loans, which
will be facilitated under Component 2.
Activity 1.2.5 – Geo-tagging of infrastructure
89.
In complement to the Village Information System and to further support planning, monitoring
and programme transparency, a geo-tagging system will be developed to map and document village
collective  infrastructure  financed  through  village  resources  and  their  status  of  achievement.  Geo-
tagging  will  assign  specific,  infrastructure-related  data  (such  as  infrastructure  sub-project  latitude,
longitude,  place  name,  cost,  progress)  to  a  web-based  mapping  application  such  as  Google  Maps,
using a phone or tablet built-in Global Positioning System (GPS).
The  system  will build  on  the  successful  experience  of  the  World  Bank-financed  Philippine
90.
Rural  Development  Project,  which  developed  geo-tagging  as  a  tool  for  monitoring  project
infrastructure development. A study tour for a small team of MoV/TEKAD staff will be organised prior
to designing the system.
Implementation Arrangements for Component 1
91.
Implementation  of  Component  1  will  be  led  by  a  TEKAD-financed  District  Implementation
Team98 comprised  of  a  District  Coordinator,  a  District  Marketing  Specialist  and  an  M&E/MIS
Coordinator;  (ii)  Village  Governance  Facilitators,  who  will  support  the  implementation  of  activities
under  Sub-component  1.1  and  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with  sub-district  Village  Community
Empowerment  Facilitators99;  and  (iii)  Economic 
the
implementation  of  activities  under  Sub-component  1.2  and  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with
existing  district  and  sub-district  staff  as  described  above,  including  Field  Agriculture  Extensionists
under the district Agriculture department. These will be redeployed to ensure that their skills match the
target  products  selected  by  village  clusters.  Two  village  cadres  and  the  village  network  of  activists
(see will support the district team at village level.
Initiatives  Advisors,  who  will  support 
92.
The  facilitators  will  be recruited  locally  and  will  work  as  a  team.  Each  facilitation  team
(composed  of  one  Village  Governance  Facilitator  and  one  Economic  Initiatives  Advisor)  will  initially
cover 4 villages with a decreasing rate of intensity100, so that by the end of TEKAD support, farmers’
access  to  services  is  ensured  by  local  players  using  local  resources.  Capacity  building  will  be
provided to local service providers under Component 2.
The family-based approach will be implemented by an NGO, along a methodology that will be
93.
developed  by  international  technical  consultant  with  experience  in  household-based  methodologies
gained in IFAD projects. The Village Information System will be implemented along an approach that
will be developed in partnership with KOMPAK. The geo-tagging system will be designed with support
97 Indigenous entrepreneurship has often been misunderstood because the analytical framework used for the task was implicitly
derived from standard individualistic (utility maximising) parameters of organisational action in industrialised countries centred
on anonymous market transactions. “There are many such examples of development programs in the agricultural and other
sectors that do not have a significant impact on Papua’s indigenous communities, because they did not understand and utilise
the traditional knowledge and culture of Papuans” (Wambrauw 2013).
98 Budgeted under sub-component 2.1 – District Support for Village Economic Development.
99 Pendamping Desa Pemberdayaan – PDP.
100 See Attachment 1.
130
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
from  a  service  provider,  who  will  also  be  responsible  for  producing  a  manual  and  organising  the
training  of district teams. The system will be operated and maintained by  the district-level staff, with
support from the Provincial MIS/GIS Specialist.
94.
The geo-tagging system will be designed with support from a service provider, who will also
be responsible for producing a manual and organising the training of district teams. The system will be
operated  and  maintained  by  the  district-level  staff,  with  support  from  the  Provincial  MIS/GIS
Specialist.  A  study  tour  for  a  small  team  of  MoV/TEKAD  staff  to  visit  the  Philippines  Rural
Development Project will possibly be organised prior to designing the system.
95.
MoV’s departments dealing with BUMDes.
Support  to  BUMDEs  and economic  organisations  will  be  developed  in  collaboration  with
B. COMPONENT
2
-
PARTNERSHIPS
FOR VILLAGE
ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
96.
Component  2  will  promote  an  enabling  environment  for  inclusive  and  sustainable  village
economic  development,  by  facilitating  and  improving  village  connections  to services,  markets  and
commercial financing. The expected outcome is that village households will have sustainable access
to markets and to public and private services in support of village economic initiatives.
97.
Strategic  orientations  for  Component  2  include  the  following:  (i)  building  the  capacities  of
districts  and  sub-districts  relevant  departments  so  they  can  provide  support  services  to  village
governments  and  better  integrate  village needs  into  district  economic  development  planning;  (ii)
complementing  public  support  services  by  building  villagers’  access  to  qualified  private  service
providers extending technical and business development services (BDS), whose services can be paid
with Village  Fund  and  other  village  resources;  (iii)  phasing  out  programme  facilitators’  support  and
building gradual takeover by public and private service providers;
(iv) building the awareness of and
facilitating  linkages  with  market  players  so  they  source  from  village-based  producers  and  provide
embedded  services;  (v)  supporting  linkages  with  selected  banks  so  that  villagers  have  access  to
financial  products  meeting  their  needs  and  complementing  public  resources.  Component  2
achievements  will  therefore have a key role  in  ensuring that,  by  the end of the  programme, villages
keep accessing services to ensure profitable and sustainable economic initiatives.
98.
Component  2  will  be  implemented  at  district  and  provincial  level,  and  will  support  and
complement  village-based  activities  implemented  under  Component  1.  It  is  comprised  of  three  sub-
components:  (i) District  Support  for  Village  Economic  Development;  (ii)  Economic  Services;  and  (iii)
Financial  Services.  Guidelines  and  tools  will  be  embodied  in  the  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building
Packages that will be developed under Component 3.
Main indicators are: (i) 50% of participating districts integrate investment financing for target
99.
districts in district plan; (ii) 75 % of households reporting adoption of improved inputs, technologies or
practices; (iii) 80% of households are satisfied with the: a) relevance, b) quality, and c) accessibility of
agricultural  extension  and  advisory  services  provided  by  the  public  and  private  sector,  physically  or
through  digital  solutions;  and  (iv)  60%  of  households  reporting  access  to  adequate  BDS/financial
services.
Sub-component 2.1 – District Support for Village Economic Development
The aim of this subcomponent is two-fold. On the one hand, it will gradually build capacities at
100.
district  and  sub-district  level  to  provide  technical  assistance  and  facilitation  support  for  the  village
economic development planning and the implementation of village economic activities. On the  other
hand, it will promote district-level productive investment, which will complement investments financed
through village resources by addressing constraints that exceed village financing capacity or that are
common to several villages. Activities will include the following.
131
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Activity 2.1.1 - Information
In PY1101, TEKAD PPIUs, supported by TEKAD District Coordinators will run information and
101.
awareness workshops with: (i) the District Head; (ii) relevant district departments (Dinas) - Community
Empowerment,  Agriculture,  Forestry,  Fisheries,  Planning,  Trade  and  Industry,  Cooperatives  and
Small  and  Medium  Enterprises;  and  (iii)  Heads  of  Sub-districts.  The  objective  will  be  to  provide
information  about:  (i)  programme  objectives,  activities  and  expected  benefits;  (ii)  the  misperception
that  TEKAD  may  be  directing  village fund  expenditure;
(iii) commodities/trades  with  highest
potential  of  success  and  returns;  (iv)  the  village  cluster  approach;  (v)  the  GESI  approach;  and  (vi)
respective  roles  and  obligations  of 
the  District  and  Sub-district  Heads,  district/sub-district
departments, villages and of TEKAD.
102.
This  information  campaign  will  include  a  start-up  workshop  at  provincial  level  with  all  of  the
District  Heads  of  the  target  districts  and  relevant  provincial  departments,  a  district  workshop,  and
meetings with the different district and sub-district departments as required.
Activity 2.1.2 - Commitment
103.
After the information workshops, District Heads will be invited to sign an agreement, which will
outline  respective  roles  and  obligations  of  the  signatories - District  Head  and  TEKAD - in  particular
with regard to:
facilitating  Village  Heads’  adoption  of  increased  Village  Fund  allocations  for  economic
development;
promoting village clusters with common economic development strategies;
district participation in and support to TEKAD activities;
gradual  take-over  of  facilitation  and  technical  support  services  by  the  district  departments  and
other plans to ensure sustainability;
participation  in  monitoring  and  evaluation,  including  to  link  district  systems  with  the  Village
Information System and to hold regular meetings with the TEKAD District Team.
104.
It  will  also  spell  out  the  District  Head  commitment  to  address  village  cluster  needs  in  the
district  planning  of  investments,  to  organise  a  Village  Desk  offering  easy  access  of Village
Governments  and  villagers  to  information  and  services  related  to  economic  development  and  to  set
up a District Coordination Platform for Village Economic Development that would also involve Village
Heads.
Finally,  this  should  also  include  the  agreement  to  redeploy  the  department  of  Agriculture
105.
extension  staff,  to  ensure  that  their  skills  match  target  commodities/trades  as  described  under
Component 1. A District Head regulation (Peraturan  Daerah – PERDA)  will confirm the terms of the
agreement as relevant.
Activity 2.1.3 - Capacity building
106.
District/Sub-District Heads and staff of the relevant departments will receive capacity building
to strengthen their abilities to provide technical assistance to district/sub-district facilitators and village
governments. This will be achieved through:
training  of  trainers  (ToT),  which  will  be  carried  out  under  a  partnership  agreement  with  MoV
Community Training Center Department (Pusat Pelatihan Masyarakat – Puslatmas). ToT will rest
on  training  modules  that  will  be  developed  building  on  the  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building
Packages  to  be  designed  under  Component  3,  and  will  be  implemented  at  Puslatmas  training
centres  in  Ambon  (for  Maluku  and  North  Maluku  provinces),  Jayapura  (for  Papua  and  West
Papua provinces) and Denpasar (for East Nusa Tenggara province). Modules  will be  developed
and delivered in PY1;
district- and  province-based  training,  targeting  TEKAD  District  Teams,  who  will  in  turn  train
relevant district departments;
refreshment ToT/training by PY3, building on TEKAD implementation progress and TEKAD mid-
term review;
101 And at any rate prior to delivery of the awareness campaign in village districts described in Sub-component 1.1, Activity
1.1.1.
132








Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
broad  dissemination  of  TEKAD  capacity  building  packages  within  relevant  district/sub-district
departments;
province-based community of practices facilitated by TEKAD Online Platform (Component 3) and
access to the Platform.
107.
Under the joint leadership of the TEKAD District Coordinator and of the District Head, TEKAD
Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budgeting  will  describe  how  facilitation,  technical  assistance  and  coaching
activities  will  be  implemented  by  TEKAD  team  and  district/sub-district  staff  (in  particular  Community
Empowerment and Field Agriculture Extensionists) and Village Cadres.
108. While  in  the  first  years  of  programme  implementation,  TEKAD  District  Teams  will  take  full
responsibility for the implementation of activities  with participation  of district staff, TEKAD facilitators
will be tasked with building the capacities of existing, permanent facilitators, so that responsibility will
gradually shift to the latter and by the end of the programme, they will be fully in charge for extending
support to villages. This take-over by local facilitators will result in an overall reduction in the number
of  facilitators  interacting  with  the  villages102.  Where  possible  (which  will  be  contingent  on  TEKAD
being able to demonstrate the added value brought by TEKAD facilitators), TEKAD will promote with
the  District  Head/MoV  the  integration  of  at  least  one  of TEKAD  facilitators103 into  the  regular  district
Community  Empowerment  Facilitation  Team104.  It  is  also  expected  that  village  volunteers  and  the
village network of activists (see Component 1, Activity 1.1.4) will support facilitator’s interventions.
Activity 2.1.4 - Village Desk
109.
Village  Desks will  be  established  in  every  target  district,  within  the  district  administration
premises,  and  will  operate  as  a  one-stop-shop  for  village  governments  seeking  support  on  village
economic development at the district administration. It will provide easy access to:
economic information (such as market opportunities and specifications, technologies, roster of
service providers, linkages with banks), which will be developed as part of TEKAD activities;
information about technical and financial assistance available within the district administration.
It  will  also  facilitate  the  quick  access  of  village  heads/administration  to  the  relevant  district
110.
departments. Information will also be provided to market players about market opportunities and will
facilitate contacts with village clusters to discuss market issues and provide market feedback.
111.
The  Village  Desk  will  be  operated  by  a  suitably  qualified  and  skilled  focal  point  within  the
Community  Empowerment  Department  and  will  not  involve  any  additional  costs  for  the  district
administration. Village Desks will be established from PY4 and will not involve any additional costs for
the district administration.
Activity 2.1.5 - Planning integration
Village  resources  will  finance  economic  equipment  and  infrastructure  that  are  economically
112.
justified  at  village  level  (such  as  storage  or  dryers). It  is  expected  that  districts  will  make  financing
available  for  bigger  investments  exceeding  village  financing  capacity  or  economically  justified  at  a
higher scale than the village, such as cold storage or large processing facilities, or capital investment
into inter-village BumDes (BumDes Bersamah).
113.
To  this  effect,  TEKAD  will  support  district  administrations  in  integrating  village  needs  into
district  planning  and  budgeting  by:  (i)  ensuring  that  village  planning  is  aligned  with  the  national
planning cycle; (ii) promoting clusters of villages involved in the production and marketing of the same
commodity  (see  Sub-component  2.2);  (iii)  making  available  updated  village  data  through  the  Village
Information System; and (iv) setting up District Coordination Platforms.
Activity 2.1.6 - District Coordination Platforms
114.
TEKAD  will  establish  District  Coordination  Platforms  to  support  information  exchange  and
coordination  of  activities  related  to  the  promotion  of  village  economic  development,  and  will  discuss
102 While the proposed ration of TEKAD facilitators is about 2 facilitators for 9 villages, the current ratio for
Community Empowerment Facilitators is around 1.25 facilitator for one sub-district or about 9 villages.
103 Most likely the Economic Development Facilitator, who would match currently existing facilitator positions at
sub-district (Village Community Empowerment Facilitator and Village Technical Infrastructure Facilitator).
104 Including MOA extension staff, lead farmers and other group leaders.
133




Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
programme progress, using village-based M&E data. The Coordination Platform will be chaired by the
District Head and  its secretariat  will be ensured by the District Planning Department (Bappeda)  with
TEKAD  support.  It  will  be  composed  of  relevant  district  departments  (Community  Empowerment,
Agriculture,  Forestry,  Fisheries,  Planning,  Trade  and  Industry,  Cooperatives  and  Small  and  Medium
Enterprises)  and  Village  Heads.  Market  players,  development  projects,  NGOs  or  other  service
providers will be called to participate in working sessions as required. District Coordination Platforms
will meet every quarter. To enhance discussion and outputs, the District Coordination Platforms may
be  preceded  by  smaller,  more  focused  working  groups  (for  example  by  commodity)  of  Platform
members and invited participants.
Sub-component 2.2 – Economic Services
115.
The  objective  of  the  subcomponent  is  to  facilitate  the  access  of  village-based  producers  to
markets  and  services  through  remunerative  market  linkages  and  sustainable  service  delivery
systems. Activities will include the following.
Activity 2.2.1 – Mapping studies
116.
The  development  of  linkages  with  market  players  or  service  providers  will  rest  on  prior
mapping  studies,  which  will  be  carried  out  in  every  province  in  PY1,  with  a  focus  on  the  target
districts. They will include the following.
117.
Market  opportunities  and  value  chain  analysis. Based  on  an  assessment  of productive
resources  and  market  opportunities  for  primary  sector  commodities  (agriculture,  livestock,  fisheries,
aquaculture, non-timber forest products), value chain analysis will be conducted for a limited number
of priority commodities that hold the highest potential for growth and for generating income for village-
based producers in the target districts. Opportunities in agritourism and related economic activities will
also be covered given their increasingly  important effects in triggering supply chains and generating
income and employment.
118.
In every province, a Value Chain Analysis Reference Group will be created to steer the whole
process.  It  will  be  chaired  by  the  Community  Empowerment  Provincial  Department  and  will  gather
relevant stakeholders, including relevant provincial department (including Community Empowerment,
Agriculture,  Forestry,  Fisheries,  Planning,  Trade  and  Industry,  Cooperatives  and  Small  and  Medium
Enterprises),  District  Heads  from  the  target  districts,  the  Provincial  Chamber  of  Commerce  and
Industry  (KADIN)/representatives  of  private  sector,  existing  PLUTs,  BRI  and  regional  bank, etc.
Reference Groups will: (i) validate the TORs for the study; (ii) orient the work of the technical experts,
including with regard to the criteria for selecting commodities for which detailed value chain analysis
will be carried out; (iii) validate the pre-selection of commodities; (v) participate in the organization of
provincial workshops to review the study draft.
119.
An initial meeting with the Reference Group will be organised to: (i) define a preliminary list of
the  commodities  to  be  mapped;  agree  on  the  selection  criteria  to  be  considered;  and  (ii)  acquire
information on existing sources of info and key institutions and market players to be consulted.
120.
A preliminary review of market opportunities and main commodities to be considered will then
be  conducted,  building  on  available  literature  (including  available  value  chain  analysis105)  and
stakeholders’  interview,  mainly  at  district  and  provincial  level.  The  output  of  the  review  will  be  a
preliminary  identification  of  a  basket  of  value  chains  to  be  further  analysed,  together  with  a  brief
presentation of main opportunities and constraints and a ranking based on criteria that will have been
preliminarily agreed upon with the Reference Group. These criteria should include the following:
Large number of smallholders involved;
Potential for fast production/productivity growth;
Markets accessible to small producers (low entry requirements) and opportunities for growth;
Potential returns to small producers and share of value added through production, processing and
marketing;
105 For example DFID-funded Green Economic Growth Programme is preparing value chain studies for ten economically
important commodities in Papua and West Papua, including for seaweed, nutmeg, vanilla, cacao, coconut, coffee, pepper,
sago, vines for handicraft and eco-tourism.
134




Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Potential for integrating women, youth, indigenous groups, remote villages;
Contribution to food security (this criterion however would not need to be applicable to all of the
selected value chains).
121.
The pre-selection will be presented to and validated by the Reference Group.
122.
value chains. The value chain analysis will cover:
Gender-sensitive  value  chain  analysis  will  then  be  carried  out  for  the  pre-selected  priority
Value  chain  stakeholders: identify  value  chain  key  players - i.e.  existing  village/producer-owned
ventures  (BUMDes,  cooperatives  or  other  joint  ventures),  different  categories  of  buyers  and
service  providers  and  existing  value  chain  relationships  between  chain  actors;  define  flows  of
exchange and types of relations between stakeholders (including the existence or possibilities of
contracting  between  stakeholders); estimate  the  number  of  players,  flows  and  volumes; and
assess  interest  of  value  chain  stakeholders  in  participating  in  the  programme  as  well  as  their
capacities;
identify  main  production  areas, analyse  current  production,  production  systems  and
Supply:
capacities;  assess  opportunities/potential  for  growth  of  production  and  productivity,  as  well  as
major constraints;
Markets: identify different types of markets opportunities (local markets, main commodities export
markets, niche markets) with potential for increasing the income of diverse types of village-based
producers (including young people and women, villagers in traditional villages or in remote areas),
market  requirements  in  terms  of  volume  and  quality,  and  opportunities  for  value  added  and
processing  at  village  level  or  village  cluster  level;  assess  potential  for  market  growth;  analyse
competitiveness; identify  price  formation  mechanisms  and  distribution  of  value  added  between
stakeholders;
Village participation: identify  specific  opportunities  and  constraints  at  village  level  and  types  of
investments/technologies/skills  enhancements  required  to  address  them;  identify  aggregation,
value adding or other functions that should best be addressed at village cluster level;
Inclusive development: identify factors of socio-economic differentiation amongst producers (such
as  gender,  generation  gaps,  clan networks)  that  could  affect  opportunities  to  benefit  from  the
programme  and  provide  orientations  to  secure  broad  inclusion;  identify  prerequisites  for
producers  to  integrate  production,  processing  or  marketing  along  the  value  chain,  and
opportunities for special groups - poorer households,  women and  youth, indigenous groups and
remote villages (see details in Section III A);
Land  tenure: assess  tenure  systems  and  recommend  ways  to  secure  land  tenure  for  the
programme target groups.
123.
Aside  from  the  value  chain  analysis  and recommendations  to  facilitate  the  participation  of
villages,  deliverables  should  include: a  value  chain  map  showing  the  various  stakeholders,  sub-
chains/markets with respective production amounts and distribution of value added; a recap of main
opportunities  and  constraints  for  village  participation;  and  geographical  maps  showing  main
production areas in every province and possible areas of extension.
124.
Provincial  workshops  gathering  TEKAD  public  and  private  stakeholders,  including  the
Reference  Group, will  be  organised  to  present  studies  outcome,  discuss  and  validate  results  and
make  recommendations  to  orient  TEKAD  activities  in  the  province  and  to  further  support  the
preparation of Orientation and Capacity Building Packages.
125.
Access  to  services  mapping. This  study  will  assess  the  availability  and  capacities  of:  (i)
service  providers  that  could  extend  business  development  services  to  village  producers  and  their
organisations  in  the  target  districts  (including  PLUTs,  P4S,  NGOs,  consultants,  chamber  of
commerce); and (ii) market players, input dealers or other value chain agents extending or interested
in extending services to small producers as embedded services106.
106 Embedded services are technical or other types of services (including credit, in kind or in cash) that are provided within the
framework  of  a  business  transaction  between  a  buyer  or  an  input  dealer,  and  village-based  producers,  without  any  direct
payment charged to the producers. For example, a buyer, in addition to marketing products, can provide technical assistance,
135








Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
126.
Service providers will be identified in different ways: (i) through the PLUT networks; (ii) using
existing rosters (e.g. BDS Association of Indonesia, FOKUS, KADIN etc.); (iii) through organizations
operating in the target districts (e.g. producers’ organizations and cooperatives, KADIN members).
The  study  will  make  recommendations  for  strengthening  service  providers’  capacities  and
127.
facilitating  villagers’  access  to  services.  It  will  also develop  a  provincial  roster  of  business
development  service  providers,  which  will  be  regularly  updated  under  the  responsibility  of  the
Provincial  Economic  Development  Expert.  The  roster  will  indicate  areas  of  expertise,  the  type  and
cost of services, experience (references) and geographical area of intervention.
128.
BUMDes  assessment. Building  on  the  Market  Opportunities  and  Value  Chain  Analysis
above,  an  assessment  of  existing  BUMDes  will  be  carried  out  in  the  target  districts,  covering  their
activities,  capacities  and  related  BUMDes-ranking,  main  constraints  and  opportunities 
for
development, including for upgrading to joint BUMDes (BUMDes Bersama), and recommendations for
supporting BUMDes enhanced performance in implementing collective actions in support of villagers’
participation in target value chains.
129.
Climate risk and vulnerability assessment. This study will assess the exposure, sensitivity
and adaptive capacity  to climate risks and vulnerability  in the target areas to build resilience among
participating villages, by identifying climate-risk responsive interventions. Specifically, the assessment
will:
Identify areas with climate change risks and other natural hazards that must be addressed (such
as drought, flood, hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunamis…);
Establish baseline data and climate change trends for various climate variables (e.g. average
temperature, heat days, intensive rainfall events…), with an indication on the level of confidence
(e.g. high, medium, low) for such impacts;
Assess socio-economic development and other non-climatic factors (such as demographic
change, use of resources, market trends) that will influence vulnerability to climate change;
Identify short and medium-term risk management strategies and best practices to build climate
change resilience in the target value chains.
130.
A thorough literature/desk review and analysis of existing climate-related secondary data that
are widely available for Indonesia will be undertaken during the early phase of project implementation
to inform TEKAD interventions and to ensure they are robust and climate resilient. For example, the
detailed historical and projected climate data as well as general information on climate vulnerabilities
and  impacts  can  be  sourced  from  the  Climate  Change  Knowledge  Portal  developed  by  the  World
Bank and the website107 of the Indonesian Meteorological, Climatological and Geophysical Agency or
BMKG. This will be supplemented by local studies that have been conducted in the target provinces
and  with  inputs  from  project  beneficiaries.  Preliminary  focus  areas  identified  in  this  assessment  will
include  awareness,  dissemination  and  skills  development  on  climate-smart  provided  through  project
partners and digital technologies.
131.
Implementation  arrangements  for  studies. Studies  will  be carried  out  by  international
consultants/service  providers,  in  coordination  with  the  preparation  of  the  GESI  strategy.  They  will
generate  information  to  support  the  preparation  of  product-based  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building
Packages  (prepared  under  Component  3)  and  to  orient  District  Strategies  for  Market  Access  (see
Activity  2.2.2)  and  District  Strategies  for  Access  to  Business  Development  Services  (see  Sub-
component  1.2,  Activity  1.2.1).  Studies  will  build  on  available  material  and  reflect  studies  and
experience  of  relevant  projects  financed  by  development  partners,  such  as  PRISMA, GEGPP  and
Lestari. Information will be captured in the database, shared with programme stakeholders, reflected
in the Orientation  and Capacity  Building Packages (Sub-component 3.2) and  posted on the  Eastern
Indonesia Gateway (Sub-component 3.1)..
training, finance and/or inputs to its village-based suppliers. The buyer provides these services because it makes good business
sense to do so and it ensures the exporter receives high-quality goods from the producers. This type of embedded services often
occurs in the frame of contract farming. Another example is where technical advice is linked to the sale of agricultural inputs
(e.g. seeds, fertiliser, pesticides, veterinary drugs) and the costs of the advice are inbuilt in the price of the sold input.
107 https://www.bmkg.go.id/iklim/?p=proyeksi-perubahan-iklim&lang=EN
136




Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
132.
Provincial  workshops  gathering  TEKAD  public  and  private  stakeholders  will  be  organised  to
present studies outcome, discuss and validate results and make recommendations to orient TEKAD
activities  in  the  province  and  to  further  support  the  preparation  of  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building
Packages.
Activity 2.2.2 - Access to markets
133.
Building  on  the  mapping  studies  and  on  the  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages
(designed  under Sub-component  3.2),  TEKAD  will  facilitate  formal  and  informal  marketing
arrangements  with  different  types  of  buyers  (such  as  middlemen,  larger  collectors,  traders,
processors,  exporters  or  distributors)  and  for  different  types  of  markets  (local  markets,  main
commodities export markets, niche markets), in adaptation with the features and capacities of target
villages (well-connected or remote) and groups. This will be achieved through the following activities.
District strategies for access to markets. Building on the studies and on the product-based
134.
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, District Teams will develop a District Strategy for Access
to Markets with support from TEKAD Provincial Implementation Unit. The Strategy will be developed
in PY2 and will be upgraded annually, based on achievements at district level. It will aim at fostering
the development of market linkages between village-based producers and different types of markets
(local,  export,  niche)  and  different  types  of  off-takers  (middlemen,  local  collectors  and  traders,
processors,  exporters…)  on  a  limited  number  of  priority  commodities  as  identified  in  the  Orientation
and Capacity Building Packages. In particular, it will clarify how to:
build a gradual approach to facilitate producers’ access to increasingly remunerative markets, as
villagers’ skills develop and produce increased volumes of increasingly good quality produce;
ensure that villagers can retain an increasingly higher share of the final added value, through
primary processing, packaging, branding, certification etc.;
promote
BUMDes/cooperatives, SMEs and tech start-ups (see below);
other marketing
contract
farming
and
arrangements with
lead
farmers,
encourage villagers to join into village and inter-village collective forms of organization such as
BUMDes, other types of economic organisations and village clusters (see below).
135.
The  strategy  will  complement  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages  and  will  further
guide  villages  and  district  implementation  teams,  in  line  with  district  specificities  and  building  on
synergies with existing development projects (such as PRISMA or GEGPP108. It will be developed in
partnership  with target  villages,  and  especially  with  existing  village- or  intervillage-based  economic
organisations, along guidelines that will be developed by the NPMU Economic Development Expert,
with assistance from an international consultant.
136.
Facilitation services. Building on the market studies, TEKAD will support the development of
market  linkages  between  producers and  buyers,  whereby  producers  will  have  secure  and
remunerative  market  outlets  justifying  that  they  invest  in  increased  production  of  better  quality
products, whereas buyers will obtain reliable and consistent supply in line with market demand.
137.
Services will  be  provided  by  TEKAD  Marketing  Specialists  at  district  and  Economic
Development  Specialists  at  provincial  level,  in  collaboration  with  TEKAD  Economic  Initiatives
Advisors,  BUMDes  where  relevant,  Village  Economic  Development  Facilitators  under  the  district
Community Empowerment Department (PED) as well as the district and province Trade and Industry
and other relevant departments. Activities will include the following:
information  workshops  at  provincial  and  district  level: building  on  the  market  opportunities  and
value chain analysis (Activity 2.2.1), district-level consultations and awareness workshops will be
conducted  twice  a  year  with  a  view  to  support  the  development  of  marketing  arrangements
between  producers  and  buyers.  They  will  bring  together  representatives  from  BUMDes,
cooperatives  and  other  village-based  economic  organisations  as  well  as  potential  buyers,
including  local  market  agents,  traders,  processors,  wholesalers  and  retailers.  Production  and
supply potential will be showed for different seasons on TEKAD villages, and quality and quantity
requirements also explained. Local technical supporters of public and private sector will also join
the  consultation  and  connection  workshop  to  tailor  their  TA  in  enhanced  production  and  post-
108 See Annex 1 - Development projects with potential for synergies/learning in TEKAD areas.
137





Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
harvest management as required by the market. While most of the opportunities and agreements
may  relate  to  farm  agribusinesses,  agritourism  and  substituting  import  products  should  be
addressed and eventually help integrate the TEKAD villages into the related value/supply chains.
direct  contacts  with  buyers  and  facilitation  of  linkages with  producers’  economic  organisations,
including BUMDEs;
facilitation  for  the  negotiation  of  fair  and  transparent  arrangements between  buyers  and  village-
based  economic  organisations. This  will  include  contract  farming  (which  could  be  implemented
through  informal  or  formal  arrangements)  or  an  agreement  between  producers  and  a  buyer,
whereby producers agree to provide agreed quantities and quality of a specific product at a
certain  time,  and  the  buyer  commits  to  purchase  the  product  and,  in  some  cases,  to
support production through services that are embedded in the arrangement such as the
supply  of  production  inputs,  land  preparation  or  the  provision  of  technical  advice.
Collaborative  arrangements,  especially  formal  ones,  will  spell  out  a  clear  distribution  of
responsibilities and a balanced share of risks and benefits;
building  the  capacities  of  BUMDes to:  (i)  develop  marketing  activities;  (ii)  aggregate  villagers’
produce and ensure storage and quality control; (iii) negotiate fair contractual arrangements with
buyers on behalf of village economic entities or assisting negotiations with supply chain partners.
138.
Activities  will  be  implemented  in  close  collaboration  with  development  partners-financed
projects such as PRISMA and GEGGP. Village governments and traditional authorities will be closely
associated to market linkage development to facilitate villagers’ buy-in.
139.
Based  on  local  current  practice  and  international  experience,  an  international  consulting
firm/consultant  will  be contracted by the NPMU to  develop guidelines for good practices on contract
farming and to train district teams and BUMDes or other village-based economic organisations.
140.
Local market agents. Capacity building will be provided to middlemen and other local market
agents who play a vital role in connecting isolated areas to markets, so that they are aware of and can
apply quality standards, and increase both their and producers’ income.
141.
Online and tech start up marketing. TEKAD-supported online platform under Component 3,
will  offer  the  possibility  to  market  products  online,  by  branding  them  as  products  from  Eastern
Indonesia  in  connection  with  existing  online  marketplaces,  including  those  with  which  MoV  already
has a partnership109.
142.
A  study  exploring  opportunities  will  be  carried  out  at  provincial  level  in  PY3  and  will  be
reflected into updated Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, based on which capacity building
will be made available to village-based economic organisations as appropriate. A similar approach will
be  used  to  promote  partnerships  between  villagers  and  agritech,  marinetech,  traveltech  startups,
building on initial efforts launched by MoV.
143.
The exploration study will be implemented in collaboration with tech startups and focus on the
target districts. It will be complemented by a budget made available at provincial level for sponsoring
visits of interested tech startups and initiating contacts.
144.
Market  promotion. Once  the  programme  villages  are  able  to ensure  a  steady  supply  of
quality  products  through  organized  farming,  market  diversification  will  be  promoted  through  TEKAD
resources – a  budget  is  available  at  district  level,  for  example  to  sponsor  villagers’  participation  in
trade fairs; buyers’ visits to target districts/villages, BUMDEs Bersamah or P4S to allow an exchange
of views and understandings on how individual producers and producer groups can be engaged and
incentivized  in  building  additional  quality  yields;  buyers’  participation  in  information  workshops;  and
market exploration activities.
Activity 2.2.3 - Access to services
145.
Building  on  the  mapping  studies  and  on  the  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages
(designed under Sub-component 3.2), TEKAD will facilitate producers’ access to services provided by
a  range  of  formal  and  informal  business  development  services  providers.  Business  development
services include for example technical and management skills development, technology development
109 Bukalapak.com and Shopee.co.id.
138



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
and  transfer,  product  development  and  branding,  marketing,  certification,  enterprise  registration
training,  consultancy  and  advisory  services,  marketing  assistance,  business  linkage  promotion
information.
District Strategies for Access to Services. Every year, the TEKAD District Coordinator, in
146.
collaboration with the technical team and the BUMDes where existing, will develop a demand-driven
Strategy for Access to Business Development Services (BDS) for the target villages addressing needs
identified  in  the  Village  Economic  Development  Strategies/Annual  Plans  developed  under  Sub-
Component 1.1.
147.
The  strategy  will  combine  available  public  and  private  sources  for  service  provision.  Due
consideration  will  be  given  to  including:  retailers  of  production  inputs,  who  could  be  trained  to  offer
the  point  of  purchase110;  services  embedded  into  contract  farming
advice  to  producers  at
arrangements;  lead  farmers,  entrepreneurs  or  cooperatives  that  would  have  the  experience  and
willingness to become service producers. It will ensure that access to services is inclusive and open to
women  and youth,  taking  into  account  their  specificities  (especially  with  regard  to  women’s  time
availability).
Guidelines for preparing the Strategy for Access to BDS will be developed and support will be
148.
provided  by  TEKAD  Economic  Development  Expert.  Guidelines  will  also  cover  the  development  of
district rosters of services providers.
Additionally,  every target district  will  have access to  an annual programme budget for hiring
149.
specialised  service  providers  to  complement  available  skills  and  to  make up  for  skills  deficiencies
within  the  district  technical  team,  by  offering  on-demand  support  services  to  producers.  The  annual
budget  for  service  providers  will  gradually  phase  out  as  it  is  expected  that  Village  Fund  and  other
village resources will take over the financing role.
150.
Service  provider  rosters. District-based  service  provider  rosters  will  be  established  and
regularly updated, based on the service mapping and provincial roster developed under Activity 2.2.1.
They will draw on resources available in the provincial roster, which will be complemented through a
call  for  expression  of interest  at  district  level.  Interested  service  providers  will  submit  a  standard
application  including  basic  information  about  areas  of  expertise,  the  type  and  cost  of  services  and
their experience (with references). District rosters will seek to enlist: (i) conventional service providers,
or entities providing services as a business or as part of their mandate (such as firms and consultants,
PLUTs111,  P4S,  KADIN);  and  (ii)  unconventional  service  providers,  or  entities  that  are  successful  in
operating a business in a target  value chain  and that  are interested  in  providing  training services or
on-the-job  exposure  to  village  producers  (such  as  cooperatives,  lead  farmers,  KADIN  members…).
BUMDEs could also become a service provider at village level.
151.
Capacity  building  for  service  providers. Capacity building  will  be  provided  to  selected
service  providers  (and  in  particular  BUMDes)  in  specific  areas  of  interest  linked  to  the  target  value
chains (such as postharvest storage and agro-processing, food safety and nutrition or certification) or
to  the  delivery  modalities  that  are  gender-sensitive  and  accommodate  the  needs  of  remote
communities or special socio-economic groups.
Embedded  services. TEKAD  will  also  promote  the  provision  of  embedded  services  by
152.
market  players 
improve  productivity  and  quality  meeting  market
requirements112.  The  international  consulting  firm/consultant  contracted  for  developing  guidelines  for
good  practices  on  contract  farming  will  also  cover  the  promotion  of  embedded  services  and  district
teams will be trained accordingly.
to  village  producers, 
to 
110 Experience  shows  that  when  a  retailer  is  well  trained  to  offer  advice  on  a  product,  and  rates
and timing of application, producers investment decisions are improved.
111 PLUT - Center for Integrated Business Services (CIBS- SMEsCo). Part of a programme of the
Ministry of Cooperatives in assisting cooperatives of small and medium micro businesses to
accelerate the increase in competitiveness, productivity, value added and quality of work.
112 On the model of Ransiki cocoa cooperative (Manokwari) or the approach supported by
WANTANAS (National Defence Council) on sago.
139
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Activity 2.2.4 – Cluster Development
153.
TEKAD  will  support  the  development  of  groups  of  villages  engaged  in  the  production and
marketing  of  the  same  commodity,  or  village  clusters,  with  a  view  to  improve  producers’  market
access, bargaining power and remuneration through stronger organisation, increased quantity, quality
and delivery reliability, and economies of scale. In particular, clusters will help in building up reliable
volumes  of  quality  product,  which  is  the  main  constraint  to  including  small  producers  in  most  value
chains.
Village  clusters  will  be  promoted  building  on  awareness  campaigns  conducted  from  PY2  in
154.
core and cluster villages (see Sub-component 1.1), and with due consideration to anthropological and
socio-cultural context, especially in Papua and West Papua.
155. While  clusters  will  initially  consist  of  group  of  villagers  engaging  in  the  production  and
marketing  of  the  same  commodity,  as  volume  increases  and  village  capacities  in  meeting  market
requirements  develop,  TEKAD  will  provide  support  to  gradually  organise  the  clusters  and  to  set  up
and build the capacities of cluster-based organisations. These could initially be informal organisations,
for example bringing together Village Heads and representatives of BUMDes and other village-based
economic  organisations,  and  organising  their  activities  around  cluster  supply  plans  with  production
and harvesting schedules and in accordance with market requirements. Informal organisations could
in time become registered organisations, for example under the form of a BUMDes Bersamah113.
156.
A detailed approach for cluster development will be developed in PY3 under the responsibility
of  the  NPMU,  building  on  experience in  Indonesia  and  elsewhere114.  Training  will  be  provided  to
District  Implementation  Teams  accordingly,  and  they  will  receive  guidance  and  support  from  the
Provincial Economic Development Expert. In turn, District Marketing Specialists will provide capacity
building  and  technical  assistance  to  villagers,  including  Village  Heads,  BUMDEs  and  village-based
economic organisations and lead farmers. The approach will consider the establishment of a Cluster
Platform.,  that  would  bring  together  cluster  leaders,  facilitators  and  TEKAD  district  staff  as
appropriate. TEKAD will contribute to meeting costs.
Sub-component 2.3 – Financial Services
The  objective  of  the  sub-component  is  to  facilitate  the  access  of  village-based  producers  to
157.
financial  services,  for  the  financing  of  private  assets  and  working  capital,  and  to  foster  savings.
Activities will include the following.
Activity 2.3.1 - Survey on demand and supply of financial services
158.
financial services. It will consist of two parts. A village-based household survey will be carried out to:
A  survey  will  be  organised  in  PY2  in  every  province  to  assess  the  demand  and  supply  of
Identify main sources of incomes, the perception and understanding on access to credit of formal
and informal sources, and savings;
assess  villagers’  main  cost  centres  for  productive  and  non-productive  activities,  including  in
education  and  health,  paying-off  of  debts,  housing  and  renovation,  purchase  of  household
productive  and  non-productive  appliance,  social  and  community  event  participation,  and  other
family projects;
assess  the  demand  of financial  services  related  to  productive  and  non-productive  needs,  with  a
focus  on  productive  financing  for  micro/small  business  start-up  and  expansion  (working  capital
and fixed assets), savings and insurance;
identify formal and informal channels through which villagers currently access financing, including
remittances, value chain finance and informal loans.
159.
Furthermore,  the  survey  will  identify  financial  and  non-financial  services  and  products
(especially in relation to productive activities) offered by financial service providers in the programme
area, and in particular by BRI and BPDs, through physical or digital solutions. A concise questionnaire
will be formulated and distributed to the financial institutions operating in the target districts to obtain
an overall supply profile of rural financial services in the programme area. The questionnaire should
113 Joint BUMDes covering several villages.
114 See for example http://pqpublications.squarespace.com/publications/2014/8/27/moving-together-to-the-
market-the-clustering-approach-to-agr.html.
140




Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
cover the range of services and products offered of financial and non-financial nature, especially the
availability  of  loan  products  tailored  to  different  productive  sectors  and  value  chains  through  both
physical  or  digital  solutions,  including  loan  types  and  purposes,  target  clienteles,  lending  terms
conditions,  sizes and  ceilings,  rescheduling  and  refinancing  modalities,  prepayment  conditions,
collateral  and  guarantee  requirements.  Gaps  will  be  identified,  building  on  the  household  survey
results, as well as opportunities for introducing
160.
The survey will take place in PY 1 and its outcomes will be used to support the design of the
financial  and  digital  education  programme,  socialization,  capacity  building  as  required,  and  product
development  with  partnering  financial  institutions.  It  will  be  carried  out  by  a  service  provider  (a
consultancy  firm  or  a  university/research  institution)  with  experience  in  carrying  grassroots  surveys,
including with constructing sampling frame, training survey supervisors and enumerators, supervising
data collection and entry, performing data analysis, and producing the survey report. The sample size
needs  to  be  statistically  representative  and  in  compliance  with  the  programme  implementation  plan.
The service provider  will be hired by the NPIU and  will be responsible for designing the survey and
implementing the survey, in collaboration with DPIUs. Village Economic Initiatives Advisers will be in
charge of carrying out the village-level household survey, in collaboration with the village government,
and with adequate training from the service provider.
Activity 2.3.2 - Financial and digital education
161.
TEKAD-supported financial and digital education programme will build on:
available material already  developed by OJK115, which  will be assessed and adapted to suit  the
needs  of  TEKAD  target  groups  as revealed  by  the  survey  and  as  required  to  support  the
production and marketing of TEKAD-supported priority products;
OJK’s  know-how  in  relation  to  training  material  adaptation  and  training  logistics  (organization  of
training of trainers, supervision of trainings, trainers’ certification and mobilization).
162.
Financial  education  modules  will  be  made  available  both  through  e-learning  (mobile
application  and  Eastern  Indonesia  Gateway – see  Sub-component  3.1)  and  in  paper  copies,
especially  for  poorly  connected areas.  The  will  broadly  cover:  overall  household  budget  planning;
savings products; loan products, debt management and duties/responsibilities as a borrower; use of
digital  banking;  knowledge  of  other  financial  products  and  services  such  as  money  transfer or
remittances;  basic  financial  management  for  agri-based  activities,  basic  book-keeping,  budget
planning for agri-based activities, and.
Financial  education  will  be  delivered 
facilitators,
163.
BUMDes/cooperatives  staff  and  extension officers,  who  will  be  trained,  possibly  by  OJK-certified
master trainers. Initial training will be followed by regular coaching, in particular through BUMDes and
cooperatives, as well as through partnering financial institutions and their agents in the target districts
(see below). In Papua and West Papua, financial education will be implemented in coordination with
the Family-based approach.
through  village 
from  PY2, 
Activity 2.3.3 - Linking villagers to financial institutions
164.
MoV  has  already  a  MoU  with  BRI  and  many  districts  have  partnerships  with  regional
development  banks  (Bank  Pembangunan  Daerah – BPDs).  Activities  will  therefore  be  developed  in
partnership  with  BRI  (along  a  consolidated  MoU)  and  BPDs  (along  MoUs  to  be  established  at
provincial level). They will include the following.
165.
Increased outreach. TEKAD will support BRI’s and BPDs’ expanded outreach by supporting
existing agents’ networks and providing them with capacity building to suit the needs of TEKAD target
populations.  The  programme  will  finance  tailored  training to  the  agents,  especially  with  regard  to
financial  products  related  to  productive  activities  in  the  target  value  chains.  It  will  also  facilitate
network  expansion  to  improve  access  to  financial  services  in  the  target  areas.  Ways  to  support
BUMDes in becoming bank agents under the current legislation will be explored.
166.
TEKAD  will  encourage  the  banks  to  widen  the  agent  network  by  adopting  non-exclusive
agents  or  brokers,  who  can  work  more  for  the  demand  side  to  negotiate  the  best  deals  for  the
115 Including material developed with SDB and ILO (focusing on specific customer segments such as
housewives, youth, migrant workers).
141


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
borrowers.  Such brokerage  or  agentry  is  a  derived  form  of  either  individual  or  group  lending116.
Borrowers may, on behalf of each individual or in form of borrowing group, communicate their credit
needs and conditions to the broker or agent, who will undertake inquiries on the credit supply side in
search of the best deal. The broker will negotiate the detailed terms and conditions with the lender on
behalf  of  the  represented  borrowers.  The  bank  will  still  lend  directly  to  borrowers  and  the  broker  or
agent may get rewarded in the form of commissions or other means from the borrowing side, or from
both  borrowing  and  lending  parties.  This  in  part  helps  improve  the  lending  cost  efficiency  and
reaching the grassroots-level customers for the lending institutions. As IFAD’s investment concern, it
is  not  the  modality  that  matters,  but  the  effective  credit  access  for  its  target  population  mainly
composed  of  economically  active  men  and  women  belonging  to  different  socio-economic  wealth
categories.
Mobile banking exists in almost all the banks operating in the programme area and it offers a
167.
wide range of services. However, access to mobile banking remains uneven in the rural area, partly
due to the lack of network coverage and education on utilization. While the mobile network could be
improved  quickly,  with  the  ongoing  telecommunication  network  roll  out  and  the  recent  launch  of
Indonesian  telecommunication  satellite,  and  both  are  aimed  to  cover  the  entire  Eastern  Indonesia
including the remote areas. The increasing mobile network capacity and the marginal use  of mobile
banking service by the rural population means the potential of mobile banking may be underexplored
in Eastern Indonesia. Meanwhile,
TEKAD  possible  interventions  aiming  at  facilitating  the  use  of  mobile  banking  will  also  be
168.
considered.  ASBANDA  indicated  that  regional  banks  in  Eastern  Indonesia  would  need  to  upgrade
their  technologies  in  mobile  banking  in  order  to  remain  competitive  in  the  market,  and  technical
assistance could be provided in this respect.
169.
target areas with the economic activities supported by TEKAD and related financial needs.
Socialisation/capacity building with BRI/BPDs will be organised to familiarise branches in the
170.
Product development. TEKAD will provide on-demand technical assistance to develop new
or adapting existing financial products that meet village producer’s needs in the target value chains.
This could include:
Revised procedures/lending modalities, for example: revised loan repayment schedules meeting
agriculture production cycle; alternatives to classic collaterized  loan financing such as cash-flow
based  lending;  or  collateral  substitutes  for  low  risk-return  loans  (cashflow  short-term  loans  for
productive  purposes,  mutual  guarantee  and  third-party  guarantee,  or  requirement  to  complete
financial education modules for accessing lending;
Savings  to  loan  products, whereby  villagers  can  save  and  use  their  accumulated  savings  as
collateral to  access  loan  resources.  All  of  the  participants  in  the  financial  and  digital  education
programme  will  be  required  to  open  a  specific  saving  account  at  one  of  the  partnering  financial
institutions  and  make  regular  deposits  during  his/her  training  period.  This  mandatory  approach
should  instil  a  savings  culture  the  participants.  The  accumulated  savings  could  be  used  as
collateral against loans extended by the partnering financial institution;
 Warehouse  receipt  financing,  whereby  farmers  to  defer  the  time  of  selling  their  production  until
market prices are higher and yet accessing a loan right after harvest, by storing their production
into a warehouse co-managed with the bank and using the stored production as collateral against
the loan. This product is meant to facilitate access to loans for the production of crops that have
significant  price  variation  depending  on  the  time  of  selling.  The  bank  would  require  that  the
warehouse be independently controlled, with recognized quality of inventory that could be quickly
convertible into liquidity or with transferable ownership in case of default;
Receivables/non-invoice 
into  contractual
arrangements with producers to access financial resources so they can timely pay their suppliers.
These instruments aim at enabling the bank to advance funds for paying producers on the basis
of: (i)  invoices  (receivable  financing),  or  (ii)  bills  of  delivery  signed  by  the  buyer,  until  the  buyer
financing, which  will  enable  buyers  entering 
116 Good practices have been recorded in IFAD-assisted RF projects in Bangladesh and China and they are still
worthy being recaptured, and maybe replicated.
142



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
has  effectively  processed  payment.  Receivable  financing  and  bills  of  delivery  financing  have
already been successfully tested by financial institutions in Indonesia (BRI and BNI);
Tripartite  agreement  financing, which  could  be  promoted  together  with  farming  contracts.  It  is
based  on  current  practices  among  some  of  the  financial  institutions  operating  in  Indonesia  (BNI
and  BRI).  Instead  of  extending  a  large  number  of  micro  and  small  loans  to  smallholders,  a
financial  institution  will  lend  the  same  amount  to  a  lead  farmer  or  a  buyer,  usually  based  on  a
contract between the lead farmer/buyer and smallholders. The lead farmer/buyer will use the loan
proceeds to purchase the equipment, material and inputs needed by the smallholders. At harvest
time,  the  organisation/buyer  will  pay  back  the  loan  to  the  financial  institution  by  withholding  a
percentage of the purchase price of produce delivered by smallholders. This mechanism can be
used until smallholders form a legal entity (cooperative or association) and have direct access to
loan  funds  from  a  financial  institution.  Contracting  farmers/buyers  will  be  identified  in  target
districts/provinces  through  the  mapping  exercise  at  programme  onset,  as  well  as  information
meetings between buyers and young farmers, to be arranged by the DPIU.
171.
Linking  village-based  economic  organisations  to  financial  institutions. Building  on  the
mapping  and  capacity  assessment  of  village-based  business  organisations  (Sub-component  2.2),
TEKAD, through its team of Financial Services Experts, will support the linking of eligible (i.e. meeting
minimal  performance  criteria  and  legally  recognised)  existing  organisations  (mainly  cooperatives)  to
the partner  financial  institutions,  and  will  provide  them  with  capacity  building  as  required.  Should
current legal provisions evolve, BUMDes might also benefit from this activity.
Activity 2.3.4 – Value chain financing
172.
The  promotion  of  value  chain  financing can  help  the  target  value  chains  become  more
inclusive, and make resources available from both banking and non-banking sources for village-based
organized  producers.  The  viability  of  value  chain  financing  depends  on  knowledge,  data  availability
and intelligence, and its financing efficiency and risk reduction on strong commitments of chain actors.
In  the  context  of  TEKAD  interventions,  the  precondition  will  be  the  connection  and  engagement  of
programme beneficiaries in the form of organized production or post-production as individual farmers,
farmer groups, production cooperatives into the identified value chains.
Building  on  value  chain  analysis  and  on  market  arrangements  developed  under  Sub-
173.
component  2.2,  TEKAD  will  promote  alternative  financing  sources  to  loan  banking,  which  could
include the following:
Advanced financing, whereby a buyer will advance either inputs in kind to the producers, or funds
to cover working capital needs, and will be repaid in kind (usually) or in cash at harvest time along
pre-agreed  terms  and  conditions.  Advanced  financing  can  be  provided  either  directly  by  the
buyer/input  supplier  or  through  a  bank  loan.  This  has  been  popular  in  Eastern  Indonesia  for
export markets in particular, usually under contract farming arrangements;
Input supplier credit is a similar arrangement implemented with input suppliers, whereby inputs in
kind  are  provided  to  producers  on  loan,  either  directly  or  through  a  buyer,  and  paid  back  at
harvest time.
174.
supported to assess opportunities, negotiate arrangements and ensuring compliance by villagers.
Such models will be developed by in partnership with BUMDes or cooperatives, which will be
Implementation arrangements for Component 2
The  implementation  of  Sub-Component  2.1  will  be  led  by  the  TEKAD-financed  District
175.
Implementation Team117 comprised of: (i) a District Coordinator, a District Marketing Specialist and an
MIS/M&E  coordinator;  (ii)  Village  Governance  Facilitators,  who  will  support  the  implementation  of
activities  under  Sub-component  1.1118 and  will  work in  close  collaboration  with  sub-district  Village
Community Empowerment Facilitator119 under sub-district Community Empowerment department; and
(iii)  Economic  Initiatives  Advisors,  who  will  support  the  implementation  of  activities  under  Sub-
component  1.2120 and  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with  existing  district  and  sub-district  staff  as
117 Budgeted under sub-component 2.1 – District Support for Village Economic Development.
118 One Village Governance Facilitator for 4 villages, gradually phasing out – see Annex 5.
119 Pendamping Desa Pemberdayaan – PDP.
120 One Economic Initiatives Facilitator for 4 villages, gradually phasing out – see Annex 5.
143



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
described  above,  including  Field  Agriculture  Extensionists  under  the  district  Agriculture  department.
These  will  be  redeployed  to  ensure  that  their  skills  match  the  target products  selected  by  village
clusters. To this effect, an MoU will be signed between MoV and MoA. TEKAD-financed services will
gradually  decrease  so  that  by  the  end  of  programme  support,  farmers’  access  to  services  will  be
ensured  by  local  players  using  local  resources.  The  budget  for  this  component  includes  financial
support to contribute to the operational costs of Village Community Empowerment Facilitators (PDP),
Village  Economic  Development  Facilitators  (PED),  Appropriate  Technology  Facilitators  (TTG)  and
Field Agriculture Extensionists.
176.
Each district team will be responsible for: (i) forging strong relationships between TEKAD and
the  District  Head;  (ii)  engaging  with  the  services  of  district  and  provincial  technical  agencies  and
relevant private sector service providers; (iii) coordinating with existing market players and developing
links with new market players; (iv) supervising the performance of the Village Governance Facilitators
and  Economic  Initiatives  Advisors;  (vii)  ensuring  a  functional  MIS/M&E system  operates  in  the
villages;  between  participating  villages,  sub-district  heads  and  the  district  team;  and  (viii)  ensuring
TEKAD is linking to other relevant agency programmes being implemented in the district. The TEKAD
District Coordinator will collaborate with and report to district government leadership and agencies – in
particular the District Head and the Director of Bappeda.
177.
The TEKAD district manager will collaborate with and report to district government leadership
and  agencies – in  particular the  District  Mayor  (Bupati)  and  the  Director  of  Bappeda. While  existing
village fund reporting includes the Mayor, the district coordinator will ensure that TEKAD activities in
accelerating  economic  development  are  regularly  reported  to  the  Mayor  and  that as  a  financing
partner, she/he is regularly consulted on matters of direction and content. TEKAD recognizes the role
of  MOV  P3MD  facilitators,  and  especially  the  district-based  Village  Economic  Development  (PED)
facilitators  who  will  be  an  important  support  resource  for  the  TEKAD  sub-district  based  economic
empowerment facilitators.
178.
TEKAD will deliver its support using a team approach, with coordination and management at
district  level  and  service  delivery  at  sub-district  level.  Each  district  team  will  be made  up  of  a  well-
qualified121,  full  time  manager,  supported  by  an  MIS  coordinator  and  a  Market  Development
coordinator  and  of  sub-district  facilitators  (Governance  and  Business  Initiatives)  that  will  provide
support  to  village-level  and  will  be  based  at  sub-district  level122.  The  sub-district  facilitators  will  be
locally  recruited  facilitators  and  will  work  as  a  team  but  with  decreasing  intensity  and  eventually  be
replaced by PED and P3D facilitators.
179.
The  TEKAD  District  Coordinator  will  collaborate  with  and  report  to  district  government
leadership and agencies – in particular the District Head (Bupati) and the Director of Bappeda. S/he
will ensure that TEKAD activities are regularly reported to the District Head and that s/he is regularly
consulted  on  matters of  direction  and  content. MoV  P3MD  facilitators,  and  especially  the  district-
based  Village  Economic  Development  (PED)  facilitators,  will  be  an  important  support  resource  and
their capacities will be built so that they take fully take over from TEKAD-financed facilitators at project
end.
180.
Sub-component  2.2  mapping  studies  will  take  place  in  PY  1.  The  Market  opportunities  and
value  chain  analysis  will  be  conducted  under  the  same  contract  financed  by  the  IFAD  grant  for  the
preparation of the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages (see Component 3). It will be updated
by the end of PY3, by  Provincial Economic Development Experts and District Marketing Specialists,
with  support  from  technical  assistance.  Services  mapping  and  BUMDes  assessment  will  each  be
carried out by a team of five province consultants (or provincial universities), under the leadership of
an  international  consultant.  The  Climate  risk  and  vulnerability  assessment  will  be  carried  out  by  an
international service provider, in collaboration with provincial universities.
181.
The implementation of activities under Access to markets and Access to Services will be led
by  TEKAD  Marketing  Specialists  at  district  level  and  Economic  Development  Expert  at  provincial
level,  with  technical  assistance  from  the  national  TEKAD  Economic  Development  Specialist.
Together,  they  will  also  design  and  provide  capacity  building  programmes  to  local  market  agents,
building on the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages developed under Component 3.
121 Ideally a Bachelor Degree level but minimum High School graduate.
122 The number of sub-district facilitators will vary according to the number of village clusters per district.
144
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
182.
Sub-component 2.3 will be implemented by a Financial Services Team composed of national-
level Senior Financial Services Expert and a Financial Services Exert in every Provincial Programme
Implementation Unit. In close consultation with OJK and ASBANDA, the Financial Services Team will
be  responsible  for:  (i)  assisting  financial  institutions  to  design  and  implement  new  products  and
services  as  well  as  to  adapt  their  current  products  and  services;  (ii)  providing  training  to  financial
institutions’ staff; and (iii) training TEKAD Economic Initiatives Advisors and their district counterparts
on basic assessment of financial needs and on basic financial advisory services.
183.
outsourced to a consulting firm or university.
The  Survey  on  demand  and  supply  of  financial  services  will  take  place  in  PY  2  and  will  be
184.
Existing  financial  education  modules  will  be  adapted  by  with  support  from  a  specialised
consultant,  possibly in partnership  with OJK. In addition, the  programme will closely  work whenever
possible  with  the Tim  Percepatan  Akses  Keuangan  Daerah (Regional  Finance  Acceleration  Team -
TPAKD)  developed  by  OJK, which  aims  at encouraging  economic  development  and  community
empowerment  through  improving  SME  and  communities  access  to  finance  across  the  country.
International technical assistance will be hired to assist the Financial Services Team in: (i) identifying
new products and services that could be carried out with BRI and the BPDs, building on lessons from
other countries; (ii) assisting in the preparation and negotiation of MoUs with BRI and the BPDs; (iii)
assisting in preparing training modules.
COMPONENT
DEVELOPMENT
3
–
INNOVATION,
LEARNING AND POLICY
185.
Component  3  has  two  sub-components:  (i) Innovation,  Learning  and  Inspiration;  and    (ii)
Policy Development and Institution Building. While it will mainly be implemented at the national level,
it  will  complement  and  support  activities  carried  out  at  village  and  district  level,  respectively  under
Component 1 and Component 2.
Sub-component 3.1 – Information, Inspiration and Communication
186.
This sub-component will be implemented at the national level and will aim at: (i) setting up an
open  Management  Information  System  (MIS);  (ii)  promoting  digital  solutions  (online  platform  and
applications)  and  the  use  of  social  networks  for  enhanced  transparency  and  accountability  and  for
facilitating  wide  access  to  information  and  knowledge;  (iii)  documenting  innovation,  good  practices
and successful models; (iv) inspiring and motivating  village stakeholders, and  in  particular  youth, by
showcasing 
internet
connectivity.
innovations  and  successful  achievements;  and  (vi) 
improving  village’s 
The expected  outcome is  that  an  enabling  policy,  institutional  and  media  environment
187.
facilitates  village  economic  development  that  builds  on  local  opportunities  and  leverages  the  Village
Fund resources. Main indicators are: (i) districts have plans for continued implementation of TEKAD
approach;  (ii)  innovative,  replicable  models  for  supporting  village  economic  development  leveraging
Village  Fund  and  village  resources;  (iii)  policy/regulatory  instruments  proposed  to  policy  makers  for
approval, ratification or amendment.
Activity 3.1.1 – Management Information System
188.
A  web-based Management  Information  System  (MIS),  which  will  be  compatible  with MoV’s
systems  and  will  build on  the  Village  Information  System  developed  under  Component  1, will  track
and regularly  update  gender-disaggregated financial  and  technical  data  on  programme  outputs  and
outcomes, lessons learnt and good practices. The main purpose of these tools is to continuously keep
track of programme implementation progress. This function will allow TEKAD stakeholders to achieve
better results and, especially for the programme implementation team, to be held accountable.
189.
The  MIS  will  display  weekly-updated  dashboards, showing  progress  on  key  outputs  and
objectives,  profiling  DPIU  and  PPIU  performance  and  showing  progress  towards  meeting  key
programme  indicators.  There  should  be  a  feature  to  export  or  print  the  results  displayed  on
dashboards.
190.
The  website  should  be  developed  using  notable  Web  Application  Framework,  for  example
Laravel  or  Symfony,  and  have  adequate  cyber  security  protection  to  protect  from  typical  cyber-
attacks.  While  TEKAD  will  rely  on  GoI  plans  and  resources  to  improve  connectivity  in  eastern
145
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Indonesia (see Activity 3.1.5), due to limited connectivity issue in TEKAD target areas, it is suggested
the online platform to be designed for low-band with connection in mind. There are growing numbers
of internet mobile phone users123, for that reason the website is recommended to be mobile-friendly.
Due  to  affordability  factor,  Android-based  gadgets  and  mobile  phone  are  considerably  popular  in
Indonesia124.  Therefore  it  is  recommended  that  mobile  applications  only  use  the  Android  operating
system. Both website and mobile app should embrace appealing User Interface design and intuitive to
navigate. Due to rapid dynamic progress in information technology sector, there is probability to have
better alternative technology during the time this programme is being implemented. If this occurrence
happens, the NPIU is authorized to decide what is best for the TEKAD programme.
191.
The M&E tools will be also available in mobile application, this to accommodate the TEKAD
facilitators  who  dynamically  work  on  the  field.  In  areas  without  internet  connectivity,  this  app  will  be
able to save the newly inputted data into the local storage first and will continue to sync the data to
the  cloud  server  in  the  background  process  whenever  internet  networks  are  detected  available
(enabling  asynchronous  process).  Regarding  data  validation,  the  data  submitted  by  the  TEKAD
facilitators will first need verification from higher authority (DPIU, PPIU or NPIU), after which it will be
displayed in the M&E system.
192.
Furthermore,  the  use  of  mobile  applications like  WhatsApp,  Facebook  and  Instagram  will
facilitate  the  exchange  of  information  throughout  wide  programme  target  areas  and  will  foster  team
building.
Activity 3.1.2 – Eastern Indonesia Gateway
193.
An online platform will be developed to engage with large target audiences, including TEKAD
stakeholders in the five provinces and interested village and other players nation-wide. It will connect
village players to knowledge and innovation, as well as services and markets. The platform will be in
the form of both a website and applications, and  will give access to TEKAD-generated material and
information, but will also direct users to existing websites that would be of interest for the planning and
promotion of village economic development in Eastern Indonesia. A mapping of relevant websites125
will be carried out as part of the platform design in PY2, with a major objective to avoid duplications
and develop original content only where it can bring added value to the existing.
194.
Learning and village innovation; and (iii) Connection to other services.
The  following  main  functionalities  will  be  developed:  (i)  TEKAD  online  presence;
(ii)
195.
TEKAD  online  presence. This  will  aim  to  inform  related  stakeholders  and  public  about  the
(i)  News,
progress  and  achievements  of  the  TEKAD  programme.  It  will  contain  (but  not  limited):
newly  received  information  related  to  TEKAD  recent  activities,  achievements  and  outcomes;  (ii)
Events, highlighting upcoming events, workshops or awards; (iii) Photos & Videos, the documentation
of interesting moments during TEKAD implementation; (iv) Other media, infographics and other media
format  related  to  TEKAD  programme.  This  feature  is  expected  to  be  updated  weekly  under  the
leadership of the NPIU KM and Policy Development Expert. The website visitor should be offered to
stay  in  touch  with  the  programme  updates,  either  through  web  notifications  or  newsletter
subscriptions.
According to the latest data (2018), averagely, Indonesian people spend 3 hours 36 minutes
196.
daily  on  social  media  and  instant  messenger126.  In  response  to  that,  TEKAD  will  also  expand  its
presence  on  popular  social  media,  specifically  on  Youtube,  Facebook  and  Instagram.  Those  social
networks are the top social media among Indonesia netizen. This action hopefully will widen the reach
of the programme awareness. The social media accounts are suggested to be created and updated
by the M&E specialist.
123 From Statista (2019). Link https://www.statista.com/statistics/309017/indonesia-mobile-phone-internet-
user-penetration/
124 Android OS dominating with 93.5% according to Statcounter (2019). Link: http://gs.statcounter.com/os-
market-share/mobile/indonesia
125 Such as GoDesa and other digital applications to be developed by P3PD, as well as online marketplaces with
which MoV already has a partnership.
126 From Digital 2019 Indonesia by We Are Social. Link: https://www.slideshare.net/DataReportal/digital-2019-
indonesia-january-2019-v01.
146
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
197.
Learning  and  innovation. Learning  material  will  be  posted  on  the  Eastern  Indonesia
Gateway  and  will  also  be  available  offline  and  in  printed form.  This  will  include  the  Orientation  and
Capacity  Building  Packages  developed  under Subcomponent  3.2  (see  Activity  3.2.1),  other
knowledge products, such as guidelines, mapping studies and surveys, and information about TEKAD
achievements and outcomes.
198.
The platform will also feature innovative practices developed in the target areas in relation to
products  and  activities  supported  by  TEKAD,  building  on  the  Village  Innovation  Programme
methodology.  Entries,  enriched  by  photo/videos  and  relevant  data,  will  be  submitted  by  district
M&E/MIS Coordinators and reviewed by the  Provincial M&/KM Officer and the  NPIU  KM  and Policy
Development Expert,  along  guidelines  that  will  be  developed  by  the  NPIU  KM  and  Policy
Development Expert at project onset.
Aside  from  the  province  identity,  these  stories  should  also  be  tagged  with  their  respective
199.
ecological condition (lowland, highland, dryland and coastal). This will help visitor to sort stories which
are relevant to their village situation. In the end of each case, there would be contact information, so
those  who  are  interested  could  follow  up  and  learn  more  through  further  communications.  Videos,
graphic  media  and  social  networks  will  also  be  widely  used  for  documenting  and  dissemination
innovations.
200.
Moreover,  the  platform  could  be  used  to  develop  communities  of  interest  among  staff  (and
possibly  also  other  TEKAD  stakeholders). Communities  of  interest  gather  professionals  that  share
similar  interests  and  that  interact  to  learn  together  and  from  each  other,  on  a  voluntary  basis.  A
community  of  interest  could  be  formed,  for  example,  with  village  facilitators  interested  in  meeting,
discussing and  exchanging  information  via  the platform and/or  messaging  tools. Communities  of
interest  were  successfully  set  up  in  IFAD-financed  CCDP  and  were  an  effective  tool  to  build  staff
motivation, learning  across the five  provinces, and sense of belonging. This feature  will be built  into
the Eastern Indonesia Gateway if there is a potential interest from specific groups of staff.
201.
Connection to other services. Building on the mapping of websites, links will be established
to  connect  visitors  of  the  Eastern  Indonesia  Gateway  to  existing  platforms  that  could  be  of  interest.
Some potential links that are already identified for now are GoDesa and Akademi Desa 4.0. GoDesa,
is an online platform currently being developed by MoV with support from World-Bank financed P3PD,
which  will  be  available  in  mobile  application  that  integrate  nine  village  related  services,  including:
village  facilitators  performance  monitoring,  marketplace  for  TA  provider,  chatroom  for  villages,
payment  gateway  for  services,  online  courses  (Akademi  Desa  4.0),  peer  to  peer  village  innovation
learnings, and other features127. Akademi Desa 4.0, is an online course for capacity building targeting
MoV’s  facilitators.  Although  it  already  run  at  limited  scope,  most  of  the  content  will  be  developed  in
2020  through  P3PD.  Links  to  marketplaces,  in  particular  those  with  which  MoV  already  has  an
agreement, will also be proposed.
Activity 3.1.3 – Learning and Village Innovation
202.
TEKAD  will  facilitate  the  identification,  documentation  and  dissemination  of  innovative
practices  developed  in  the  target  areas  in  relation  to  products  and  activities  supported  by  the
programme.  A  simple  system,  along  with  guidelines,  will  be  designed  by  the  KM  and  Policy
Development  Specialist  in  PY2  with  support  from  a  consultant,  building  on  World  Bank-financed
Village  Innovation  Programme  methodology,  along  which  more  than  200  stories  of  inspiring  village
innovation were collected nationwide128 and each village could learn from what is being successfully
implemented  in  other  villages.  Building  on  the  guidelines,  Provincial  M&E/KM  Officers  and  district-
based  M&E/MIS  Coordinator  will  train  village  facilitators  to  assess  and  document  village-based
innovations  that  contribute  to  enhanced  production,  processing  and  marketing,  including  through
Village Awards (see Activity 3.1.4)
203.
Innovations will be disseminated through:
The Eastern Indonesia Gateway: there will be a dedicated feature for displaying innovations and
they  should  also  feature  on  the  programme  social  media  accounts  such  as  Facebook  and
Instagram;
127 From ESMF P3PD (2019). Link: https://lumbungfile.kemendesa.go.id/index.php/s/dw8sJy99QApxQeX.
128 See Inovasi Desa. Link: https://inovasidesa.kemendesa.go.id/
147

Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Village competitions and awards, which will receive media coverage and be showcased through
videos posted on the platform (see activity 3.1.3);
Eastern  Indonesia  Youth  Ambassadors,  who will  have  access  to  innovation  through  their
bootcamp (see Activity 3.1.3);
The  thematic  KKN  programme,  whereby  university  students  will  be  exposed  to  innovative
approaches happening in  the  villages  through  sharing  sessions  with  TEKAD  facilitators  (see
Activity 3.1.3);
Study  tours: they  will  be  organised  for  villagers  within  districts  (under  Sub-component  1.2)  and
across  districts  of  the  same  province  to  facilitate  peer-to-peer  learning.  Study  tours  will  also  be
organised  for  BUMDes  managers  to  expose  them  to  leading  BUMDes  in  each  province.  Each
year,  the  PPIU  will  choose  one  or  two  leading  BUMDes  to  be  visited.  Study  tours  will  be
organised under the overall responsibility of the Provincial M&E/KM Officer, in collaboration with
District M&E/MIS Coordinators. The latter will make proposals as to BUMDes/village groups worth
visiting in their district, along pre-agreed selection criteria (which could be revised every year) on
an annual basis;
Innovation fairs: this activity builds on the good achievements from the previous VIP, particularly
the Bursa Inovasi Desa (Village Innovation Exchange Forum). Under TEKAD, it will emphasize on
innovations  that  could  contribute  to  village  economic  outcomes.  The  innovation  fair  will  be
conducted  at  district  level,  inviting  two  representatives,  one  man  and  one  woman,  of  each
participating TEKAD village in that district, as well as TEKAD facilitators. There will be display of
replicable  innovations,  the  participants  then  choose  what  kind  of  innovation  that  will  try  to  be
adopted  in  their  village,  after  that  consulting  it  with  the  TEKAD  facilitator  in  site.  The  TEKAD
facilitator will document this commitment, and will help to assist the implementation in the village;
Printed material: every year there will be booklets and other kind of printed materials showcasing
the successful village’s innovative practice.
Activity 3.1.4 – Inspiration and Motivation
204.
The main objective of this set of activities is to inspire villagers in developing rewarding and
sustainable economic activities adopting various innovative approaches. Motivating the youth through
involvement and recognition will also be central theme to this. During the activities, seeking for media
coverage  and  posting  on  social  media  is  encouraged  to  reach  broader  audience.  To  support
achieving the objective, the activities will comprise of:
(i) Eastern Indonesia Youth Ambassador;
(ii) Village awards; and (iii) Thematic KKN.
205.
Eastern  Indonesia  Youth  Ambassadors. This  set  of  activities  aims  to  change  the
agriculture  narrative  in  the  young  people  perception  so  that  agriculture  is  not  perceived  as  a  dirty,
non-innovative and poorly remunerative job, but one that can support good livelihoods and bring good
returns, integrate innovation and technology, and generate positive social and environmental impact.
The  Eastern  Indonesia  Youth  Ambassadors  (EIYA)  programme  will  show  opportunities  for  young
people  in  the  commodity  producing  (agriculture,  aquaculture,  fishery and  livestock),  processed
product  (food,  herbs,  traditional  woven  fabrics  and  other  non-food)  and  ecotourism  business
(hospitality related) based on their village potential.
206.
Starting  in  PY3,  each  year  there  will  be  two  young  people  from  each  TEKAD  province,  a
young  woman  and  a  young  man,  competitively  selected  to  be  the  ambassadors  (total  10
ambassadors).  These  ambassadors  should  represent  different  socio-economic  profiles,  gender  as
well  diversity  of  economic  activities.  The  selected  young  ambassadors’  responsibilities  are:  (i)
showcasing their experience and strive for scaling-up their business; (ii) inspiring local youth through
speaking  engagements,  media  coverage  and  social  media;  (iii)  supporting  village  economic
transformation particularly with TEKAD programme activities.
The  main  guideline  for  EIYA  will  be  designed  by  a  national  consultant  with  experience  in
207.
setting  entrepreneurship  programme  at  national  level.  The  consultant  will  develop  the  concept,
outlining  how  it  would  inspire  the  youth  and  also envision  implementation  this  competitive  event  for
future years. Regarding naming, it is not mandatory using the word ‘ambassador’ - using ‘heroes’ or
other term is a possibility to be explored further by the consultant to brand the event. Implementation
will be carried out by a service provider specializing in event organization, who will be responsible for
arrangement of the following activities:
148






Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Programme  preparation:  there  will  be  meeting  with  the  PPIU,  discussing  how  the  event  will  be
organized, deciding the  yearly theme and how to reach the potential participant. The results will
be  communicated  with  the  DPIU  and  TEKAD  facilitators.  The  materials  for  the  visual
communication and identity for the event will also do designed in this phase.
Open  submission:
there  will  be  communication  effort  using  local  media  placement,  printed
posters, social media and instant messenger to target  young entrepreneurs to participate  in this
event. TEKAD facilitators will inform this open submission to their villages of operation, promote
the event, describe the benefits of being chosen  as ambassador, explain the terms and criteria.
Furthermore, facilitators should identify potential candidates, thus encourage them to participate,
including  young  women  entrepreneurs.  The  TEKAD  facilitator  is  suggested  to  identify  local
entrepreneur  communities  (such  as  HIPMI129,  Tangan  Di  Atas130,  etc.)  and  ask  them  to
disseminate  the  information  through  their  members.  The  interested  youth  could  submit  their
application through the facilitator directly, or through online form accessible in the online platform
(see Activity 3.1.2). Some criteria for the participants are (but not limited): (i) has been running the
business  (agriculture  commodities,  processed  product  or  eco-tourism)  for  at  least  2  years;  (ii)
business  is  operated  in  or  sourcing  form  (TEKAD  target)  villages;  (iii)  maximum  35  years  old
(iv) describe what impact they would make if they are chosen as youth
during registering; and
ambassadors.  In  this  open  submission  phase,  it  is  expected  minimum  total  250  applications
submitted from all TEKAD provinces;
Participant  selection: the  service  provider  together  with  PPIUs  will  screen  the  applicants  until
there  are  10  candidates  from  each  province.  The  next  stage  of  the  review  will  be  done  by a
committee at the national level, consisting of representatives from MoV, NPIU and youth related
NGO(s),  selecting  four  candidates  from  each  province  to  be  finalist.  The  20  finalists  should
include 50% women;
Bootcamp  and  winner  announcement: the  5-days bootcamp  will  be  held  in  one  of  the  TEKAD
provinces and move to a different TEKAD province every year. The service provider will arrange
the  itineraries  of  the  finalists,  plan  the  agenda,  prepare  the  event  logistics,  and  arrange  the
resource  persons  for  the  bootcamp.  The  finalists  will  be  given  leadership  training,  innovative
appropriate  technology,  knowledge  to  scale-up  their  business,  information  about  TEKAD
programme and how they could make contribution in it. The resource person is recommended to
have  reputation  in  the  national  level  and  strongly  advised  to  having  knowledge  the  Eastern
Indonesia  context,  particularly  in  terms  of  business  development  challenges.  A  site  visit  to  local
successful agri-related business and ecotourism is suggested to be included in the agenda. In the
last  day,  all  participants  will  be  presenting  their  business  plan  to  scale-up  and  how  they  would
make impact on villages. It is suggested to make this final pitch event open for public, also inviting
media and local university students to attend. To help organize this event, the service provider is
allowed  to  recruit  volunteers,  possibly  from  the  local  university  students  or  youth  community,  in
hope  they  will  also  be  inspired.  The  judges  that  consist  of  resource  persons  from  the  hosting
province entrepreneurial committee and local universities will be composed of 50% women. It will
finally select 2 from each province to be selected as winners, making total 10 youth ambassadors
selected. The expected output of the event will be 100 participants attending the event, 5 media
coverages (including online media), and at least 50 social media posts.
Roadshow: this  roadshow  will  be  taking  place  in  each  TEKAD  province,  promoting  the  winners
selected from that province. The purpose of this phase is to inspire young people not to migrate
and motivate them to start or join economic initiatives in their village, which is the essence of this
whole set of EIYA programme. Therefore, the speaking engagements should be held in the areas
with  high  youth  migration  rate,  targeting  youth  community,  landless  youth,  high  schoolers  and
university  students  as  the  event  audience.  During  the  speaking  engagement,  the  ambassadors
should also offer help as mentor to those who interested to start a business. The output expected
from  each  province  are  at  minimum  500  youth  exposed  with  the  events,  covered  in  5  media
(including online media), reaching 10,000 media audience.
Follow  up:
to  reach  wider  audience,  videos  highlighting  the  winners  will  be  produced  and
published  by  another  service  provider,  specialized  on  videography.  One  video  will  feature  2
129 Himpunan Pengusaha Muda Indonesia (Association of Indonesia Young Businessperson).
130 One of the biggest entrepreneur community in Indonesia. Visit www.tangandiatas.com/
149






Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
ambassadors from same province, in total there will be 5 videos to cover all winners, each year.
The  video  will  be  around  3  minutes,  introducing  also  sharing  the  ambassadors  entrepreneurial
life,  and  most  importantly  sending  message  about  plenty  opportunities  to  be  explored  in  the
village and TEKAD programme are ready to help those youth villagers who interested. This video
service  provider  also  responsible  to  push  the  total 5  published  videos  to  have  at  least  37,000
viewers (0.3% of the total population of TEKAD provinces) at the first month after published. Not
only  Youtube,  the  videos  could  be  distributed  on  Facebook  video,  Instagram  TV,  and  instant
messenger. Aside from video, TEKAD facilitators should follow up and assist the ambassadors on
implementing their  plan to  develop their business and involved  in economic initiative  on TEKAD
villages.
208.
Village awards. To appreciate innovative individual and collective economic initiative efforts
of villages, BUMDes or cooperatives, TEKAD will set yearly awards. This also as a mean to motivate
and  inspire  action  for  the  other  stakeholder  involved.  The  awards  will  try  to  recognize  the  finest
achievement  in  the  form  of  these  categories:  (i)  Village  producers  who  implemented  innovative
approach  on  agriculture  or  aquaculture;  (ii)  BUMDes  or  cooperative,  that  contribute  significant
economic  revenue  to  their  village  in  sustainable  manner;  (iii)  Village  best  collective  efforts  to  make
inclusive village economic transformation happen, i.e. showing impact on village households, women
and  youth;  and  (iv)  village  facilitators  and  village  cadres  with  innovative  facilitation  approaches  and
highest adoption rates by both women and men. This will be achieved through the following steps:
Nomination  and  selection: nominations  will  come  from  TEKAD  facilitators,  submitting  through
online form available at the Eastern Indonesia Gateway platform, based on criteria such as (but
not  limited):  adoption  of  innovative  technologies,  generated  benefits,  social  and  environmental
impact.  Nominations  entries  will  be  reviewed  at  the  district  and  then  provincial  level  to  be  final
reviewed  and  decided.  There  will  be  one  winner  per  nominees  for  each  district,  and  it  will  be
announced in the provincial based awarding event.
Awarding: awarding events will be prepared and organized by a service provider in each province,
inviting  all  the  awardees  as  well  as  media.  This  event  and  winner  will  also  be  communicated
through  the Eastern  Indonesia  Gateway.  This  promotion  will  also  cover  information  regarding
replicability  and  requirements,  including  with  regard  to  skills,  access  to  finance  or  business
development.  From  each  awarding  event,  the  expected output  is 3  media  coverages (including
online media outlet) and 30 social media posts.
Video publication: to inspire wider target groups, there will be short video produced by a service
provider. The national M&E specialist  will pick one of the best from each category  which  will  be
produced by  a service  provider. The video  will be  around  3 minutes long, highlighting the effort,
the innovative approach and the inspiring results of each category. This video service provider will
also responsible to drive the total 4 published videos to have at least 25,000 viewers (0.2% of the
total population of TEKAD provinces) at the first month after published.
209.
Thematic  KKN. Kuliah  Kerja  Nyata (KKN)  is  a  university  programme  across  Indonesia  that
links academic study with the practical experience of community service. Multi-disciplinary groups of
about  10  students  stay  in  a  village  for  one  to  two  months  and  are  expected  to  make  a  positive
contribution to the village by supporting community activities meeting community needs and related to
infrastructure,  education,  religion,  economy,  environment,  social  and  culture.  Each  group  is
supervised  by  a  teacher  and  KKN  manager  that  regularly  visit  the  group. Most  of  Indonesia  higher
education  institution  have  KKN  programme  during  semester  break.  Most  universities  deploying  their
KKN students between July to August.
210.
KKN  Thematic  has  the  same  organization  but  focuses  on  a  specific  theme  (for  example
promoting good practices for coffee production), upon request from a Dinas or other institution. VDP
co-financed  this  programme  in  West  Papua  with  excellent  impact  on  agriculture  production.  This
thematic  KKN  is  considered  as a  strategic vehicle  to  support  deliver  TEKAD  mission  in the  target
villages.  During  the  programme,  the  students  could  be  empowered  as  helper  or  extension  of  the
TEKAD facilitators in village level.
211.
provinces that have KKN programme, as shown in Table 6.
TEKAD  will  make  partnership  with  state-owned  universities  (including  polytechnics)  in  the  5
150



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
NTT
Universitas Nusa
Cendana, Kupang
Table 6 – Eligible universities for TEKAD-supported KKN programme
North Maluku
Universitas Khairun,
Ternate
Maluku
Universitas
Pattimura, Ambon
West Papua
Universitas Papua,
Manokwari
Politeknik
Pembangunan
Pertanian
Manokwari
Papua
Universitas
Cendrawasih, Jayap
ura
Universitas
Musamus Merauke
212.
Every year, the representatives of those universities will be invited to the meeting with NPIU
and MoV,  with the purpose to have agreement on: (i) the universities will accommodate the TEKAD
agenda to their thematic KKN; and (ii) agreed on the number of students, the amount of subsidy, and
the designated villages. TEKAD expected to support around 300 KKN students per year from each of
the seven universities, and will subsidize up to 50% for the KKN students living cost and operational
cost that deployed at TEKAD villages. The target villages selection should be aligned with the TEKAD
village support phase, and for the village that had already visited by KKN students, will not be chosen
again in the future year.
213.
Before the students are deployed to the villages, there is in-class learning session to prepare
the  KKN  students.  The  university  will  arrange  the  schedule  and  TEKAD  District  Coordinators  will
come and give information about TEKAD programme, the profiles of target villages, expected TEKAD
thematic  KKN  outcomes  and  how  to  deliver  them.  It  is  also  suggested  to  share  replicable  good
practices  of  innovations  that  could  be  applied  at  the  designated  villages.  If  there  is  possibility,  the
Eastern Indonesia Youth Ambassadors are encouraged to be involved also in this session to motivate
the students.
Activity 3.1.5 – Improving connectivity
214.
To  enhance  village  access  to  internet  networks,  MoV  will establish  a  partnership  with  the
Ministry  of  Communication  and  Information  Technology  (MoCI)  to  engage  with  BAKTI  (Badan
Aksesibilitas Telekomunikasi dan Informasi), a government agency under MoCI that administers and
manages the improvement of telecommunication networks mainly in disadvantaged regions, where no
telecommunication  provider  is  interested  to  invest  in  building  their  networks.  Until  2018,  BAKTI  has
built  4,111  internet  access  site  and  856  BTS  (Base  Transceiver  Station)  sites  across  Indonesia131.
Further,  BAKTI  seeks  to  reach  at  least  5,000  villages  to  experience  telecommunication  networks  in
2020132. BAKTI can accommodate other ministry, government agency and local government requests
to  build  the  connectivity  networks  in  the  requested  area  through submission  on  BAKTI  online  web
application (PASTI Management System - https://pasti.baktikominfo.id/).
215.
Electricity availability. One key criterion for BAKTI to provide connectivity is the availability
of electricity, with a minimum power of 150 watts. For those villages which do not yet have electricity,
DPIU will provide advice to interested villages as to the type of electricity power installation (preferably
solar panels), they could adopt and include in their annual plan and budget.
216.
Meeting for agreement. Every year, starting in PY2, MoV will communicate a list of priority
villages  for  connection  to  grid  and  equipment  installation  by  BAKTI  at  no  cost133.  There  will  be  a
meeting  between  the  General  Directorate  of  Village  Development  and  Community  Empowerment,
(MoV)  and  BAKTI  (MoCI)  to  affirm  the  number,  location  and  implementation  schedule  for  internet
connectivity facility developed at the TEKAD villages.
Application  submission.  Based  on  the  agreement,  the  NPIU  will  provide  the  data  and
217.
information  needed  by  BAKTI  through  the  PASTI  Management  System.  The  NPIU  will  monitor  the
progress of the application and communicate with the corresponding DPIU, ensuring the designated
villages had proper preparation to have the facility built.
131 BAKTI website (2019), https://www.baktikominfo.id/.
132 MoCI website (2018), https://kominfo.go.id/content/detail/15419/bakti-kominfo-genjot-pembangunan-bts-
agar-indonesia-merdeka-sinyal-pada-2020/0/sorotan_media.
133 A similar model currently applies for Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health.
151
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Sub-component 3.2 – Policy Development and Institution Building
218.
The Village Law represents the core policy at the root of GoI efforts to support village-based
economic  development.  Therefore,  TEKAD  efforts  with  regard  to  policy  development  will  focus  on
making the implementation of the Village Law and of the Village Fund more effective and impactful in
promoting  village  economic  development.  TEKAD  strategy  with  regard  to  policy  development  is
therefore  to:  (i)  develop  approaches  and  tools  to  assist  village  governments  and  communities  in
leveraging the Village Fund to promote economic development in different agro-ecological and social
contexts  in  Eastern  Indonesia,  and  potentially  throughout  the  country;  (ii)  pilot  their  implementation
and monitor results;
(iii) share outcomes with stakeholders at village, district, province and national
level,  including  with  institution;  and  (iv)  institutionalise  them  under  the  responsibility  of  four  main
partners:  MoV,  Bappenas,  provincial  and  district  governments.  In  this  respect,  one  of  the  key
programme  outcomes  will  be  the  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages,  a  set  of  evidence-
based  and  replicable  models  for  improving  the  use  of  village  resources  and  for  developing  village
partnerships with public and private players in support of inclusive and sustainable village economic
development.
Activity 3.2.1 – Orientation and Capacity Building Packages
219.
An initial set of Orientation and Capacity Building Packages will be developed in PY1 to guide
activities  and  support  capacity  building  of  programme  staff,  district  and  provincial  departments  and
village stakeholders in the following areas:
Village  Governance  for  Economic  Development. This  package  will  build  on  models  and  tools
developed through World Bank-financed P3PD134. These will be adapted to match the specificities
of  economic  development  in  the  primary  sector  as  well  as  specific  features  of  the  target
provinces.  Guidelines,  tools  and  outlines  for  developing,  monitoring  and  reviewing  the  village
economic  development  strategy,  annual  planning  and  budgeting,  regular  monitoring  annual
reviews and setting up and running the Village Information System will be included;
Support to Village Economic Initiatives. This part will largely be commodity-based, and design will
build  on  the  mapping  studies  conducted  under subcomponents 2.2  and  2.3.  Commodity-based
packages  will  include  different  menus  and  modalities  adapted  to  the  four  broad  TEKAD  agro-
ecological  zones  (highlands  lowlands,  drylands  and  coastal),  different  types  of  areas  and
opportunities - varying types of market opportunities, connectivity (from well connected to remote
areas),  social  organisation  (from  cohesive  to  fragmented  societies)  or  economic  organisation
(villages that already have BUMDes, cooperatives or economic groups or that have none). While
agriculture is the dominant sector in the target provinces and therefore will dominate the priority
commodities,  non-agriculture  commodities  and  services  are  also 
important  economic
development  opportunities,  including  marine  products,  non-timber  forest  products  (especially  in
remote villages and indigenous communities), and ecotourism.
Commodity-based  packages  will  promote  multi-benefit approaches that  deliver  multiple  benefits
for  production,  poverty  reduction,  environment  and  climate  resilience,  and  will  also  make
reference  to  appropriate  technologies  and  modalities  for  using  and  financing  them.  This  will
include  the  promotion  of  more  rigorous  planning;  good  practices  to  mitigate  desertification,
deforestation, loss of biodiversity and resource depletion; and environment protection.
Each  package  will  cover  (non-exhaustive):  (i)  a  description  of  the  activity,  state-of-the-art
technology  including  for  climate  change  adaptation,  post-harvest  and  value  adding  (drying,
storage,  packaging,  certification,  transport…),  market,  assets/pre-requirements,  costs  and
expected revenues, financial and cash-flow projections; (ii) growth path for producers; (iii) market
players,  linkage  opportunities.  They  will  also  include  examples  (not  mandatory)  of  simple
business models, adapted to the different commodities;
BUMDes,  economic  organisations  and  village  clusters. This  package  will  focus  on  the  creation
and expansion of economic organisations (primarily BUMDEs and cooperatives, but possibly also
other  groups  such  as  women  or  youth  groups,  or  individual  businesses  such  as  a  lead  farmer
aggregating and marketing produce) and of village clusters, and the benefits and returns they can
provide  to  villagers.  It  will  also provide  guidance  and  capacity-building  modules  in  developing
simple  business  plans,  in  setting  up,  managing  and  financing  business  development,  and  in
134 Expected to be available end of 2019.
152



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
carrying out annual capacity assessment to measure progress and gaps, and orient consolidation
efforts.
Access  to  financial  services. This  package  will  cover  financial  and  digital  education  modules,
guidance for linking to financial service providers and accessing financing, as well as a range of
financial  products  and  services,  including  innovations  promoted by  TEKAD  with  partnering
financial institutions (see Sub-component 3.2).
220.
Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages  will  be  sensitive  to  gender  and  other  specific
groups’ constraints in operationalizing their content, and will provide solutions for supporting women’s
inclusion (including labour- and time-saving technologies) and that of marginalised groups, including
remote villages.
Each  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Package  will  include  a  guide  with  step-by-step
221.
explanations, which will be linked to practical tools designed in adaptation to different audiences. All
guidelines developed to support programme implementation will be included.
222.
Implementation. Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages  will  be  developed  through  a
contract  with  an  international  service  provider  with  multi-disciplinary  competences  covering  rural
inclusive  economic  planning  and  business  development,  along  with  provincial-based  national
consultants  (possibly  though  provincial  universities).  This  team  will  work  in  partnership  with  MoV
Community  Training  Center  Department (Pusat  Pelatihan  Masyarakat – Puslatmas), based  on  an
MoU  to  be  established  by  the  NPIU,  which  will  also  cover  the  training  of  TEKAD  staff  in  using  the
Packages  (Sub-component  2.1).  The  service  provider  will  also  establish  close  collaboration  with
relevant  ministries  (dealing  with  Agriculture,  Forestry,  Fisheries,  Planning,  Trade  and  Industry,
Cooperatives  and  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises)  and  with  other  public  and  private  provincial
stakeholders.  Preparation  will  associate  TEKAD  provincial  and  district  teams  and  will  plan  an
approach for ensuring that they could be adapted to district local conditions.
223.
To facilitate wide access to support, including in most remote areas, Orientation and Capacity
Building Packages will be available both online, through the Eastern Indonesia Gateway platform and
in a separate mobile application, as well as offline. In recognition of lower literacy and numeracy skills
among  beneficiary  communities,  will  adopt  visual  learning  tools  including  video  tutorials,  photos,
videos,  infographics...  Economic  Initiatives  Advisers  will  be  equipped  with  digital  tablets  to  enable
multi-media presentations using the product-based capacity-building packages.
224.
Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages will  build  on  and  be  fully  compatible  with
instruments developed for MoV’s Village Academy 4.0 and P3PD135, which will be complemented to fit
the  specific  needs  of  village  economic  planning  and  the  specificities  of  the  target  provinces.  While
there will be a common core of guidance/capacity building modules, adaptations will be introduced for
every  province  as  required,  to  reflect  socio-cultural  and  product-related  specifics  to  every  province
and agro-ecological zone. Preparation will associate TEKAD provincial and district teams and will plan
an approach for ensuring that they could be adapted to district local conditions.
225.
It  is  recommended  that:  (i)  modules  be  broken  down  into  smaller  sub-chapters  to  make
lessons easier to digest; (ii) users should be able to track their learning progress also able to continue
from  the  last  milestone  regardless  log-in  from  website  or  mobile  app;  (iii)  user  able  to  download  or
save the learning material to their device, this to address the lack of connectivity in certain areas; (iv)
user  able  to  take  evaluation  after  the  learnings;  and  (v)  user  able  to  download  an  automatically
generated  certificate  of  completion  after  the  user  completed  a  module.  The  service  provider  is
encouraged to take inspiration from the successful online course platforms such as Coursera or Edx.
For  less  resource  intensive  and  ease  of  maintenance,  the  mobile  application  is  suggested  to  use
hybrid mobile  app development framework. For the  video tutorials, it is suggested to  be  narrated  or
spoken in Bahasa Indonesia, but with eastern Indonesia dialect.
Puslatmas  will  organise  the  training  of  district  and  provincial  stakeholders  involved  in
226.
delivering  the  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages,  including  TEKAD  staff,  based  on  the
training of trainers in Puslatmas training centres in Ambon (for Maluku and North Maluku provinces),
Jayapura (for Papua and West Papua provinces) and Denpasar (see Sub-component 2.1).
135 Currently being developed and to become available by end of 2019.
153

Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
227.
Model  development,  innovation  and  communication. Orientation  and  Capacity  Building
Packages will form the building base for TEKAD model development. Packages designed in PY1 will
be  tested  from  PY2  and  will  be  amended  and  expanded  to  reflect  the  lessons  of  experience,  new
technologies  and  innovations  developed  along  with  programme  implementation,  and review  of
conditions  for  replication.  Package  development  will  therefore  be  closely  linked  to  programme
monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management.
228.
The  international  service  provider  will  design  a  simple  methodology  for  carrying  out  an
annual,  performance-based  assessment  of  the  packages,  building  on  data  provided  by  the  M&E
system/TEKAD MIS starting from the village level. The assessment will be done jointly with Puslatmas
and will: (i) review packages’ effectiveness (both in content and in form) in building capacities and in
delivering  results  with  regard  to  village-based  economic  development  planning  and  implementation;
and  (ii)  identify  good  practices  and  innovations  that  concurred  to  achieving  good  results.  The
assessment  will  also  review  the extent  to  which  packages  are  effective  in  supporting  specific  target
groups, such as women, youth and poorer households, and in reaching out to remote areas.
229.
Every  year, in preparation  of the Annual Workplan and Budget (AWPB), with guidance from
the Provincial M&E/KM and Policy Development Expert, District M&E/MIS will lead the assessment at
district  level,  in  close  collaboration  with  the  District  Coordination  Platform  for  Village  Economic
Development and the team of programme and district facilitators. The outcome of the assessment will
be a provincial report synthesising the exercise and highlighting gaps, as well innovations and good
practices, with recommendations for action, including amendments, further testing of innovations and
other research and development activities. The report will be submitted to the Provincial Coordination
Platform,  where  it  will  be  discussed  with  stakeholders,  who  will  make  recommendations  regarding
improvements  to  be  brought  to  the  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages  and  further  actions
required. This will include the proposal of possible collaborations with provincial universities and their
departments for innovation and research.
230.
Building  on  provincial  contributions,  the  NPMU  KM  and  Policy  Development  Expert  will
prepare an Annual Plan for Model Development, Innovation and Communication, which will be part
of  TEKAD  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  and  will  cover  the  following:  (i)  identifying
inclusive  innovative  approaches/models  with  potential  for  scaling  up,  based  on  a  set  of
agreed  upon  indicators – detailed  indications  will  be  provided  on  model  pre-requisites,
implementation  modalities  and  costs;  (ii)  detailing  agendas  and  responsibilities  for
scaling  up  proof-tested  innovative  model  and  reviewing  progress  achieved;  (iii)
specifying changes to be brought to the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages; and
(iv)  building  partnerships  with  government  agencies,  provinces/districts,  private  sector
and development  partners  to  mainstream  innovation  into  regular processes  and to  scale  up
successful  models.  An  international  consultant  will  design  guidelines  and  provide  support  to  the
process.
231.
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages will be updated by Puslatmas.
232.
Progress  and  updates  will  be  widely  shared  through  the  Coordination  Team  under  MoV
Directorate General  of Village Community Empowerment and Development, the Joint TEKAD-P3PD
Working Group136, the District Coordination Platforms for Village Economic Development, the Papua
Desk, and the Eastern Indonesia Gateway.
Activity 3.2.2 – Policy studies
233.
objectives:
TEKAD will support a demand-driven policy process whereby policy studies will address two
contribute  to  translating  innovative  approaches  and  tools  developed  under  the  programme  into
legal  and  policy  instruments,  under different  forms  such  as  MoV  regulations,  ministerial
instructions,  technical  guidelines  or  Puslatmas  training  programmes;  or  Papua  Desk-sponsored
regulations;
address  policy  gaps  identified  through  the  provincial  mapping  studies,  TEKAD  programme
operations and recommendations made by District and Provincial Coordination Teams.
136 See Section V – Institutional arrangements.
154


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
234.
Activities will include the following:
identification of policy needs/gaps to support the institutionalisation of evidence-based innovative
instruments  or  to  improve  village-based  planning,  financing  and  implementation  of  economic
development: this  will  largely  rest  on  the  initial  mapping  studies  (Sub-Component  2.2,  Activity
2.2.1)  and  their  updates,  TEKAD  operations  and  recommendations  made  by  District  and
Provincial  Programme  Implementation  Units.  But  it  could  also  derive  from  a  specific  study  on  a
specific issue brought forward by MoV or by the Papua Desk;
policy studies and support for publication and production of related outreach materials;
policy consultations and workshops to support the preparation of policy studies or to present and
discuss the results of such studies;
dissemination of results and lessons learned.
235.
Areas for policy development identified during programme design include the following: (i) an
expenditure/performance review of the Village Fund and of MoV, district and village performance for
the promotion of village economic development in Eastern Indonesia;
(ii) revised guidelines and
legal  framework  for  BUMDes  to  become  an  inclusive  village  economic  development-supporting
organization;  and  (iii)  a  survey  on  participation  and  accountability  in  Village  Law  implementation,
building on the model of the Sentinel Villages Study, under the Local Solutions to Poverty programme
implemented  by  the  World  Bank.  Gender  equity  and  Social  Inclusion  considerations  will  be
mainstreamed in all of the policy development activities.
Activity 3.2.3 – Institution building
236.
exclusively) of the Community Empowerment and Development General Directorate, in:
TEKAD  will  contribute  in  strengthening  the  capacities  of  MoV,  and  especially  (but  not
implementing the programme in an accountable and transparent manner, in line with
GoI  and  IFAD  procedures,  and  in  delivering  programme  outcomes  and  outputs
according to plans;
promoting inclusive and profitable village economic development;
tracking  achievements  and  capitalising  on  good  results  to  improve  related
performance;
 mainstreaming  successfully  tested  TEKAD  innovative  tools  through  MoV’s  relevant
structures.
237.
and capacity development plans.
Capacity building will be provided on the basis of annual participatory capacity assessments
238.
Governments137, at national and provincial level.
This  set  of  activities  should  also  benefit 
the  Association  of 
Indonesian  Village
Activity 3.2.4 – Upscaling facility
239.
An upscaling facility is available to finance specific operations that would upscale innovative
tools successfully implemented by the programme. The facility could be used for any of the following
purposes  (not  exclusive):  expand  programme  operations  to  additional  villages  (for  example  to
participate  in  cluster);  scale  up  specific  activities  in  target  districts  (for  example  trainings);  finance
study tours or other peer-to-peer instruments to disseminate programme knowledge and experience
to  villages  not  included  in  target  areas;  face  increased  costs  in  relation  to  planned  activities  in  this
PDR.
Implementation arrangements for Component 3
240.
The  implementation  of  Component  3  will  be  led  by  the  NPIU  KM  and  Policy  Development
Expert  in  close  collaboration  with  the  team  of  technical  experts at  the  national  level  and  at
provincial/district level
241.
Under  Sub-component  3.1,  service  providers  will  be  hired  to:  (i)  develop  the  TEKAD  MIS
system  and  provide  support  to  Provincial  MIS/GIS  Officers  for  MIS  development,  in  close
137 Asiosasi Pemerintah Desa Seluruh Indonesia (APDESI).
155







Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
collaboration with the Senior M&E and Senior GESI Experts especially; (ii) develop and maintain the
Eastern  Indonesia  Gateway;  (iii)  implement  the  annual  selection  and  awarding  process  for  the
Eastern  Indonesia  Youth  Ambassadors;  (iv)  produce  videos  on  the  Eastern  Indonesia  Youth
Ambassadors.  A  national  consultant  will  provide  support  to  design  the  guidelines  for  the  Eastern
Indonesia Youth Ambassador Programme. An MoU will be signed between MoV and MoCI to engage
with BAKTI for the implementation of the connectivity programme.
242.
Under  Sub-component  3.2,  an  international  service  provider  will  be  hired  under  the  IFAD
grant to develop the Orientation and Capacity Building Packages, in partnership with MoV Community
Training  Center  Department (Pusat  Pelatihan  Masyarakat – Puslatmas), based  on  an  MoU  to  be
established  by  the  NPIU,  which  will  also  cover  the  training  of  TEKAD  staff  in  using  the  Packages
(Sub-component  2.1). The  same  service  provider  will  be  hired  to  carry  out  the  provincial Market
opportunities  and  value  chain  analyses  (see  Component  2).  A  financial  provision  for  paying
management  fees  under  the  contract with the  international  service  provider  is  included  in  the
programme  budget. Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages  will  be  annually  updated  by
Puslatmas,  building  on  annual  assessments  and  on  the  specifications  of  the Annual  Plan  for  Model
Development, Innovation and Communication.
243.
Priority areas for the development of policy studies and for institution-building will be identified
annually by the NPMU and will be validated by the Programme Steering Committee. An international
consultant will assist in defining a methodology and in providing guidance for implementation. TEKAD
will finance the cost of policy studies, workshops and capacity building.
244.
component 3.2.
Bappenas, including the Papua Desk, will be closely associated to the implementation of Sub-
156
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
ATTACHMENT 1 – NUMBER OF VILLAGES ASSIGNED PER VILLAGE GOVERNANCE
FACILITATOR/ECONOMIC INITIATIVES ADVISOR
ASSUMPTIONS
Number of villages per PY
Years
Core
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Total:
1
0
2
500
3
500
610
500
1110
4
500
610
610
1720
5
500
610
610
1720
6
610
610
1220
For Core and cluster 1
Economic initiative facilitator: covers 4 villages in Y 1 and 2, 6 villages in Y 3 and 9 villages in Y 4
Village governance facilitator: covers 4 villages in Y 1 and 2, 6 villages in Y 3 and 9 villages in Y 4
For cluster 2
Economic initiative facilitator: covers 4 villages in Y 1 and 2, 6 villages in Y 3 and 9 villages in Y 4
Village governance facilitator: covers 4 villages in Y 1 and 2, 6 villages in Y 3 and 9 villages in Y 4
4
83
153
153
388
83
153
153
388
777
5
56
102
153
310
56
102
153
310
619
6
68
102
169
68
102
169
339
Project years
Village Governance
Facilitators
Sub-total
Economic Initiative
Facilitators
Sub-total
TOTAL
Number of facilitators required
3
1
2
125
153
278
125
153
278
555
125
125
125
125
250
157
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
IV. GENDER EQUITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION STRATEGY
246.
A multi-pronged approach is necessary to tackle the social heterogeneity in the target areas.
Since there are no readymade answers that would be appropriate across the programme’s spectrum
of target groups and agro-ecological livelihood settings, TEKAD’s targeting strategy will be composed
of a mix of features aimed at fostering inclusive approaches, and direct pro-active targeting measures.
247.
Key  elements  of  a  targeting  and  inclusion  strategy  are  built-into  design  and  are  described
hereafter. However, a full Gender and Social Inclusion (GESI) strategy will be designed during the first
year  of  implementation  to  fully  address  the  diversity  and  diverse  requirements  in  the  target  areas.
Besides, only bottom-up approaches stand a chance of genuinely succeeding in difficult environments
such as the programme. Therefore only a GESI strategy that is owned by the facilitators as the people
with the prime responsibility  of implementing it can  work effectively,  which means that they must be
involved in its conception, as well in the planning of expected achievements for which they will be held
accountable. Finally,  the  Village  Law  implementation  is  progressing  rapidly  but  unpredictably,  which
may offer new opportunities that should be built upon as and when they arise138.
248.
targeting and GESI include the following:
Lessons learnt. Lessons  learned  from  PNPM  Agriculture,  VDP  and  other  initiatives  on
field  staff  were  not  sufficiently  trained  on  basic  facilitation  skills  and  community
empowerment;
the  community  empowerment  objectives  of  the  Village  Law  and  the  procedures  for
using the Village Fund are still unknown by the wider public;
broad community ownership and Village Head buy-in of targeting and GESI activities
are important;
the village apparatus should play a role in targeting and GESI activities;
where  and  how  village  meetings  are  called  for  are  essential  considerations  that  will
determine the extent of participation and inclusion;
given  that  literacy  levels  can  be  low,  that  Bahasa  Indonesia  is  not  understood
everywhere,  and  that  oral  communication  is  frequently  the  most  important  form  of
communication,  supplementary  non-written  communication  (videos,  pictorials,  etc.)
is important;
in Papua especially, women only groups can be “the surest way to include women in
group decision-making roles, and the groups serve to build women’s  self-confidence
as  well  as  their  skills;  most  importantly,  in  a  women’s  only  group,  they  will  not  be
talked  down  to,  allocated  extra  work  by  men  who  will  benefit  from  their  labour,  be
taken advantage of, or otherwise be treated as chattel by male members” 139.
GENDER EQUITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION STRATEGY (GESI)
249.
TEKAD  will  develop  a  Gender  Equality  and  Social  Inclusion  (GESI)  Strategy  to  ensure  that
poor target groups, women, young people and indigenous groups in the target villages participate in
TEKAD activities and access programme benefits. Given the socio-cultural diversity,  while the GESI
Strategy  will  build  on  core  principles,  it  will  be  adapted  to  the  specific  features  of  each  of  the  five
target provinces.
Guidelines. Guidelines  will  define  objectives,  a  core  set  of  orientations  and  mechanisms
250.
building  on  the  Village  Law  to  :  (i)  profile  target  sub-groups;  (ii)  ensure  gender  equitable  and  social
inclusion  of the  target  groups  and  especially  of  disadvantaged  or  isolated  groups  in  the  village
138 E.g., at the time of writing, Village Heads in Papua Province are still appointed; it is expected that, soon, they will be elected,
like elsewhere in Indonesia. The Village Law reserves a lot of power to Village Heads. Their election will not only change their
downward accountability, but much of the dynamics of village governance; this will therefore be an important evolution to keep
sight of, and to consider during implementation. According to the Law, village consultative meetings (musyawarah desa) are the
highest body of village governance, an innovation which is meant to balance the power of the Village Head and to provide a
solution for cases where, under the previous situation, tension between the village parliament and the Village Head would lead
to a stalemate – these meetings are however often not held at all, or only infrequently.
139 PNPM Agriculture MTR report.
158







Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
planning  and  budgeting process  and  in  the  development  of  village  economic  initiatives;  (iii)  develop
transparent  monitoring  mechanisms  to  measure  achievements  and  identify challenges,  such  as
community  reviews  and  grievance  mechanisms  to  assess  gender  equitable  and  social  inclusion  in
village  processes;  (iv)  prevent  elite  capture,  for  which  the  main  strategy  will  consist  on  empowering
rural  communities,  including  organizations  strengthening  and  capacity  building,  emphasizing  the
poorest  and  more  vulnerable  segments,  for  them  to  participate  and  make  their  rights  and  priorities
prevail  in  villages'  decisions  on  the  Village  Fund  resources  allocation;  (v)  identify  capacity  building
needs  assessment  of  programme  staff  and  key  partners  and  identify  capacity  building  needs
assessment  of  programme  staff  and  key  partners;  (vi)  ensuring  that  economic  organisations  and
multi-stakeholders’  platforms  are  inclusive  of  women,  poor  and  indigenous  youth,  and  that  GESI
issues  are  addressed  as  part  of  their  regular  agenda;  (vii)  develop  an  implementation  plan  with
outcomes and indicators to be updated annually in conjunction with the AWPB. They will also provide
detailed orientations for ensuring that TEKAD activities ensure social inclusiveness and accommodate
the  needs  of  women,  young  people  and  diverse  socio-economic  groups,  building  on  the  above
guidance.
251.
monitored as part of TEKAD M&E system. Targets will include the following:
Expected  outcomes,  with  targets  and  milestones  will  be  laid  out  in  the  strategy  and  will be
An overall gender participation rate of 50% of women amongst programme beneficiaries;
An overall gender participation rate of 40% qualified women in the NPMU, PPIUs and DPIUs –
while it may be harder to achieve in DPIUs, it should strongly be promoted;
An overall 30% of decision-making positions in economic organisations occupied by
women/disadvantaged groups;
the service providers recruited to support
All of
experience in the principles and practice of gender and social inclusion.
the programme will be required to have
The terms of reference of all programme staff will
include responsibility for gender and social
inclusion objectives and support will be given to the recruitment of women to ensure gender-
balanced programme implementer teams.
252.
A  GESI  consultant  will  be  hired  at  programme  onset  to  prepare  GESI  guidelines,  in  close
collaboration  with  the  National  GESI  Specialist  and  the  team  of  Provincial  GESI  Experts,  which  will
outline  TEKAD  GESI  Strategy,  will  detail  activities  and  mechanisms  designed  to  mainstream  GESI
into all programme activities and tools, in line with this section, and will provide orientations to ensure
that guidelines are adapted to province/district social and cultural specificities.
253.
Adaptation to local specificities. Key steps in adapting GESI guidelines will be as follows:
Once the GESI guidelines are finalised, capacity building workshops will be organised in every
province to familiarise TEKAD staff and their colleagues in the relevant agencies, along a format
that will be designed by the: GESI consultant, that will be tested in one province with the
consultant participation, and will then be rolled out under the leadership of the National GESI
Specialist;
Village data will be collected to set up the Village Information System and village mapping will be
undertaken in the core villages as described above under Sub-component 1.1 – Village
Governance;
Under the overall guidance of the Provincial GESI, GESI guidelines will be reviewed and adapted
in every district by the TEKAD District Coordinator and the team of Village Governance
Facilitators and of Economic Initiatives Advisors to take into account
the local specificities,
building on the outcomes of the village data collection and mapping. Specificities could regard
modalities for organising community consultation and participation; modalities for reaching out to
women or youth; ways to reach out to remote areas; priority labour- and time-saving investments
to ensure women participation; modalities to facilitate the recruitment of young women as village
cadres etc.
The revised guidelines will be reflected into the annual plans of activities of the TEKAD district
team, and into the individual annual plans of activity of every member of the team, and in
particular of the Village Governance Facilitators and of Economic Initiatives Advisors. These plans
will be updated annually based on progress, which will be measured through the M&E system,
Village Information System and annual reviews held as part of the preparation of AWPBs;
159









Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Plans will be approved by the TEKAD Provincial Team Leader.
254.
Implementation  responsibilities. The  NPMU  Consultant  Team  Leader  will  bear  direct
responsibility  for  ensuring  that the  programme  meets  both  economic  targeting  and  social  inclusion
objectives.  The  National GESI  Specialist  and  the  Provincial  GESI  Specialists,  each  within  their
province,  will  have  overall  responsibility  for  guiding  programme  stakeholders  in  implementing  the
GESI  Strategy,  providing  technical  assistance,  ensuring  monitoring  and  promoting  knowledge
management. In PY1, they will work closely with the international service provider responsible for the
Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Programmes  and  the  consultants  in  charge  with  provincial
mapping, to  ensure  that  GESI  issues  are  covered  so  that  social  constraints,  vulnerabilities  and
capacities are taken into account in the selection of value chains and economic interventions as well
as the modalities of programme outreach.
All agreements (village  agreements, district agreements), strategies (economic development
255.
strategies,  district  access  to  market  strategies,  district  access  to  services  strategies)  and  contracts
(especially  service  contracts)  will  specifically  promote gender  equity  and  social  inclusiveness
objectives.  Facilitators  will  be  held  accountable  for  achieving  the  results  they  have  specified  for
themselves on targeting and GESI in their activity plans.
256.
Targeting  and  inclusion  mechanisms. Targeting  and  inclusion  mechanisms  and  activities
have  been  mainstreamed  throughout  TEKAD  design  and  activities  composing  the  three  programme
components are outlined below.
257.
Gender  equity  will  be  mainstreamed  into  all  activities.  Specific  measures  to  support  gender
mainstreaming  and  achievement  of  the  gender  targets  outlined  above  to  be  included  in  the  GESI
Strategy include: (i) support for women’s groups where appropriate; (ii) training and extension tailored
to women’s needs; (iii) supporting women to be leaders and decision-makers; (iv) promoting gender
sensitive career guidance services; and (v) promoting labour-saving and time-saving investments for
women. These measures will be sensitive to differences in economic potential and capacity as well as
age specific needs.
258.
M&E. The design provides for a comprehensive M&E, learning and knowledge management
framework  to  guide  programme  implementation,  support  economic  decisions  and  policy-making,
share knowledge and upscale good practices. GESI specialists will work closely with the Senior M&E
Expert and the KM and Policy Development Expert to ensure that GESI objectives are integrated in
the M&E and KM system. The GESI specialists, in close consultation with other technical specialists,
will support the integration of GESI objectives into the M&E Annual Implementation Plans and in the
Annual  Model  Development, 
their  practical
operationalisation.
Innovation  and  Communication  as  well  as 
The  baseline  and  completion  survey,  as  well  as  the  Village  Information  System,  will
259.
disaggregate data  by  sex  and  age.  A  web-based  Management  Information  System  (MIS)  which  will
track and regularly update gender-disaggregated financial and technical data on programme outputs
and  outcomes,  lessons  learnt  and  good  practices.  The  GESI  specialists  will  work  closely  with  the
Senior  M&E  Specialist  and  the  KM  and  Policy  Development  Expert  to  ensure  that  information
dissemination is inclusive and accessible to all youth target groups.
TARGETING AND INCLUSION MECHANISMS
Based  on  the  above,  and  on  a  review  of  other  development  partners’  experiences  in  the
260.
programme  areas,  the  design  provides  for  a  range  of  targeting  and  inclusion  mechanisms  that  are
built-into  programme  components.  GESI  specific  features  applicable  to  programme  activities  are
outlined below and will be further developed in the GESI Strategy to be prepared during PY1.
Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment
261.
Awareness campaigns. These will provide information about : (i) the letter and the spirit of
the  Village  Law - therefore  including  the  clarification  of  the  principles  of  participation,  transparency
and  accountability  of  village  governments  to  their  constituents,  which  the  Village  Law  supports  to
ensure  good  governance;  (ii)  programme  objectives,  activities  and  expected  benefits;  and  (iii)  roles
and obligations of stakeholders. In particular, gender equity and social inclusion objectives, the roles
of Village Heads and government in addressing them, and their accountability towards all their village
160

Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
constituents,  including  women and socially-marginalised groups. The entry point into the community
will be the Village Head and the Village Council140, which will agree, with support from the facilitators,
on  the  best  ways  to  organise  the  awareness  activities  and  the  village  mapping  (see  below)  so  that
they broadly reach out to women and men and to the various social segments in the community. This
will include the mobilisation of community groups (including women and youth groups present in most
of the villages), as well as organising inclusive community meetings at sub-village level.
262.
Commitment. Further  to  the  awareness  campaign, villages  willing  to  participate  in  TEKAD
activities will be requested to sign an agreement, which will specifically spell out village obligations in
ensuring  inclusive  community  participation  in  programme-supported  activities  and  benefits  and  in
facilitating access to land, in particular for young people, and make Village Heads accountable for it.
263.
Village  Information  System. TEKAD  will  set  up  a  Village  Information  System  (VIS),  which
will be used to orient village planning and monitor progress. Data will be disaggregated by gender and
age where appropriate and the questionnaire will ensure that men, women and young people have an
opportunity to provide distinct answers.
264.
Two  village  cadres  per  village  will  be  responsible  for  supporting  programme  activities  within
the community (and in particular for the initial collection and regular update  of VIS data) and  will  be
trained  accordingly.  Village  cadres  will  be  young  volunteers,  possibly  one  woman  and  a  man.  It  is
important that every effort is made to identify young women to become village cadres because of the
message this would give to the entire community: that women have the skills to exert such a qualified
job,  are  not  to  be  confined  to  household  chores  and  low-skill  activities,  and  can  contribute  to  the
welfare of the whole community. Village Governance Facilitators should propose modalities that would
facilitate  young  women’s  participation,  in  line with the  GESI  strategy  and under  the  guidance  of
Provincial GESI Expert.
Village  mapping. Each  village  will  undertake  an  assessment  of  existing  potential  and
265.
constraints to  village-led economic development, which will  build on the Village Information  System.
The village mapping will be carried out with separate groups of villagers (men/women, different ages
and social groups), building on the agreed with the Village Head and Village Council at the beginning
of the awareness campaign. Village mapping will include:
a rapid, participatory, age and gender-sensitive livelihoods and nutrition status analysis, which will
differentiate between main socio-economic groups, as well as gender differences in roles and
responsibilities, assets, access to resources, capacity and availability. The assessment will take
into account different age/social categories of women (married in monogamous and polygamous
unions, widowed, household heads) and will also review the potential for labour-saving and time-
saving technologies for women;
an  assessment  of the  best  ways  of  reaching  out  to  women  and  youth.  The  women  outreach
assessment will  point out locality-specific issues to consider in order to increase positive impact
on community women and on community youth. In case the facilitator in question is a man, he will
need  to  enrol  the  help  of  a  female  facilitator,  who  will  meet  women  separately  as  part  of  the
assessment exercise (where possible and appropriate in collaboration with local PKK groups). A
first step will be to find out about how to create a safe environment for women/youth - if no such
space  exists.  The  assessments  will  provide  analytical  descriptions  of  all  types  of  village  groups
(PKK  but  also,  for  example,  religious  groups,  youth  groups,  savings  and  credit  associations,
parent-teacher  associations,  labour-pooling  groups,  etc.)  in  which  women/youth  participate  and
under  which terms and conditions they  do (or fail/choose not to do) so. Age, educational levels,
ethnic group and clan affiliation, social and familial status will also be outlined in this section, as
well  as  the  presence  of  any  opinion  leaders  among  them.  The  potential  and  pros  and  cons  of
creating new groups, both women-only and mixed, will also be assessed. A similar approach will
be  conducted  for  the  youth  outreach  assessments,  which  will  address  youth  opportunities  and
constraints,  aspirations  and  fears,  and  will  identify  potential  youth  opinion  leaders,  resource
persons and role models.
140 Article 55 of the Village Law: The Village Consultative Body shall have the function to: a. discuss and agree
on Draft Village Regulation along with the Village Head; b. obtain and share the aspirations of the Village
community; and c. supervise the performance of the Village Head.
161


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
an age and gender-sensitive mapping of existing land use and a characterisation of the different
groups of users;
a social mapping focusing on both village traditional social structures (including adat), lines of
power, village groups (producers’, women, youth, religious or others) and businesses, and aiming
at an in-depth understanding of:
o local power dynamics and governance (statutory and traditional decision-making): one of the
core elements of the traditional dimensions assessment will be an outline of proposals of
how to better bridge the divide (especially in Papua) between statutory and traditional
governance;
interventions, which have often
reinforced village élites who have not always taken the broader public interest into account.
The Village Law provides for considerable flexibility (whether or not the village in question
has opted to become a ‘traditional village/desa adat, or not) in terms of accommodating
‘informal’
local governance arrangements where these may be conducive to extensive
community ownership and strong buy-in as well as good target group participation.
this has been a major weakness of past
o local organizing practices for collective action and socio-cultural factors that could influence
local economic development, including traditional forms of collectivism and redistribution that
generate both economic and non-economic benefits and that hold potential for evolving into
forms of social or indigenous entrepreneurship.
266.
The mapping methodology will draw on the ‘indigenous food systems appraisal’ developed by
Aman141,  which  starts  with  the  mapping  of  customary  land  holdings  and  tenure  regimes  and
assessment  of  natural  resource 
land
tenure/landlessness;  forest  tenure;  hunting,  gathering,  and  grazing  rights;  sea  tenure;  access  to
inland  fisheries,  etc.)  including  of  both  customary  regimes  and  of  the de  facto application  of  village
regulations. It also maps natural resources/‘traditional’ products’ such as non-timber forest products,
their use and production and marketing potential.
tenure  arrangements  (access  and  use  rights, 
i.e., 
267.
Social  mapping  will  provide  orientations  to  ensure  that the  Village  Economic  Development
Strategy  and  Annual  Economic  Development  Plan  are  inclusive  and  will  promote  the  welfare  of  the
different  groups  that  compose  the  community.  It  will  also  be  used  by  village  facilitators  to  establish
their own work plan to promote gender equity and inclusion in all of their activities, with guidance from
the Provincial GESI Expert.
268.
Capacity  building  and  community  mobilisation. Capacity  building  will  be  provided  to
Village Heads and village government, sub-village heads and leaders of village businesses (including
BUMDes)  and  groups  (producers’  groups,  women  groups,  youth  groups,  religious  groups,  other
traditional  groups…)  so  they  can  engage  in  village  planning  and  monitoring  and  facilitate  broad
community mobilisation and participation. Capacity building will be delivered using visual presentation
tools wherever possible to account for lower rates of literacy. The two village cadres, a young woman
and a young man (see Village mapping and VIS), will mobilize broad-based community participation.
They  will particularly  seek  to  mobilise  young  people,  with  a  view  to  promote  a  network  of  village
activists to ensure broad-based village participation.
Inclusive Economic Development Strategy. Building on the Village Information System and
269.
on  the  village  mapping,  villages  will  be  supported  in  developing  a  simple  medium-term  economic
development strategy, which will specifically outline how the community intends to promote measures
aiming  at  inclusiveness, i.e.  ensuring  the  participation of  women,  youth  and  other  special  groups
identified  through  the  village  mapping  in  activities  and  benefits.  Facilitation  and  advisory  services
provided by TEKAD-financed facilitators will be tasked with ensuring broad and inclusive community
participation in  the  planning,  which  may  require  organising  diverse  types  of  meetings,  for  example
broad community meetings, with representatives of sub-villages and of the main groups, and separate
meetings with women or producers’ groups.
270.
Household-based approach. In Papua and West Papua, a cornerstone of the GESI strategy
will  be  the  implementation  of  a household-based  approach. It  has  successfully  been  tried  in  Papua
New Guinea under the name of Family Team approach (and implemented by IFAD in other countries)
141 Aliansi Masyarakat Adat Nusantara or Indigenous Peoples Alliance of the Archipelago (AMAN) is
the largest indigenous people’s organization, representing 2,332 communities and 17,000 individuals.
162


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
to propose a more equitable distribution of agricultural and household work done by women, men and
youth. “[The Family Team approach] addresses the fact that households are not cohesive units with
shared  needs and resources and that different members pursue different goals and are responsible
for different production and consumption activities. The family-based approach helps families to look
at  the  work  done  by  women,  men  and  youth  to  work  towards  a  more  equitable  distribution  of
agricultural  and  household  work and  to  create  a  joint  vision  and  an  action  plan  for  working  towards
this  vision.  It  has  been  successful  because  it  works  through  traditional  leadership  structures  and
explicitly  includes  men,  seeking  to  build  a  consensus  and  demonstrate  that  social  inclusion  and
gender empowerment will bring social and economic benefits to the entire family”142.
271.
Specifically, the household-based approach will aim at: increasing the capacities of household
members to jointly taking advantage of programme benefits to improve family welfare, through family
planning and budgeting; empowering women so that they access programme benefits alongside men,
within the family unit; raising awareness on good nutrition practices; and engaging the community to
create a supportive environment for household level activities and for broad inclusion.
272.
An  important  part  of  the  household-based  approach  is  the  household  situational  analysis  of
gender roles and relations, nutrition and livelihood vulnerabilities, which often marks the starting point
of  a  journey  of  self-discovery  and  emancipation.  Target  households,  with  the  regular  support  of  the
facilitators, will carry out this analysis themselves. Another important feature is the setting of long-term
household  objectives,  understanding  the  family budget  and  looking  at  gendered  roles  and
responsibilities,  creating  a  basic  vision  and  road  map  for  achieving  the  family  dream  by  working
together as a family and by knowing where to source non-technical and technical assistance.
273.
methodologies (IFAD 2014).
The  figure  below  provides a  quick  summary  of  the  key  elements  of  household-based
In  Papua  and  West  Papua,  the household-based  approach  will  form  the  foundation  through
274.
which TEKAD will promote village economic development plans, as well as support services such as
extension, financial literacy and business education. The following key elements could be envisaged
to prepare and implement a household-based approach.
142 IFAD, Market for Village Farmers, Project Design Report, 2017.
163
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Table 5 – Envisaged activities in the household-based approach
Activity
Description
Creating  and  achieving  a 
vision
family
Financial education
Healthy families
Follow-up
Setting  family  long-term  objectives,  understanding  the
family budget and looking at household gendered roles and
responsibilities,  creating  a  basic  plan  for  achieving  the
family dream by working together as a family
Planning  and  monitoring  the  family  budget  (one  module)
and saving to meet family goals (one module)
Enhancing  the  health  of  family  members  through  good
nutrition and hygiene practices
Discussing  specific  challenges  and  opportunities  and
providing targeted support and advice
275.
An international consultant with experience in IFAD-supported household-based approach will
assist TEKAD  in  developing a suitable methodology  and manual for Papua  and West Papua  and in
training  an  Indonesian  NGO  with  relevant  experience  in  those  two  provinces,  which  will  then  be
tasked with providing training of trainers and coaching in target villages.
276.
An  enabling  environment  for  the  acceptance  and  successful  deployment  of  the  household-
based  approach  will  need  to  be  created  as  part  of  TEKAD’s  awareness  campaigns.  The  fact  that
facilitators will be using this methodology will be included in the agreement which Village Heads will
sign with TEKAD if they want their village to participate in the programme.
277.
Peer-to-peer learning. Village Facilitators will have the responsibility to facilitate a balanced
access  of  men  and  women,  young  people  and  other  special  groups  in  all  types  of  peer-to-peer
learning activities.
278.
BUMDes and village businesses. Building on the village mapping and on guidance from the
GESI  strategy,  ways  to  adapt  organizational  models  (such  as,  for  example,  cooperatives  and
microenterprises) to better match socio-cultural specificities will be sought at village level, with support
from the Provincial GESI Experts. Facilitators will also support women and youth groups with potential
for running economic activities, as well as gender/age-balanced group decision-making structures.
Component 2 – Partnerships for Village Economic Development
279.
District Support for Village Economic Development. Capacity building will be provided to
District/Sub-District Heads and staff of the relevant departments to strengthen their abilities to provide
technical assistance to district/sub-district facilitators and village governments. This will cover capacity
building  to  foster  gender  equitable  and  socially  inclusive  village  economic  development  and  to
contribute to implementing TEKAD GESI strategy.
280.
Mapping. Mapping  studies  will  provide  information  that  will  support  villagers  in  planning
economic development strategies and investments that build on local productive resources and have
the  highest  potential  for  bringing  back  returns  to  households.  The  market  opportunities  and  value
chains analyses will lead to the selection of a limited number of inclusive value chains and a review of
opportunities for growth and of challenges for different profiles of villagers.
281.
Economic  inclusion,  or  the  potential  to  bring  different  socio-economic  profiles  villagers  into
productive  or  value  adding  activities,  will  be  one  of  the  central  objectives  of  the  priority  selection.
Inclusive value chains will respond to the following features:
build on local natural resources and activities known to villagers with potential for upgrading and
improved commercialisation;
have low entry costs for small producers, i.e. low asset requirements to start participation in the
value chain;
have potential
including women, young people, indigenous groups or other marginalised groups;
to involve large numbers of villagers with different socio-economic profiles,
164



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
have potential
demonstration;
for growth and open to replication of
‘first mover
technology’ uptake and
have potential for gradual development of activities, from production of raw material to increased
value adding, to enable villagers to gradually intensify and upgrade activities and investment in
line with their resources and risk profile;
have potential for the participation of remote villages and isolated communities
however would not need to be applicable to all of the selected value chains).
(this  criterion
282.
A preliminary review of market opportunities and main commodities to be considered will lead
to the pre-selection of a basket of value chains to be further analysed, based on criteria that will have
been preliminarily agreed upon with the Value Chain Analysis Reference Group (see Section III, Sub-
component 2.1 for details). One of the key criteria  will be the potential for integrating  women,  youth
and indigenous groups, and to reach out to remote villages.
283.
Thorough value chain analysis will then be conducted, including to assess: (i) factors of socio-
economic  differentiation  amongst  producers  (such  as  gender,  generation  gaps,  clan networks)  that
could  affect  opportunities  to  benefit from  the  programme  and  provide  orientations  to  secure  broad
inclusion;  (ii)  prerequisites  for  producers  to  integrate  production,  processing  or  marketing  along  the
value  chain;  and  (iii)  opportunities  for  special  groups - poorer  households,  women  and  youth,
indigenous groups and remote villages.
Access to markets and services. Building on the mapping studies, TEKAD will ensure that
284.
market  facilitation  services  and  other  business  development  services  are  delivered  along  delivery
modalities that are gender-sensitive (for example with regard to timing and organisation) and adapted
to  the  profiles  of  specific  groups.  Resources  will  be  available  for  building  the  capacities  of  service
providers  to  ensure  that  service  delivery  is  adapted  to  the  needs  of  the  target  audiences,  and  in
particular to women.
285.
Access  to  finance. Formal  and  informal  financial  services  will  be  mapped  with  a  view  to
understanding  needs  and  constraints  related  to  proposed  programme  investments,  as  well  as  risks,
vulnerabilities  and  capacity  gaps  in  the  financial  access  and  literacy  of  different  target  sub-groups.
This will include mapping target group access to the documents and certificates that will be required
to  access  financing,  such  as  land  certificates,  lease  agreements,  pro-forma  invoices  for  machines,
contract  farming  contracts  etc.  and  advise  on  implications  for  financial  inclusion.  One  of  the  key
objectives  in  developing  new  financial  products  jointly  with  partnering  financial  institutions  will  be  to
offer alternatives to collateral-based loans to circumvent villagers’ low assets base.
Component 3 – Innovation, Learning and Policy Development
286.
Incentives. Targeting  incentives  are  built  into  the  design  of  inspiration  activities  under  Sub-
component 3.1: (i) Eastern Youth Ambassadors will help reach out to, and involve, village youths, and
their selection will ensure gender balance; (ii) awards will reward village best collective efforts to make
inclusive village economic transformation happen, i.e. showing impact on village households, women
and youth; (iii) awards will also reward facilitators/extensionists and village cadres that use innovative
facilitation approaches and obtain the highest adoption rates by both women and men in their villages.
287.
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages. Capacity Building and Orientation Packages
will  be  sensitive  to  gender  and  other  specific  groups’  constraints,  and  will  provide  solutions  for
supporting women’s access (including labour- and time-saving technologies) and that of marginalised
groups, including remote villages.
288.
Policy studies. Gender equity and social inclusion considerations will be mainstreamed in all
of the policy development activities. Areas for policy development identified during programme design
include:  (i)  revised  guidelines  and  legal  framework  for  BUMDes  to  become  an  inclusive  village
economic development-supporting organization; and (iii) a survey on participation and accountability
in Village Law implementation, building on the model of the Sentinel Villages Study, under the Local
Solutions to Poverty programme implemented by the World Bank.
289.
Institution  building. One  of  the  key  areas  for  strengthening  the  capacities  of  MoV  and
especially  of  the  Community  Empowerment  and  Development  General  Directorate  will  be  the
promotion of inclusive and profitable village economic development.
165



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
V.
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
290.
The main features of the programme organizational framework are as follows:
A National Steering Committee will provide overall guidance and oversight. As part of the Steering
Committee,  a  Joint  TEKAD-P3PD  Working  Group  will  ensure  optimal  coordination  between  the
two programmes;
MoV is  the  Executing  Agency.  Under  the  authority  of  MoV’s  Director  General  of  Village
Development  and  Community  Empowerment,  the  Directorate  of  Natural  Resources  and  Applied
Technologies  (DNRAT)  will  have  direct  responsibility  for  programme  implementation.  A
Coordination Team will be set up to secure coordination and collaboration between DNRAT and
the  other  directorates  composing  the  Directorate  General  for  Village  Development  and
Community Empowerment;
A National  Programme  Management  Unit  (NPMU) will  assist  MoV  in  carrying  out  programme
implementation responsibilities;
A Provincial Programme Implementation Unit (PPIU) will be established in every target province
to  support  the  implementation  of  programme  activities  at  the  provincial  level,  provide  technical
assistance to district units and ensure knowledge management across the province;
A District  Programme  Implementation  Unit  (DPIU) will  be  established  in  every  target  district, to
support the implementation of activities at village level;
Coordination Platforms will be established at the provincial and district levels, and will provide a
venue for stakeholders involved  in  the promotion  of village development to agree on  objectives,
review progress, ensure coordination and seek measures for addressing challenges.
291.
Implementation responsibilities are outlined below.
The  organizational  chart  in  Annex  6  presents  the  programme  institutional  structure.
KEY IMPLEMENTING INSTITUTIONS
Programme Steering Committee. A Programme Steering Committee (PSC) will be set up at
292.
the  national  level  to  provide  overall  guidance  and  oversight,  to  ensure  that  TEKAD  programming  is
aligned  on  national  sector  priorities,  to  offer  a  venue  for  sharing  TEKAD  good  practices  and  for
channelling policy issues to the appropriate policy making bodies. The PSC will also approve Annual
Work  Programs  and  Budgeting  (AWPBs)  and  annual  progress  and  financial  reports.  It  will  include
representatives  from  government  structures - Ministry  of  Finance,  Ministry  of  Village,  Ministry  of
Agriculture,  BAPPENAS,  Papua  Desk  and  other  departments  as  deemed  relevant – and  other
stakeholders, such as the Association of Indonesian Village Governments, BRI and the Association of
Regional Development Banks (ASBANDA).
Joint  TEKAD-P3PD  Working  Group. This Working  Group  will  convene  TEKAD  and  P3PD
293.
Programme Managers and representatives from MoHA and MoV, and will mainly aim at ensuring that
TEKAD activities under Component 1 - Village Economic Empowerment, and those related to village
governance  in  particular,  build  on  and  align  with  the  guidelines  and  tools  developed  by  P3PD  for
MoHA and MoV.
294.
Ministry  of  Finance. The  Ministry  of  Finance  will  act  as  the  official  representative  of  the
Government  of  Indonesia  as  the  Borrower/Recipient.  In  this  role  MoF  will  be  responsible  for:  (i)
fulfilling  the  government  fiduciary  oversight  and  management  responsibilities;
(ii)  providing
sufficient  counterpart  contribution  in a  timely  manner  to  finance  programme  activities,  including  the
payment  of  government  staff  salaries  seconded  to  the  programme;  and  (iii)  timely  processing  of
Withdrawal Applications, approval of procurement actions and other necessary documents according
to the agreed operating procedures.
MoV. The  Lead  Executing  Agency  will  be  the  Ministry  of  Village,  Underdeveloped  Regions
295.
and  Transmigration.  The  NPMU  will  be  operated  under  the  authority  of  MoV’s  Director  General  of
Village  Development  and  Community  Empowerment,  which  will  be  delegated  to  the  Director  of
Natural  Resources  and  Applied  Technology.  MoV  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  programme
(i)  ensuring  the
management,  coordination,  and  oversight.  This  will  involve  the  following:
management  and timely  implementation  of  programme  activities,  with  support  from  the  NPMU  (see
below);  (ii)  prepare  Annual  Work  Programs  and  Budgeting  (AWPBs),  jointly  with  the  NPMU,  for
166






Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
submission to the Programme Steering Committee; (iii) ensure the integration of programme activities
within DNRAT overall programme of activities and the coordination of programme activities with other
DNRAT  initiatives;  (iii)  supporting  provincial  and  district  governments’  participation  in  programme
implementation, the fulfilment of their responsibilities and the channelling of resources as planned; (iv)
approve technical and financial reports and Withdrawal Applications prepared by the NPMU; and (v)
support  coordination  between  TEKAD  and  other  relevant  initiatives  in  the  promotion  of  village
economic development and facilitate programme access to knowledge generated by such initiatives.
A  Coordination  Team  will  be  established  within  the  Directorate  General  of  Village  Community
Empowerment  and  Development,  which  will  gather  DNRAT  and  all  of
its  other  directorates,  to
exchange information and quickly mainstream successful tools and approaches.
296.
NPMU. A  National  Programme  Management  Unit  (NPMU)  will  be  established  to  assist
DNRAT  in  implementing  the  programme  and  will  be  fully  accountable  for  the  performance  of
programme implementation and the use of funds. It will have the following responsibilities:
orientation for developing and implementing the programme strategy to ensure that all
programme implementation partners develop activities along a common, coherent approach in
line with the Programme Design Report;
financial and administrative management of programme resources in line with the Loan
Agreement and IFAD rules. This will also include: (i) the management of programme accounts
and their timely replenishment; and (ii) the organisation of annual and final independent audits of
all programme accounts as per IFAD Loan Agreement;
planning of programme activities and the preparation of consolidated AWPBs;
contracting and procurement of programme-related services and supplies in accordance with
IFAD Loan Agreement and IFAD rules. This will also include: (i) the preparation of annual
procurement plans, and (ii) the monitoring of the implementation of service providers’ contracts;
coordination of programme activities with the various programme partners;
M&E and KM in relation to all activities;
promotion of inclusive approaches and mainstreaming of targeting and gender requirements in all
of the programme activities in accordance with the GESI Strategy and Implementation Plan.
297.
Innovation, Learning and Policy Development, which will be implemented at the national level.
The NPMU will also be directly responsible for implementing activities under Component 3 –
298.
PPIUs. A  Provincial  Programme  Implementation  Unit  (PPIU)  will  be  established  within  the
Dinas Village and Community Empowerment (provincial department) in every target province. PPIUs
will  be  under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  NPMU  Director  and  will  be  responsible  for  providing
guidance,  coordination,  management-support  services  and 
to  District
Programme Implementation Units (DPIUs) in the implementation of Component 1 – Village Economic
Empowerment  and  for  jointly  implementing  Component  2 – Partnerships  for  Village  Economic
Development  with  DPIUs.  PPIUs  will  also  be  responsible  for  the management  of  programme funds,
M&E and KM and the implementation of the GESI strategy. This will also involve:
technical  assistance 
the preparation of consolidated Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs) for the province;
the financial and administrative management of programme resources disbursed for
the
implementation of province-based activities as well as for grouped contracts benefitting all of the
target districts;
contracting and procurement of programme-related services and supplies extended at provincial
level;
the setting up and facilitation of the Provincial Multi-Stakeholder Platform and the coordination of
provincial implementation partners;
M&E and KM in relation to all activities in the province;
the implementation of TEKAD GESI strategy at the provincial level.
DPIUs. One  District  Programme  Implementation  Unit  will  be  established  in  every  target
299.
district. DPIUs will be responsible for implementing Component 1 – Village Economic Empowerment
167













Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
and  for  participating  in  the  implementation  of  Component  2 - Partnerships  for  Village  Economic
Development along with PPIUs. This will involve:
the preparation of an Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) for the district;
the  financial  and  administrative  management  of programme  resources  disbursed  for  the
implementation of Component 1 and Component 2;
contracting  and  procurement  of  programme-related  services  and  supplies  extended  at  district
level;
the setting up and facilitation of the District Coordination Platforms and the coordination of district
implementation partners, especially participating district agencies, in close collaboration  with the
District Head;
M&E and KM in relation to all activities in the district;
the implementation of TEKAD GESI strategy at the district level.
300.
Composition. Table 6 shows the composition of the NPMU, PPIUs and DPIUs.
Table 6 – Staffing of NPMU, PPIUs and DPIUs
Management
- National
Programme
Manager
- National Team
Leader*
Technical Staff
National Programme Management Unit
Administrative Staff
- Regional Coordinator I (Papua)
- Regional Coordinator II (West Papua)
- Regional Coordinator III (Maluku)
- Regional Coordinator IV (North Maluku)
- Regional Coordinator V (NTT)
- GESI Specialist*
- Senior M&E/KM Officer
- Senior M&E Expert*
- Senior Village Governance Expert*
- Senior Economic Development Expert*
- Senior Financial Services Expert *
- KM and Policy Development Expert*
- Financial Management Officer
- Procurement Officer
- Accountant
- Administrative Officer
- Financial and Administrative
Management Expert *
- Procurement Expert*
- Administrative Assistant
- Translator
- Driver
Provincial Programme Implementation Units (per Unit)
- PPIU Manager
- Provincial
Team Leader*
- GESI Expert*
- Village Governance Expert *
- Economic Development Expert*
- Financial Services Expert*
- M&E/KM Officer
- M&E/KM Expert *
- MIS/GIS Expert *
- Financial Management Officer
- Accountant
- Planning Officer
- Procurement Officer
- Administrative assistant
- Financial Management Expert*
- Procurement Expert*
- Driver
District Programme Implementation Units (per Unit)
DPIU Manager
District
Coordinator *
-
- District Marketing Specialist*
- MIS/M&E Specialist*
- Village Governance Facilitators*
- Economic Initiatives Advisors*
Staff marked with * are TEKAD-financed consultants. Other staff are government-financed staff.
301.
The  NPMU  and  PPIUs  should  include  at  least  40%  of  qualified  women,  and  women
participation in DPIUs, while it may be harder to achieve, should strongly be promoted. Staff identified
for  the  positions  financed  by  government  resources  will  require  IFAD  no-objection.  Consultants
financed  by  programme  resources  will  be  selected  based  on  competitive  bidding  (with  IFAD  no-
objection) and have performance-based contracts.
Programme  expeditors. Two Programme Expeditors will  be fielded  at programme onset to
302.
expedite programme start-up. One will support programme management and specifically will assist in:
setting up all the administrative and financial management procedures; preparing the first AWPB and
168






Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Procurement  Plan;  expediting  compliance  to  pre-conditions  for  the  release  of  the  first  fund
disbursements;  supporting  the  finalization  of  the  PIM;  hiring  programme  staff;  and  preparing  MoUs.
The  other  one  will  have  technical  responsibilities  and  will  assist  with  tendering  for  the  international
consulting firm that will lead the development of Orientation and Capacity Building Packages; hiring of
international technical assistance; preparing the first AWPB; finalising the PIM. They will both provide
capacity building to the NPMU/PPIUs, with a view to support fast programme start-up.
303.
Cost  tables  include  a  total  of  ten  months  (six  months  for  the  Expeditor/programme
management  and  four  months  for  the  Expeditor/technical)  that  can  be used  at  once  or  in  split
assignments.
PARTNERSHIPS
304.
implementation with the following organisations:
Partnering institutions in Indonesia. Partnership agreements will be established to support
MoV Community Training Center Department (Pusat Pelatihan Masyarakat – Puslatmas): TEKAD
will partner with this MoV agency for the development of the Orientation and Capacity Building
Packages (Sub-component 3.2) as well as for the training of TEKAD staff (Sub-component 2.1);
Ministry of Agriculture: a partnership agreement will be signed with the Agency of Agricultural
Extension and Human Resource Development within the Ministry of Agriculture to facilitate the
participation of Agriculture Field Extensionists (PPLs) and ensure their redeployment so that their
skillsets match the priority products supported by village annual plans (see Sub-component 1.2);
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MoCI): a partnership agreement will be
signed to engage with BAKTI (Badan Aksesibilitas Telekomunikasi dan Informasi), a government
telecommunication
agency under MoCI
networks mainly in disadvantaged regions, by supporting the installation of connectivity
equipment at village level.
that administers and manages the improvement of
305.
the
Close  collaboration  and  coordination will  be  established  with  MoHA  so 
implementation  of  TEKAD  builds  on  and  aligns  with  guidelines  and  tools  developed  for  village
governance  and  that  coordination  and  exchange  of  information  proceed  smoothly  between  the  two
programmes. This will be supported by the Joint TEKAD-P3PD Working Group set up at the national
level.
that 
Close  collaboration  will  also  be  developed  with  the  Papua  Desk  for  the  implementation  of
306.
activities in Papua and West Papua, particularly with regard to the mapping studies under Component
2,  and  to  the  development  of  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building  Packages  and  other  policy
development activities under Component 3.
307.
Regional Development Banks for the implementation of Sub-component 2.2 – Financial Services.
It  is  also  anticipated that  partnership  agreements  will  be  signed  with  BRI  and  with  the  five
308.
Provincial  and  District  Coordination  Platforms.  District  (see  Sub-component  2.1)  and
Provincial  Coordination  Platforms  will  support  information  exchange  and  coordination  of  activities
related to the promotion of village economic development. They will also review and validate AWPBs
prepared  by  DPIUs/PPIUs,  provide  guidance  to  DPIUs/PPIUs,  monitor  programme  implementation,
discuss  TEKAD  achievements,  challenges  and  bottlenecks,  including policy  gaps,  and  agree  on
measures  required  to  lift  them.  They  will  be  composed  of  provincial/district  departments  involved  in
the promotion of economic development: Community Empowerment, Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries,
Planning, Trade and Industry, Cooperatives and Small and Medium Enterprises. District platforms will
be  chaired  by  the  District  Head  and  will  also  include  Village  Heads.  Market  players,  business
associations,  development  programmes,  NGOs  or  other  service  providers,  as  well  as  universities  at
provincial  level,  will  be  called  to  participate  in  working  sessions  as  required.  Coordination  Platforms
will  meet  every  quarter.  DPIUs/PPIUs  will  provide  support  to  the  operation  of  the  coordination
Platforms and will play the role of secretariat/executive structure
309.
Service  providers. All  service  providers’  contracts  will  be  performance-based  and  stipulate
clear  deliverables  with  a  timeframe  and  quantified  expected  outputs/outcomes,  and  they  will  specify
responsibilities  with  regard  to  monitoring  and  reporting,  including  the  information  of  progress
indicators  as  set  forth  in  the  contract.  Where  envisaged  for  more  than  a  year,  contracts  will  be
169



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
established on  an  annual  basis and  will be renewable based  on satisfactory  performance. Terms of
reference  for service  providers  will  require  gender-balanced  teams  with  prior  experience  of  gender
mainstreaming, and that contract deliverables reflect gender and inclusion target and indicators.
170
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
ATTACHMENT 1 – TEKAD ORGANISATIONAL CHART
171
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
ATTACHMENT 2 – TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE PROGRAMME
EXPEDITOR/MANAGEMENT
Qualifications & Experience: Preferably a higher degree in economics, agricultural economics,
management or business administration; practical experience of at least 10 years in project financial
management, planning, accounting procedures, procurement and monitoring and evaluation
procedures in internationally financed projects; a good knowledge of computer applications
(especially of accounting software) in the above related matters. Excellent sense of relationship and
negotiations skills. Fluent in English (reading, writing and speaking).
Special Qualifications: Knowledge of IFAD financial management, procurement and accounting
procedures. Knowledge of the Indonesian legislation with regard to donor-financed project financial
management and procurement legislation would be an advantage.
Location: At TEKAD NPMU in Jakarta, with travels as required to target provinces.
Duration: Assignment of up to a maximum of 4 months.
Reporting: To TEKAD National Programme Manager.
General Objective: To assist the NPMU in securing an effective and smooth programme start-up and
in setting up all of the programme management procedures and tools.
Detailed Tasks: The Programme Expeditor will be responsible for undertaking the following tasks, in
close cooperation with the NPMU and MoV/DNRAT:
Prepare  draft  advertisements  for  the  recruitment  of  NPMU,  PPIU  and  DPIU  staff for  review  and
approval by the NPMU and IFAD; prepare interview guidelines to be used by the interview panel,
including  evaluation  and  selection  criteria  for  each  post,  and  propose  the  composition  of  the
interview panel, for approval by MoA and subsequent no objection by IFAD; and prepare NPMU
recruitment to be submitted to MoA and IFAD no objection;
Assist the NPMU in setting up PPIUs and DPIUs and in devising procedures for communication
and supervision;
In  collaboration  with  relevant  NPMU  staff,  prepare  all  contracts  and  MoUs  with  main
implementation programme partners and service providers (MOV/Puslatmas, MoA, MoCI/BAKTI,
partner  financial  institutions),  establish  NPMU  office  and  launch  the  procurement  of  office
equipment and vehicles for the NPMU, PPIUs and DPIUs;
Train  the  NPMU  and  other  relevant  DNRAT/MoV  staff  dealing  with  contract  management on:
various  methods  of  procurement  and  selection  of  service  providers;  technical  and  financial
evaluation  of  bids;  performance-based  contract  models  to  be  used;  and  monitoring  of  contract
execution;
Assist  the  NPMU  in  preparing  the  first  AWPB  and  the  revised  procurement  plan,  and  train
relevant NPMU staff in the preparation of these documents.
Set  up  the  account  management  and  financial  reporting  system  together  with  Officer  and  the
Financial  and  Administrative  Manager  Consultant,  using  appropriate  accounting  software  and  in
accordance with established international practices and IFAD and GoI requirements.
Train NPMU staff in programme accounting, disbursement, financial reporting and procurement;
Assist  the  Financial  Management  Officer  and  the  Financial  and Administrative  Manager
Consultant in setting up programme accounts and in preparing withdrawal applications and SOEs
(Statements of Expenditures);
Support 
the 
Administrative Manual;
finalisation  of 
the  Programme 
Implementation  Manual  and  Finance  and
172









Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Assist  the  NPMU  in  expediting  compliance  to  pre-conditions  for  the  release  of  the  first  fund
disbursements;
Assist the NPMU in preparing and organising the programme start-up workshop.
Prepare  the  Framework  for  Good  Governance,  including  an  Internal Code  of  Conduct  to  be
signed  by  all  PMU  staff,  and a  Code  of  Business  Ethics  to  be  signed  by  all  partners  and
beneficiaries of TEKAD investments and activities.
173



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
VI. MONITORING AND EVALUATION/KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
310.
system will be developed with three main objectives:
Objectives. TEKAD  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  and  knowledge  management  (KM)
steer programme implementation: it should provide programme stakeholders at the three levels of
intervention  (district-province-national)  with  information  and  analysis  required  to:  plan  activities
and  investments;  measure  programme  outcomes;  assess  programme  effects  on  the  livelihoods
and skills of target groups; assess the relevance of the programme strategy, methodologies and
implementation  processes;  detect  difficulties  and  successes;  and  support  decision-making  to
improve programme performance;
support planning and economic decisions: it should provide programme stakeholders, in particular
villagers  and  programme  implementers,  with  the  information  and  analyses  they  need  to  assess
the  return  brought  by  innovation,  to  plan  for  and  develop  profitable  and  sustainable  economic
activities and to adapt their strategies accordingly;
share  knowledge  and  develop  scalable  models: it  should  develop  lessons  learnt,  capture  good
practices  and successful  innovation,  and  share  knowledge,  with  a  view  to  support  programme
performance and the gradual development of scalable models for Eastern Indonesia.
311.
General principles. The M&E and KM system will be:
open  and  easily  accessible:  information  and knowledge  should  be  available  to  all  stakeholders
and not restricted to programme staff and consultants;
participatory:  associate  programme  stakeholders  in  the  definition  of  indicators,  data  collection,
analysis and dissemination of results;
focused on analysis, learning and sharing in support of decision-making, knowledge sharing and
policy dialogue, and not merely on data production;
harmonised with MoV relevant information systems;
transparent: IAFD-financed  CCDP  programme  showed  that a  comprehensive  and  transparent
management  information  system  is  an  effective  tool  to  ensure  programme  ownership  by
programme staff and service providers and to support performance-based management;
phased,  thus  simple  and  small  initially,  concentrating  on  key  indicators,  and  expanding
progressively as needs and capacities develop, particularly at village and district level.
M&E SYSTEM
312.
Framework  and  implementation  plans. The  M&E  and  Knowledge  Management  (KM)
system will be developed in line with IFAD as well as GoI requirements. It will be set up and managed
by  the  NPMU,  in  consultation  with  MoV  and  other  programme  stakeholders,  and  it  will  be
decentralised  to  the  target  provinces,  where  it  will  be  managed  by  PPIUs,  and  to  the  district  level,
where it will be managed by DPIUs. The system will be harmonised with that of MoV, and in particular
with the Smart Village data system to be developed under P3PD, so that TEKAD-related data can be
easily used by GoI.
Short-term  international  technical  assistance will  be  hired  by  the NPMU  to:  (i)  agree  on  a
313.
shared understanding of programme objectives, approaches and planned activities;
(ii) agree on
a  broad  framework  for  M&E  and  KM  and  on  priority  actions  to  implement  it;  and  (iii)  identify
quantitative and qualitative indicators on a participatory basis, building on the logical framework and
on the set of IFAD’s Operational Results Management System (ORMS). The consultant will produce a
detailed  M&E/KM  manual,  together  with  a  first  implementation  plan,  including  capacity  development
arrangements. S/he will also provide orientations: (i) for the baseline survey, mid-term and completion
surveys (see below), to be carried out by a specialised service provider; and (iii) for the Annual Plans
for Model Development, Innovation and Communication (see Sub-Component 3.2).
314.
The  NPMU  will  translate  the  manual  into  easy-to-grasp  guidelines  in  Bahasa  Indonesia,
particularly targeting districts,  which  will be largely  shared. To ensure the smooth implementation  of
the M&E system, as well as the quality of the data and information submitted to the system, training
will be provided by the Senior M&E Expert and the MIS Expert to PPIUs. In turn, Provincial M&E/KM
and Policy Development Expert will train DPIUS and relevant district staff. District M&E/MIS Specialist
174









Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
will train DPIUS  and relevant district staff. The main features of the M&E/KM system are developed
below.
315.
Indicators. Building  on  the  PDR  logical  framework,  output  and  outcome  indicators  will  be
developed  with  TEKAD  stakeholders.  They  will  be  SMART  (specific,  measurable,  achievable,
relevant,  time-bound),  easy  to  collect  and  disaggregated  by  gender  and  by  relevant  target  groups.
They  will  include  relevant  ORMS  indicators  as  well  as  COSOP  indicators.  The  National  GESI
Specialist  and  Provincial  GESI  Experts  will  be  consulted  to  ensure  that  the  system  adequately
monitors inclusion, poverty and gender aspects.
316.
Baseline,  outcome  and  completion  surveys.  The  NPMU  will  carry  out  a  baseline  study
measuring  the  status  of  main  indicators  at  programme onset,  with  assistance  from  an  outsourced
qualified consulting firm. The scope of the survey and implementation modalities will be defined by the
NPMU Senior M&E Specialist, with support from the M&E/KM consultant hired at the beginning of the
programme. Target indicators in the PDR logical framework will be reviewed based on actual baseline
figures. The baseline study will be updated through the mapping studies (Subcomponent 2.2) and the
information  gathered  as  part  of  the  GESI  baseline  during  the  first  year  of  TEKAD  programme
implementation.
317.
Additionally, mini-baseline  surveys  will be carried out  at district level, building  on the  Village
Information  System,  along  a  simple  e-format  to  be  prepared  at  programme  inception  by  the  NPMU
Senior M&E Specialist and the specialised consultant, in collaboration with the National and Provincial
Village Governance and Economic Development Experts.
318.
Planning. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the programme Annual Work
Plan and Budget (AWPB), which will cover detailed annual planning of activities and implementation
responsibilities,  physical  results  targeted,  outputs  expected,  budget  and  procurement  plan.  The
AWPB  will  also  include  the  Annual  GESI  Implementation  Plan  (see  Section  IV  A),  the  Annual  M&E
Implementation Plan  (see  this  section,  above)  and  Annual  Plan  for  Model  Development,  Innovation
and Communication (Sub-component 3.2).
319.
AWPBS will build on:
AWPBs prepared by DPIUs and PPIUs;
AWPBs prepared by service providers;
Draft  district/provincial  AWPBs  orientations  provided  by  the  District  Coordination  Platforms  for
Village Economic Development/Province Coordination Platforms, including for the identification of
policy studies.
320.
The  programme  AWPB  will  be  collated  by  the  NPMU  Senior  M&E  Expert  and  the Financial
Management Expert (for budgeting), under the supervision of the Consultant Team Leader, and it will
be submitted to the Programme Steering Committee for final approval. TEKAD stakeholders will have
an active role in identifying, collecting and analysing data.
321.
Data collection. Data will be collected against both qualitative and quantitative indicators and
disaggregated by gender, along forms to be proposed by the M&E/KM consultant hired at programme
onset and the following levels:
District  level,  where  information  will  be  gathered  by  DPIUs  with  the  help  of  Village  Governance
Facilitators  and  Economic  Initiatives  Advisers,  building  on  the  Village  Information  System  and
updates provided by village cadres. These will receive a tablet to support data collection;
Provincial  level,  where  district-based  information  will  be  consolidated,  together  with  data  on
activities implemented at provincial level, including implementation of service providers’ contracts
(including financial institutions) in the province;
NPMU  level, information  will  encompass  overall  programme  performance,  including  nationally
contracted service providers and will be the responsibility of the Senior M&E Specialist.
322.
MIS. TEKAD  will  develop  a  web-based  Management  Information  System  (MIS)  to  support
data  management.  The  MIS  will  track  and  regularly  update  gender-disaggregated  financial  and
technical data on programme outputs and outcomes, lessons learnt and good practices. It will build on
the  Village  Information  System  that  will  be  set up  at  village  level  and  operated  and  maintained  by
village cadres (see Sub-component 1.1). A service provider will set up the system along indications to
175






Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
be  provided  by  the  M&E/KM  consultant  hired  at  programme  onset  and  provide  training  to  relevant
staff  along  with  the  MIS  Specialist.  S/he  will  be  responsible  for  the  MIS  operation  and  maintenance
and for providing technical guidance to the provincial and district levels.
Geo-tagging.
In  complement  to  the  Village  Information  System  and to  further  support
323.
planning,  monitoring  and  programme  transparency,  a  geo-tagging  system  will  be  developed  to  map
and  document  village  collective  infrastructure  financed  through  village  resources  and  their  status  of
achievement (see Sub-component 1.2).
324.
Analysis. Data  will  be  consolidated  and  analysed  so  as  to  provide  information  on  the
performance of the various components, detect problems, identify possible solutions and track good
practices  to  share  through  the  knowledge  management  system.  Building  on  CCDP  successful
experience, the MIS will generate weekly and monthly dashboards showing progress on key outputs
and  objectives,  profiling  DPIU  and  PPIU  performance  and  showing  progress  towards  meeting  key
programme indicators. Weekly meetings will be held at the various levels to review progress, discuss
issues, and update programme status.
325.
exchange of information throughout wide programme target areas and will foster team building.
The  use  of  mobile  applications  like  WhatsApp,  Facebook  and  Twitter  will  facilitate  the
326.
Reporting. The  NPMU  will  prepare  semi-annual  progress  reports,  which  will  record  and
analyse technical and financial achievements. A draft structure of semi-annual reports is presented in
Attachment 1. Progress reports will be channelled to the Programme Steering Committee and to IFAD
for discussion and review. Semi-annual progress reports will build on:
DPIU reports: DPIUs will be required to submit brief progress reports, using a simple template to
be provided by the NPMU. Progress reports should be short, but include at least the following
information: financial summary (using a short table), main activities and outputs, number and
description of beneficiaries, constraints/difficulties and proposed solutions;
Provincial Team Reports: Provincial Teams will prepare semi-annual progress reports, along a
format that will be developed by the NPMU and that will be similar to that of the programme
progress report.
327.
M&E  capacity  development.  The  NPMU  will  provide  capacity  building  trainings  to  PPIUs
and  DPIUs.  The  Senior  M&E/KM  Specialist  will  design  a  capacity  building  plan,  based  on  prior
capacity assessment, to support  PPIUs and DPIUs on both concepts and practical skills to manage
the  M&E  system,  especially  data  collection,  data  analysis  and  reporting.  Short-term  technical
assistance could be hired if needed.
INCEPTION, REVIEWS AND SURVEYS
Inception. A national start-up workshop will be organised with programme stakeholders and
328.
implementing  partners,  including  from  the  five  provinces,  to:  (i)  ensure  that  all  partners  understand
and agree on the scope and implementing modalities of the programme; (ii) introduce key processes,
tools, strategies for M&E and KM; and (iii) build relationships for future knowledge sharing.
329.
Start-up workshops will subsequently be organized in every participating province and district.
330.
Implementation support. Annual Implementation Support Missions (ISMs) will be organised
by IFAD jointly with GoI, in close collaboration with MoV, PPIUs, DPIUs and programme stakeholders.
ISMs will offer an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to review innovations, and
to reflect on improvement measures. Missions will therefore be an integral part of the KM cycle, with
mission members playing a supportive and coaching role. To ensure continuity in the process, ISMs
will  be  carried  out  by  a  core  team  of  resource  persons  returning  regularly,  joined  by  specialists  to
address specific needs of a given year.
331.
Interim Programme Reviews. Given the innovative  features of the programme, two interim
reviews will be jointly organized by IFAD and GoI. The First Interim Review will take place at the end
of  PY  3  with  a  view  to:  (i)  assess  the  results,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  programme;  (ii)
identify key lessons learnt and good practices; (iii) review institutional arrangements; and (iv) provide
recommendations  for  improved  performance  and  the  achievement  of  impact.  Specific  issues  to  be
addressed include the following:
176


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Overall programme performance and performance of partners;
Most performing models and opportunities for scaling up in the different agroecological zones and
in more/less connected areas;
Performance in attributing Village Fund and other village resources as well as district funds to
support village economic development;
Participation of district and lower levels staff and readiness to take-over from programme staff;
Progress in engaging women, youth and marginalised groups in village planning and in
participating in programme activities;
Performance of financial institutions in delivering programme-supported financial instruments, in
improving financial inclusion and in supporting village economic development;
Linkages and synergies between the four components;
Role and impact of the coordination platforms;
Performance of the NPMU, PPIU, DPUI and of key implementation partners, including in terms of
required reporting, disbursement targets, implementation schedule and resolving implementation
issues.
332.
A Second Interim Review  will be  organized,  with similar objectives, in the course of the fifth
year. It will also review the likelihood of sustainable programme outcomes and the extent to which a
conducive  ecosystem has been developed  whereby  public and private  programme stakeholders are
geared  to  take  over  from  programme  interventions  and  support village  economic  development.  The
Review will make recommendations with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability
of programme achievements, based on which the NPMU will prepare a detailed exit strategy. This will
include  reviewing  the  options  for  ensuring  the  continuity  of  the  Eastern  Indonesia  Gateway  beyond
programme completion (see Sub-component 3.1).
333.
Impact  and  outcome  assessments. As  per  the  current  practice  within  IFAD's  Indonesia
country programme, an Annual Outcome Survey will be undertaken each year from Programme Year
2. Impact surveys will be carried out at three points during programme implementation, at baseline in
2018/19,  in  preparation  to  the  second  interim  review  (end  of  PY  4)  and  prior  to  programme
completion. They will be undertaken by the NPMU with the support of a service provider, in line with
IFAD’s  Impact  Survey  Guidelines.  Tools  such  as  case  studies,  the  Most  Significant  Changes  and
photo  stories  will  be  used  to  collect  qualitative  information  through  a  participatory  approach.  Survey
data and analysis will be shared with the multi-stakeholders’ platforms.
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
Objective. The purpose of KM is to ensure that knowledge generated within the programme
334.
is  systematically  identified,  analysed,  documented  and  shared,  and  that  it  is  used  to:  (i)  improve
programme performance and delivery; (ii) document and share innovations, best practices and stories
of successes and failures to improve programme intervention and support mainstreaming in national
processes  and  upscaling;  and  (iii)  identify  important  issues  to  convey  to  policy  makers.  Particular
attention  will  be  given  to  the  regular  development  and  update  of  Orientation  and  Capacity  Building
Packages  (Component  3.2),  which  will  provide  a  set  of  evidence-based and  replicable  models  for
improving the use of village resources and for developing village partnerships with public and private
players in support of inclusive and sustainable village economic development.
KM 
for Model  Development, 
framework  and  Annual  Plan 
335.
Innovation  and
Communication. In  consultation  with  programme  stakeholders  and  in  collaboration  with  the  NPMU
Senior  M&E  and  KM/Policy  Development  Experts  and  PPIU  M&E/KM  Officer,  the  same  consultant
hired  to  design  the  M&E  system  will  prepare  a  detailed  KM  framework  (as  part  of  the  M&E/KM
manual). The framework will include objectives, responsibilities and methodology, together with a Plan
for  Model  Development,  Innovation  and  Communication  (see  Sub-component  3.2)  for  the  first  year.
The  M&E/KM  consultant  will  provide  technical  guidance  in  implementing  the  framework  and  further
improving  it  based  on  experience,  through  annual  or  biannual  follow-up  missions.  Every  year  an
Annual Plan for Model Development, Innovation and Communication, covering KM, will be prepared,
along the methodology outlined under Sub-component 3.2.
177









Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Online  communication  approaches  utilizing 
336.
instant
messenger, social media and short videos, will be used to reach wider audience, communicating the
programme objectives, efforts and outcomes, also inspiring the local youth on economic opportunities
that  they  could  start  in  their  own  village.  The  Eastern  Indonesia  Gateway  will  be  connected  to
GoDesa, the online platform that will be developed by MoV, with support from P3PD.
Indonesia  Gateway, 
the  Eastern 
178
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Attachment 1: Content of Semi-Annual Progress Reports
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
Executive Summary
a. Overall progress with implementation and semester highlights
b. Key issues and actions taken
c. Key points on which Programme Steering Committee and IFAD guidance is sought
(as needed)
Progress with component implementation [For each component, discuss progress
with activities for the period against agreed AWPB and logical
identify
problems and possible solutions]
a. Component 1 – Activity implemented and results against work plan
b. Component 2 – Activity implemented and results against work plan
c. Component 3 – Activity implemented and results against work plan
framework,
Progress in meeting legal covenants [Report progress towards legal covenants in
Financing Agreement]
Progress with Agreed AWPB to [date]
[Discuss progress and include action plan in annex 1]
Financial Monitoring
a. Financial management status [include new commitments disbursement data, audit
status, etc., and refer to tables in annex 2]
b. Procurement status [Discuss procurement status and refer to table in annex 3]
Key Indicators [Discuss general progress and refer to tables in annex 4]
Knowledge Management
Development, Innovation and Communication]
[Present
implementation of Annual Plan for Model
VIII. Work Program for the next 6 months [Discuss key activities for the coming period and
any adjustment to the Programme of Activities]
IX.
Annexes
Annex 1 – Status of Agreed Action Plan
Annex 2 – Financial Management Report
Annex 3 – Procurement Status Report
Annex 4 – Progress against results framework and key indicators
179
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
VII. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS
A. IMPLEMENTING AND PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS WITH FIDUCIARY
RESPONSIBILITIES
337.
The  NPMU  will  be  operated  under  the  authority  of  MoV’s  Director  General  of  Village
Development  and  Community  Empowerment,  which  will  be  delegated  to  the  Director  of  Natural
Resources  and  Applied  Technology.  They  will  have  the  overall  accountability  for  the  programme,
including fiduciary aspects. The Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied Technology directorate
has experience in implementing international funding programme from World Bank and IFAD through
VDP. TEKAD Provincial Programme Implementation Units (PIUs) at the provincial level will be under
the authority of the Provincial  Village Empowerment Agency (DPMK/DPMD). All  activities at District,
Subdistrict and village level will be administered by the PPIU. NPMU and PPIU will hire and mobilize a
team of financial management consultants at national and subnational level to assist the programme.
B. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT RISK ASSESSMENT
a.
Inherent Risks: Country Issues, Entity Risks
338.
Based on the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 2017 report, Indonesia
has established a strong legal and regulatory framework aligned with most international standards on
public finance management (PFM). Main  PFM standards have  been adopted on accounting, budget
classification,  internal  control  as  well  as  internal  audit.  The Treasury  Single  Account  is  in  place  and
constitutes  the backbone  of  the  expenditure  management  and  control.  Strong  fiscal  discipline  is
achieved  through  a  budget  formulation  and  execution  processes  guided  by  a  strong  macro  fiscal
framework  and  clear  fiscal  rules.  The  transparent  and  participatory  budget  formulation  process  is
noteworthy;  budget  documentation  and  classification  are  comprehensive,  and  the  scrutiny  by  the
parliament  is  more  effective.  The  Indonesian  Corruption  Perception  Index  (CPI)  score  for  2018
according to Transparency International website is 38 (2017: 37; 2016: 37; 2015: 36; 2014: 34; 2013:
32), scale 0-high and 100-low risk).
339.
The inherent risk for Indonesia is medium. The programme design has taken this medium risk
into consideration with the proposed financial management arrangement to ensure that an adequate
system is in place at all level including a qualified set of financial management team.
b. Risks Linked to Programme Financial Management
340.
Table 7 shows a summary of financial management risks and mitigation actions.
180
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Table 7 - Financial management risks and mitigation actions
Risk Category
A.
Inherent Risks
Proposed Risk Mitigation Measures
Risk
Rating
(H/M/L)
Residual
Risk Rating
(H/M/L)
Country Level
M
-
M
Indonesia
index of 38/100.
Poor TI
However, PEFA 2017 shows
that
been
adopted main PFM standards
including accounting, budget
internal control
classification,
as well as internal audit
has
233.
Entity and programme design
M
MOV is a new ministry with
capacity issue
Use VDP lesson learned to improve
financial management system and
provide better and clearer guideline for
TEKAD
M
has
experience
in
LPA
implementing internal funding
programmes, including VDP.
Programme location: Papua
and Papua Barat are the most
challenging provinces in the
country.
234.
B. Programme Control Risks
1.Organization & Staffing
dedicated
Inadequate
government
to
implement the programme, in
financial management aspect
in particular
official
Remoteness might
issue
in
communication
coordination
create
and
2.Budgeting
Delay in issue of budget
documents
3. Funds Flow & Disbursements
Delay from the date of entry
into force to the date of first
in
disbursement,
slow start-up.
resulting
Delay in disbursement due to
delay in submitting withdrawal
application
H
M
H
M
M
M
Government commitment to have a
stronger and dedicated team to
manage the programme.
Financial Management consultants will
be hired at national, provincial and
district level to support FM function
FM consultants will be hired
individually. Not through service
provider/company
Budget preparation is well defined, but
there are frequent delays in execution.
Decree on budget execution should be
issued right after budget documents
are issued
The extent possible, new financing
should build on existing structures and
mechanisms, and early and continuous
consultation with Government is
essential to mitigate delays.
To ensure a smooth start-up of the
programme including early recruitment
of service providers and
implementation of construction
activities in PY1, preparatory planning,
establishment of the PSU, recruitment
of staff and procurement of service will
take place at earlier stage.
181









Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Risk Category
Proposed Risk Mitigation Measures
Risk
Rating
(H/M/L)
Residual
Risk Rating
(H/M/L)
Financial management consultants
recruited to assist day today
programme financial management at
national and district level
IFAD to provide training on financial
management procedures, including
disbursement requirements
First year implementation will be
funded by IFAD and GOI only
Internal control including financial
document management and storage
are documented in the programme
manual
The programme will develop an
automation financial reporting system.
Meanwhile a spreadsheet-based
reporting system will be use to process
the data derived from the government
accounting system into programme
financial reports for monitoring and
reporting purposes
Automation financial reporting system
will be developed
Provide guidance on how to capture
GOI and community contribution in the
programme financial report
IFAD to conduct additional fiduciary
supervision mission for the first 2 years
to ensure that FM systems are in place
The programme to include the internal
auditor (Itjen) in designing the internal
audit framework for the programme
To propose to MOF to include BPKP as
internal audit for the programme
BPK will be assigned for the audit.
The programme to create a tool to
monitor follow up progress and status
of auditor findings, and included in the
PIM
Public discloser will be included in the
Auditor TOR
4. Internal Control
turnover especially of
Staff
government staffs can lead to
of
poor
programme
financial
documents
management
5. Accounting Systems, Policies &
Procedures
H
M
of
government
Reliability
accounting system for
IFAD
and programme monitoring
purposes
No component identity in the
government financial system.
6.Reporting & Monitoring
H
The programme might not be
able to produce reliable and
timely financial report
Unclear system to capture
GOI & community contribution
in the programme financial
report
7.Internal Audit
The programme not included
in
audit
to
program
internal
Itjen
VDP internal audit was weak.
Itjen involved in budgeting
process only
8. Auditing
Integrity of the Auditor
H
M
BPK is relatively new for IFAD
programme. They have not
yet
IFAD
procedure and/or system
familiar
with
follow up of auditor
Poor
findings
Programme Fiduciary Risk at Design
OVERALL FM RISK
M
M
182
M
M
M
M
M
M
M










Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Risk Category
* H=High, M=Medium, L=Low
Risk
Rating
(H/M/L)
Proposed Risk Mitigation Measures
Residual
Risk Rating
(H/M/L)
C. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS
a. Financial Management Organization and Staffing
341.
Overall,  the  programme  financial  management  will  be  the  responsibility  of  National
Programme Management Unit (NPMU) hosted  by  the Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied
Technology,  under  the  Directorate  General  of  Village  Community  Empowerment  and  Development,
Ministry of Villages. At the provincial level, a Provincial Programme Implementation Unit will be based
within the Provincial Village Empowerment Agency (DPMK/DPMD) in the five target provinces.
342.
All staff will be hired under individual contracts by the NPMU.
The financial management staffing at national and subnational level can be seen in Table 8.
Table 8 – TEKAD Financial Management Staff
Position
National Level
Number
Senior Financial Management Consultant
1
Provincial Level
Financial Management Consultant
1 per province
b. Budgeting
343.
The NPMU will prepare Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB), to be submitted to IFAD for
review  and  no  objection.  The  AWPB  shall  include  the  activities,  respective  costs,  source  of  funds,
schedules, and also  procurement plan. The annual budget (DIPA)  preparation  will follow  the annual
government budget processing procedures as described in Figure 1. Under TEKAD, the DIPA budget
documents are being arranged as follows:
Central DIPA budget to be executed by central Satker would cover NPMU operation, monitoring,
coordination and other consultant services at central level;
Provincial DIPA budget to be executed by the provincial Satker would cover provincial operations,
district operations, facilitator's salaries and allowances and programme activities at provincial and
district  level.  The  Province  Satker  will  execute  payments,  administer  and  report  on  programme
activities in respective province.
183


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Figure 1. Process of Preparing and Stipulating State Budget (APBN)
c. Disbursement Arrangements and Flow of Funds
Designated  Account. The  programme  will  have  two  Designated  Accounts  in US$,  in  the
344.
name of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) at Bank Indonesia (BI): one account for the IFAD loan funds
and  one  for  the  IFAD  grant.  Funds  in  these  accounts  will  be  used  to  pay  eligible  programme
expenditures  incurred  by  NPMU  and  PPIUs.  The  modalities  of  the  designated  account  for  the  IFAD
resources  will  be  detailed  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  (LTB),  which  will  be  issued  by  IFAD.
Documentation  evidencing  the  opening  of  the  Designated  Account,  with  details  of  the  names and
titles of the persons authorized to operate this account, must reach IFAD before withdrawal from the
loan and the grant accounts can begin. A sample form is provided in the LTB.
Authorized  allocation. The  maximum  authorized  allocation  to  the  IFAD’s  Designated
345.
Accounts will be US$ 3,000,000 for the Loan, and EUR 250,000 for the grant. One or more advances
may  be  withdrawn  within  this  authorized  allocation.  The  authorized  allocation  to  the  Designated
Accounts may be amended during the course of programme implementation.
In  general,  there  will  be  three  types  of  disbursement  mechanisms  for  the  programme:  (i)
346.
Advance  Withdrawal;  (ii)  Direct  Payment;  (iii)  Reimbursement.  The  IFAD  loan  will  be  disbursed  in
accordance  with  IFAD  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (LDH)143.  Considering  the  activities,  the
programme  will  adapt  imprest  account  arrangement,  with  advance  payment  and  then  followed  by
replenishment to the DA.
347. Withdrawal  application. The  NPMU  is  responsible  to  prepare  the  documentation  and
reporting  required  to submit  withdrawal  application.  The  forms  and  explanatory  notes  on  their
preparation are provided in the LDH (Section 3, Annexes 2 and 3) and in the LTB. The forms provided
in the LTB, Annex 3 supersede the corresponding ones provided in the LDH.
143 https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/39635782
184
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
348.
Eligibility of expenditure will require the following:
The expenditure shall meet the reasonable cost of goods, works and services required for the
programme and veered by the relevant AWPB and procured in conformity with the procurement
guidelines;
The expenditure shall be incurred during the programme implementation period, except
expenditures to meet the costs of winding up the programme that may be incurred after the
programme completion date and before the closing date;
The expenditure shall be incurred by a programme party;
the Financing Agreement allocates the amount of
If
the financing to categories of eligible
expenditures and specifies the percentages of such eligible expenditures to be financed, the
expenditure must relate to a category whose allocation has not been depleted, and shall be
eligible only up to the percentage applicable to such category;
The expenditure shall be otherwise eligible in accordance with the terms of
Agreement (FA).
the Financing
Start-up costs. The programme may request an advance withdrawal up to
349.
US$ 300,000
from  the  Loan,  to  incur  programme  start-up  expenditures  before  the  satisfaction  of  the  additional
(general/specific)  conditions  precedent  to  withdrawal,  in  accordance  with  FA,  General  Conditions,
Section 4.02(b) and FA, Schedule 2. Any unused balance of the start-up advance will be treated as
part of the initial advance under the authorized allocation.
350. Withdrawal  Applications  for  Advance  Withdrawal  and  Reimbursements  may  be  submitted
once  ninety  (90)  days  have  lapsed from  the  submission  of  the  previous  withdrawal  application.  If,
however, the requested withdrawal amount is at least thirty per cent (30%) of the advance described
in  LTB,  paragraph  16,  a  withdrawal  application  may  be  submitted  even  if  ninety  (90)  days  have  not
lapsed.
The  Direct  Payment  procedure  should  be  used  only  for  payments  of  more  than
351.
US$
100,000  equivalent.  Programme  expenditures  below  this  threshold  should  be  paid  from  the
programme’s Designated Account. Withdrawal applications will be processed by the Accounting and
Controller's  Division  (ACD)  of  IFAD.  An  application  for  withdrawal,  accompanied  by  a  summary  of
expenditure by category and by relevant forms and supporting documents, should be sent in original
to IFAD.
352.
Refund  of  Withdrawals. Any  amount  withdrawn  from  the  programme  loan  to  finance  any
expenditure other than the eligible expenditure or will not be needed thereafter to finance the eligible
expenditures, shall be promptly refunded to IFAD. The refund shall be made in the currency used to
disburse such withdrawal.
d. Supporting Documents, Statement of Expenditure (SOE) and SOE Thresholds
353.
LDH, Section 4 provides details regarding the use of the Statements of Expenditure (SOE) to
justify advances or seek reimbursement. The format for the SOE to be used for financing is attached
as  Annex  1.  The  applicable  SOE  threshold  for  withdrawal  application,  under  procedure  (i)"Advance
Withdrawal", and under procedure (iv) "Reimbursement", is US$ 50,000 for all expenditure categories.
SOE thresholds can be changed by IFAD during the programme implementation period by notification
to the Borrower and Programme Management.
354. Withdrawal  applications  for  contracts  or  invoices  with  amounts  higher  than  these  SOE
thresholds  must  be  accompanied  by  copies  of relevant  supporting  documents  evidencing  eligible
expenditure  (Refer  to  LDH,  Section  3).  The  SOE  and  other  documentation  shall  state  amounts
requested  for  withdrawal  after  excluding  amounts  financed  from  other  financing  sources  or
counterpart funds.
355. Withdrawal  applications  for  Direct  Payments  must  be accompanied  by  a  signed  copy  of  the
contract  and  relevant  supporting  documents  evidencing  eligible  expenditure  (e.g.  invoices,  receipts,
documentary  evidence  of  completion  of  contracted  goods  and  services,  payee’s  bank  identity
certificate).
185





Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
e. Flow of Funds
356.
The programme loan  will be allocated using APBN budget mechanism which  would then be
passed  to  provincial  and  district  level  with  Dekonsentrasi  mechanism.  DG Treasury,  Ministry  of
Finance will authorize its relevant Treasury offices (KPPNs) located nearby the implementation units
to authorize payments of eligible programme expenditures by issuance of a remittance order (SP2D)
charging  the  DA. For  this  purpose,  DG  Treasury  shall  issue  a  circular  letter  to  the  relevant  KPPN
offices  providing  guidelines  and  criteria  for  eligible  programme  expenditures  in  accordance  with  the
credit/loan agreements. When expenditures are due for payment, PIU will prepare a payment request
(SPP) to the payment officer within the Satker. After documents verification, the payment  officer will
issue  a  payment  order  (SPM)  together  with  the  supporting  documentation  for  submission  to  the
relevant KPPN. The KPPN will check the budget eligibility and issue SP2D to the KPPN’s operational
bank, which  will  transfer  the  fund  directly  to  the  payee’s  account  and  arrange  for  debit  for  the  loan
portion to the DA. This arrangement will be applied for provincial payment process as well.
357.
The flow of funds and reporting mechanisms are shown in Figure 2.
f. Accounting Systems, Policies and Procedures
358.
Financial  transactions  at  national  and  subnational  level  will  be  recorded  in  the  government
accounting  system  (SAI)  and  included  in  the  government  accountability  reports.  The  FM  team  will
manage  the  accounting  requirements  of  the  programme,  as  well  as  the overall  accounting  system.
The  finance  team  will  also  be  responsible  for  ensuring  adequate  records  and  verification  of
programme expenditures.
359.
Under  the  current  government  accounting  system,  the  payment  vouchers  (SPM  and  SP2D)
do  include  information  on  the  programme  categories  but  not  for  component/subcomponent.  Report
modification  will  be  conducted  accordingly  through  an  automated  reporting  system  that  will  be
developed in PY1.
186
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
g.
Internal Control
360.
segregation of identified duties including:
In  general,  the programme  will  follow  the  government  internal  control  mechanism  where
Authorization is conducted by the Commitment Making Officer (PPK)
Recording is conducted by the Treasurer; and
Custody of assets is conducted by the Treasurer.
361.
auditor and fiduciary review conducted on supervision mission.
Compliance  to  internal  controls  will  be  part  of  the  audit  by  the  internal  and  independent
h. Financial Reporting
362.
All  financial  transactions  for  the  programme  will  be  recorded  in  the  government  accounting
system as well as included in the government accountability reports. In addition, the programme will
prepare  a  separate  set  of  programme  financial  reports  that  are  suitable  for  programme  monitoring
purposes. This will be facilitated through an automation system which will be developed in PY1.
363.
Interim  Financial  Reports. The  NPMU  will  be  responsible  to  prepare  aggregate  Interim
Financial Reports with an agreed format and submit them to IFAD quarterly within 45 days after the
period end.
364.
The programme will also submit annual financial statement for each fiscal year that states all
programme  operation,  resources  and  expenditures.  All  financing  resources  (IFAD,  counterpart
contribution, beneficiary contribution, co financier funds) shall be accounted in the report. Attachment
2 gives an example for a programme Financial Statement format.
365.
During  IFAD  review/supervision  missions,  NPMU  should  prepare  consolidated  financial
reports for IFAD review which should include information on the: (i) annual approved/agreed AWPB;
(ii)  approved  annual  budget;  (iii)  annual  budget  expenditures;  (iv)  cumulative  AWPB;  (v)  cumulative
approved budget to date; and other information required for the mission.
i. Audit
366.
Internal  audit. TEKAD  internal  audit  will  be conducted  by  the  Inspectorate  General  (Itjen)
who is reporting to the Minister. Itjen will conduct internal monitoring of the Programme performance,
financial management and administration through audit, review, evaluation and supervision. However,
the capacity of Itjen is limited to cover all audit components. BPKP as the government internal auditor
who was acted as the programme external auditor for VDP will be explored to fill in the gap.
367.
External  audit. The  programme  annual  financial  statement  will  be audited  by  the
independent  auditor,  BPK  in  accordance  with  International  Standards  on  Auditing.  The  audited
programme financial statements will be submitted in English to IFAD within 6 (six) months of the end
of  the  fiscal  year  by  the  Executing  Agency.  The annual  audit  report  will  include  a  separate  audit
opinion  on  the  use  of  the  imprest  account,  SOE  procedures  and  financial  loan  covenants.  The
government has been made aware of IFAD’s policy on delayed submission, and the requirements for
satisfactory and acceptable quality of the audited programme financial statements. IFAD reserves the
right  to  verify  the  programme’s  financial  statements  to  confirm  that  the  share  of  IFAD’s  financing  is
used  in  accordance  with  IFAD’s  policies  and  procedures.  After  review,
IFAD  will  disclose  the
Programme financial statements and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements. The draft
term of reference for the auditor is in Attachment 3.
D. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SUPERVISION PLAN
The programme will be jointly supervised by GoI and IFAD. Formal joint supervision missions
368.
will  be  conducted  at  least  once  per  financial  year  with  additional  implementation  support  missions
mobilized  as  necessary.  At  least  one  additional  implementation  support  mission  will  be  mobilized
within the  first  6  months  of  programme  implementation  and  at  least  one  additional  implementation
support mission during the second year.
369.
During joint supervision missions and implementation support mission, the main topics to be
reviewed  and  discussed  will  include,  among  others:  (i)  comparison  of  programme  progress  against
187



Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
AWPB;  (ii)  cumulative  programme  expenditures  based  on  the  source  of  funds,  per  component/sub-
component and per category; (iii) loan and/or grant disbursements;
(iv) financial data filing system;
(v)  check  a  sample  SOE  to  verify  their  accuracy  against  IFAD  records  and  adequacy  of  supporting
documents;  (vi)  asset  register;  (vii)  latest  audit  report  and  its  follow  up  action  progress;  (viii)
procurement; and (ix) compliance with the loan covenants.
370.
Two interim reviews will be jointly organized by IFAD and GoI, one at the end of PY3 and the
other one in PY5Interim reviews are a means to improve programme performance and relevance, as
well as to identify re-orientation to the programming that may be needed to ensure the achievement of
the original objectives. Loan and/or grant fund re-allocation may be necessary to adjust the changes.
188
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Attachment 1 - Evidence of Authority to Sign Withdrawal Applications
(Sample letter – to be submitted on
letterhead) [to include full street
address, city, country]
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
di Dono, 44
00142
Rome, Italy
Attention:
Services
Finance Administration
Accounting and Controller’s Division
Subject:
IFAD
Loan/Grant/Financing
No.: Programme Name:
Dear
Sirs/Madams
:
Date:
Via Paolo
to
the
refer
between
Financing
Agreement
of
I
Borrower/Recipient], dated [-----]. In accordance with the provisions of Section
4.04(b) of IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated
29 April 2009 as may be amended from time to time, I hereby designate the
signature(s)
following
appear(s) below as authorized, on behalf of
to sign
Applications for Withdrawal under the above-referenced IFAD Loan/Grant/Financing.
This notification enters into effect as of [----- date].
the Borrower/Recipient,
persons) whose
authenticated
IFAD and
specimen
person
[Name
(or
(Optional) The following is the official email address which will be used by the
Borrower/Recipient to submit Applications for Withdrawal and other official
communications to IFAD:
. Any communication not originating from this address should
be disregarded.
(Name(s) and Title(s))
Specimen
signature
(Name(s)
and
Title(s))
Specimen
signature
(Name(s)
and
Title(s))
Specimen signature
(Indicate if the authorization to sign is jointly with another person(s)).
Signed by:
Title of the Borrower/Recipient’s
Designated Representative
(as provided in the Financing
Agreement)
189
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Attachment 2 - Example of Programme Financial Statement
Programme Name………………………………...
Implementing Agency………………………
IFAD Loan/Grant Number…………………….
PROGRAMME FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
Prepared in accordance with The Cash Basis of Accounting Method of the International
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS)
190
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
CONTENTS
PAGE
Programme Information and performance
Statement of programme management responsibilities
Report of the independent auditor
Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category)
Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component)
Statement of comparative budget and actual amount
Statement of Special Account movements
Statement of Special Account Reconciliations
SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement
Notes to the Financial Statements
10-11
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
191
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
PROGRAMME INFORMATION AND PERFORMANCE
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
Institutional Details/Information: Implementing agency, status, location, names,
account numbers and address of bankers (Special and Programme accounts) name
and address of independent auditors
 Members of the Programme Coordinating Unit: Names and roles
Background Information on the Programme: Source of
Loan/Grant(s), effective and closing date(s)
financing: size of
Programme Objectives: As per Design Completion/Appraisal Report
Programme Costs: By component and category of expenditures as per Financing
Agreement and Design Completion/Appraisal Report
Summary of Performance: Physical progresses as per Progress/Supervision
Reports
192





Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTING OFFICER AND PROGRAMME COORDINATOR’S
RESPONSIBILITIES
193
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
(INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S LETTERHEAD)
REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
(Consolidated auditors report on the Programme Financial Statements, the Special
Account and the SOEs Opinion)
194
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
Notes
200X
200X-1
Cumulative
to date
Local
currency
Local
currency
Local
currency
4
XXX
XXX
Balance B/F
FINANCING
IFAD Credit
Initial Deposit
Replenishments to SA
IFAD Direct Payments
Government Funds
Other Donors
Other Receipts
TOTAL FINANCING
PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES:
(BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)
Cat
IFAD CREDIT
1 AAA
2 BBB
3 CCC
4 DDD
5 EEE
6 GGG
7 HHH
8 LLL
Government Funds
1 AAA
2 BBB
TOTAL
5
6
7
8
9
9
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
TOTAL PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES
XXX
XXX
BALANCE C/F
4
XXX
XXX
195
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY COMPONENT)
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
Balance B/F
FINANCING
IFAD Credit
Initial Deposit
Replenishments to SA
IFAD Direct Payments
Government Funds
Other Donors
Other Receipts
Notes
200X
200X-1
Cumulative
to date
Local
currency
Local
currency
Local
currency
4
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
5
6
7
8
TOTAL FINANCING
XXX
XXX
XXX
PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES:
(BY COMPONENT)
Comp IFAD CREDIT
A AAA
B BBB
C CCC
Government Funds
A AAA
B BBB
TOTAL
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
TOTAL PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES
XXX
XXX
BALANCE C/F
4
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
196
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
200X
Budget
200X
Actual
Variance
Notes
Local
currency
Local
currency
Local
currency
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
FINANCING
IFAD Credit
Replenishments to SA
IFAD Direct Payments
Government Funds
TOTAL FINANCING
XXX
XXX
XXX
PROGRAMME
EXPENDITURES:
(BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)
Cat
IFAD CREDIT
1 AAA
2 BBB
3 CCC
4 DDD
5 EEE
6 GGG
7 HHH
8 LLL
Government Funds
1 AAA
2 BBB
TOTAL
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
TOTAL PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES
XXX
XXX
XXX
Surplus/Deficit for the period
XXX
XXX
XXX
The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the Budget of X% was due to….
197
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
STATEMENT OF SPECIAL ACCOUNT ACTIVITIES
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
Account No: ___________
Bank: ________________
Address:_______________
Opening Balance
Notes
US$ (or as
otherwise
denominated)
Local
Currency
XXX
XXX
Add:
IFAD Replenishments:
WA No
WA No
XXX
XXX
XXX
Date
Date
Bank Interests
Total
Deduct:
Transfers to Operating Accounts:
Date
Date
XXX
XXX
XXX
Bank Charges
Exchange Rate Difference
Closing Balance as at 31/12/200X
(as per Bank Statement)
Include reconciliation with IFAD records
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
198
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
STATEMENT OF SPECIAL ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
Account No: ___________
Bank: ________________
Address:_______________
1 Initial Deposit
2 Less amount(s) recovered:
3 Outstanding Amount advanced
4
5
6
7
8
Represented by:
Special Account Balance as at
31/12/200X
Plus amounts claimed but not yet
credited as at 31/12/200X:
WA
WA
Plus amounts withdrawn not yet
claimed, composed of:
Was Prepared not yet submitted:
WA
WA
Was not yet prepared:
Total amount withdrawn not yet
claimed
Less Interest earned and/or plus
Bank charges (if included in the
Special Account)
Total Special Account Advance as at
31/12/200X
Difference between Line 3 and line 8
Notes
US$ (or as
otherwise
denominated)
Local
Currency
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
Date
Date
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
Notes:
a Explain any difference between lines 3 and line 8
b Indicate if amount in line 6 is eligible for financing by IFAD and provide reasons for not
claiming
199
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
SOEs-WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
by Category of Expenditures in Local Currency
Notes
Category
description
Category
description
Total
In US$
Equivalent
Rejected
from IFAD
Net
Reimbursed
Cat No
WA
No:
1
2
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
Total
WA Pending for Submission:
WA
No:
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
TOTAL
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
Withdrawal Applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the historical exchange rate of the
transfers to the Operating Account
Expenditures rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here.
This statement should be reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and Payments and include reconciliation
with IFAD records
200
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
PROGRAMME NAME AND NUMBER
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 200X
1.
FINANCIAL REPORTING UNDER INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC SECTOR
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS (IPSAS)
In accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), notes to
the financial statements of an entity should:
Present any information about the basis of preparation of the financial statements
and the specific accounting policies selected and applied for significant
transactions and other events, and
Provide additional information which is not presented on the face of the financial
statements but is necessary for a fair presentation of the entity’s cash receipts,
cash payments, cash balances and other statements as statement of financial
position.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
2
The principle accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements
are set out below:
A Basis of Preparation
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Public
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) with particular emphasis on Cash Basis
Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting
B Cash Basis of Accounting
The cash basis of accounting recognizes transactions and events only when cash is
received or paid by the entity.
C Foreign Currency Transactions
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in a foreign currency are
recorded in the financial statements using the average rate of exchange. Cash
balances held in foreign currency are reported using the closing rate. Gains/Losses
on foreign currency transactions/balances are dealt within the Statement of Special
Account Activities.
3
BUDGET
The budget is developed on the same accounting basis (cash basis), same classification
and for the same period as the financial statements. Material variances (above XXX)
have been explained as notes to the financial statements
201


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
4
CASH/FUND BALANCES
Reconciliation
Cash Accounts
Advances
4-a CASH DETAILS
200X
200X-1
Loc currency
Loc currency
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
200X
Loc
currency
200X-1
Loc
currency
A/c No______ Programme Operating
Account
A/c No_______ IFAD Special Account (as
per SA Statement)
Petty cash
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
5
DIRECT PAYMENTS
These payments were made directly by IFAD from the Loan/Grant account to the
specified supplier/service provider in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
financing Agreement
Include here details of direct payments WA, Date, currency and amount received,
amount in local currency
6 GOVERNMENT COUNTERPART FUNDS
Details here. Cumulative contributions, yearly contributions (compared to budget).
Include details of counterpart contributions as tax exemption.
Include details of tax treatment
7 OTHER DONOR FUNDS
List of Donors
200X
200X-1
Loc currency
Loc currency
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
Add details of cumulative and expected contributions
202
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
8 OTHER RECEIPTS
Interest Income
other income (specify)
9
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Financial Statement Currency
200X
200X-1
Loc currency
Loc currency
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
Cat 1 -
Infrastructure
Cat 2 Vehicles
Cat 3-Equipment
200X
200X-1
200X
200X-1
200X
200X-1
Opening Balance
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
Additions (Statement
of Receipts and
Payments)
Disposals
Closing Balance
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX
This schedule includes all assets acquired from the commencement of the Programme.
These assets are stated at cost. Existence and beneficial ownership to be verified by the
auditors.
Apart of the summary schedule, details schedules for yearly changes to be included.
10 YEARLY PROCUREMENTS
Include here a list of the yearly procurements including methods
203
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Attachment 3: Audit Term of Reference
1. Background
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD is aiding Government of Indonesia
(GOI) in the form of loan and grant for this programme
The financing agreement has been signed between IFAD and GOI on …..
IFAD requires the GOI to appoint an independent auditor to audit the accounts related to the
programme, in accordance with IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing.
The reporting entity is TEKAD Programme
TEKAD programme prepares its financial statements in accordance with IFSAS
2. Objective
The objective of this audit is to enable the auditor to express an opinion on whether the
financial statements (including additional disclosures as outlined in section 5) present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the reporting entity as at [insert
year-end date], and/or the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then
ended, in conformity with the IFSAS
General
Financial
Statement
3. Responsibilities of the programme
• Provide financial statements for the activities financed by the loan
and grant that are reconcilable to its records and accounts.
• Provide the auditor with access to all
legal documents and
correspondence with consultants, contractors and other persons or
information
firms engaged by the programme, and any other
associated with the programme and deemed necessary by the
auditor.
• Ensure that the accounting policies are consistently applied and
disclosed.
• Ensure that appropriate internal controls are implemented to prevent
misstatements and susceptibility to fraud.
• Ensure compliance with all relevant laws and regulations that pertain
to the entity, as well as with the financing agreement between the
[borrower/recipient] and IFAD.
• Provide the financial statements to the auditor within a reasonable
time and be available for any queries that the auditor may have.
The programme shall:
• Prepare financial statements covering the reporting period [date] to
[date], in accordance with [IPSAS/IPSAS “Financial Reporting under
the Cash Basis of Accounting” standards]. In addition, the following
specific disclosures will be included in the financial statements:
• Withdrawal application statement– appendix 1 to the IFAD
IFAD-financed
Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of
Programmes;
• Sources and uses of funds statement – appendix 2 to the IFAD
IFAD-financed
Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of
Programmes;
• Designated Account statement and reconciliation – appendix 3 to
202





Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-
financed Programmes;
•
•
[Statement of Expenditure – appendix 5 to the IFAD Handbook on
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Programmes] –
applicable to grants;
[Expenditure transaction list – appendix 6 to the IFAD Handbook on
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Programmes] –
applicable to grants.
203
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Auditing
Standard
General
Principle
4. Responsibilities of the Auditor
•
The auditor is responsible for the formulation of an opinion on the
financial statements in accordance with [ISA/ISSAI/national auditing
standards];
By agreeing to these terms, the auditor confirms that:
• BPK is a member of the International Organization of Supreme Audit
Institutions (INTOSAI).]
• BPK is able to conduct the audit in line with auditing standards
acceptable to IFAD, pursuant to paragraph 4.1.
• BPK can assign an audit team to the audit that has the necessary
competence and skills.
• BPK has a proven track record in conducting audits of a similar
nature and complexity.
Management
Letter
The management letter is an integral part of the audit package that documents
accounting and internal control issues identified by the auditors. The management
letter should:
• Outline the auditor’s recommendations to improve identified
accounting and internal control issues;
•
Include the responses of programme management to the identified
to address the issues identified
control
within a specific time period.
issues, and its proposal
• Where applicable, follow up on the issues identified in the previous
year’s management letter.
Reporting
The Auditor is required to deliver an audit package that includes:
•
The audited financial statements, including additional disclosures as
outlined in paragraph 3.2;
• An audit opinion on the financial statements, within the scope as
outlined in paragraph 5;
• A report on factual
findings, within the scope of agreed-upon
procedures as outlined in paragraph 6. Any ineligible expenditure
identified should be clearly mentioned.
• A management
paragraph 4.3;
letter,
including the information outlined in
The audit report should provide sufficient detail as to the nature and extent of the
procedures performed by the auditor. The auditor is required to provide the audit
package by no later than [insert date]. Reports are to be delivered in English.
5. Scope of the financial audit
In performing the audit, at a minimum the auditor shall:
Obtain  an  understanding  of  the  internal  controls  related  to  the  financial  reporting
process, to identify and assess any weakness in internal control that might result in
misstatements, whether due to fraud or to error;
Design and conduct audit procedures in response to any weaknesses identified in the
internal  controls  relating  to  the  financial  reporting  process,  to  obtain  audit  evidence
204


Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
that  the  financial  statements  are 
misstatements, in accordance with the applicable accounting framework;
fairly  presented  and  free 
from  material
Verify whether expenditure that was incurred in the name of the programme is in line
with  the  terms  of  the  financing  agreement(s)  (appendix  xx)  and  incurred  for  the
purposes intended in this agreement. All funding should be taken into consideration;
Verify that the inventory and fixed assets held by the entity exist, are complete, are
properly accounted and are used for the programme purposes;
Note  any  weaknesses  in  the  internal  control  environment  and  in  the  financial
reporting process, and communicate those in the management letter.
[List others].
205




Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
6. Scope of the agreed-upon procedures
The auditor is required to perform the following specific procedures and report on factual
findings as required in paragraph 4.4.
Withdrawal
Application
Statement
The auditor is requested to obtain the individual withdrawal applications (WAs)
submitted to IFAD, as summarized in the withdrawal application statement, and
develop test procedures to:
• Determine whether the Designated Account currency equivalent
was determined using the historical exchange rate of transfers to
the operating account;
• Determine whether goods and services have been purchased
through the SOE mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE
threshold;
• Determine whether
the expenditures claimed through SOE
authorized,
properly
procedures were
classified47 and supported by audit documentation;
appropriately
and
•
•
Identify any ineligible expenditure;
[List additional procedures, if applicable].144
Designated
Account
Statement and
Reconciliation
The auditor is requested to review the activities of the designated account(s)
associated with the programme, including the initial advance, replenishments,
interest that may accrue on the outstanding balances, and the year-end
balances. The auditor is requested develop test procedures to:
• Check the accuracy of the Designated Account reconciliation(s);
• Confirm that the Designated Account(s) have been maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the financing agreement;
•
[List additional procedures if applicable].
235.
7. Public Disclosure
IFAD promotes public disclosure of programme financial information to enhance the level
of transparency and accountability. IFAD will disclose programme audit reports, as
appropriate, in line with the Fund’s disclosure policy. Management Letters issued by
auditors are not subject to public disclosure by IFAD. In agreeing to the terms of
reference, the auditor explicitly acknowledges IFAD’s right to publicly disclose audit
reports (audited financial statements and audit opinion) and will issue reports without a
limitation of use clause.
To facilitate the public disclosure process, the auditor is requested to submit two
separate
files as follows:
• Audited financial statements and audit opinion; and
• Management Letter.
8. Appendices
[list as applicable]
Appendix: Financing/grant agreement(s)
Appendix: Letter to the Borrower
144 Procedures may include enquiry/analysis/recalculation/comparison/observation/inspection
206
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Appendix: IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of
Programmes
IFAD-financed
Signed by/date:
______________________________________________________________________
207
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
I.
PROCUREMENT
A. Procurement Principles and Ethics
1. Principles of procurement for goods/services.
Procurement of goods/services should apply the following principles:
a.
Efficiency - Procurement of goods/services must be conducted by utilizing the minimum
amount of funds and effort to meet the expected quality within the specified time frame
or by using the specified amount of funds to achieve the procurement target and
outcome at maximum quality;
b. Effectiveness - Procurement of goods/services must be conducted in consistence with
the specified requirements and targets and must result in benefits to the maximum
extent possible;
c. Transparency - All terms and conditions as well as information on Procurement of
Goods/Services are clearly stated and accessible to the public and interested
goods/service providers;
d. Openness - Procurement of goods/services is open to all goods/service providers
meeting the conditions/criteria as clearly set out in the terms and procedure;
e. Competitiveness - Procurement of goods/services must be conducted through healthy
competition among equal and qualified goods/service providers as many as possible in
order to obtain competitive bids/proposals of goods/service without any intervention
disrupting the market mechanism;
f.
Fairness - Giving equal treatment to all prospective goods/service providers not having
any tendency which may favour a certain party, and maintaining national interest;
g. Accountability - Must be conducted in accordance with the relevant
rules and
regulations on Procurement of Goods/Services in order to ensure accountability.
2. Ethics of procurement for goods/ services.
All stakeholders involved in the process of procurement for goods/ services should follow
the following ethics:
a. Conduct the tasks with discipline and responsibility to achieve targets, smoothness and
accuracy in achieving the goal of procurement for goods/ services;
b. Work professionally and independently, keep secrecy of documents for procurement for
goods/services, which nature should be kept in secret to avoid deviation in procuring
goods/services;
c. Not influence each other, directly or indirectly, leading to unfair competition;
d. Accept and responsible on any decision made as agreed by all concerned parties;
e. Avoid and prevent a conflict of interest among parties involved in the procurement
process of goods/services, directly or indirectly;
f. Avoid and prevent state financial waste and leaks in the procurement of
goods/services;
208
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
g. Avoid and prevent misconduct of authority and / or collusion for benefits of certain
individual, groups or other parties, which will harm the state, directly and indirectly; and
h. Not
receive, not offer, or not promise to give or
remuneration,
commissions, rebates and in any form whatsoever from or to anyone known or
reasonably suspected to be related to the Procurement of Goods / Services.
receive a gift,
B. Procurement Process
The Public Procurement called Government Procurement of Goods / Services is an activity that
is undertaken by Regional Ministries / Institutions / Local government work unit which has been
processed  since  identification  needs,  up  to  the  final  handover  of  work  results.  In  general,  the
procurement process consists of planning, preparation and implementation of procurement.
C. Procurement plan of goods and services.
The initial step of the procurement process of goods and services is procurement planning.
According to Presidential Regulation Number 16 Year 2018,
involves identifying needs,
determination of goods / services, methods, schedules, budgets and procurement plan.
it
The identification of supply (supply) of goods / services will have to pay attention to several
things, consisting of:
a. ease of getting goods on the Indonesian market with sufficient amount to meet the needs;
b.
level of Domestic Components;
c. number of producers and / or number of business entities; and / or
d. goods needed are domestic products or imported goods, manufacturers or can be done by
hand / manually.
Procurement planning consists of:
a. Procurement planning through self-management; and / or
b. Procurement planning through Providers.
Procurement planning through Self-Management includes:
a. Self-management type determination;
b. Preparation of technical specifications / ToR; and
c. Preparation of cost estimates / Budget Plans Cost.
Self-management constitutes the activity of Procurement of Goods/Services that is planned,
exercised and supervised Regional Ministries / Institutions / Local government work unit itself as
the budget responsibility holder (type 1), other government agencies (type 2), community
organization (type 3) and/or community groups (type 4). Self-management is carried out when
goods / services are needed cannot be provided or is not sought after by Providers. Self-
management can also be used in order
technical
capabilities possessed government, goods and services that are confidential and capable
implemented by the Ministry / Institutions / Local government work unit concerned, as well as in
order to increase the role and / empowerment of community organization and community groups
with regards to:
to optimize utilization of
resources /
a.
In order to optimize the use of technical resources / capability owned by the government,
implementation must be adjusted to the main tasks and functions according to responsibility
of the implementing Ministry / Institution / Local government work units.
209
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
b.
c.
In order to increase the participation / empowerment of community organization,
the
implementation must be adjusted to the objectives of the establishment of the community
organization (vision and mission) and competencies of community organization.
In order to increase group participation / empowerment Society, implementation must be
adjusted to the needs and community group competencies.
Procurement planning through Providers includes:
a. Preparation of technical specifications / KAK;
b. Preparation of cost estimates / RAB;
c. Procurement package of goods / services;
d. Consolidation of procurement; and
e. Preparation of supporting costs.
One of the procurement objectives is to ensure the availability of goods / services based on
value for money that is measured by right quality, quantity, time, cost, place and provider.
Presidential regulation encourages the value for money to be achieved by improving the quality
of procurement planning. Procurement specialists to be hired by TEKAD will be responsible for
preparing procurement planning at
level or consolidating
procurement of goods/ services at the provincial
level which is then ready to be announced
through a general procurement plan information system (https://sirup.lkpp.go.id/sirup). The
procurement plan should be developed in a participatory manner with all Project Implementers
in Province. The consolidated procurement plan will be submitted to IFAD for review and "no-
objection". The first year of the procurement plan should include procurement of goods and
services for 18 (eighteen) months, then to be updated any time as required. The mechanism of
procurement plan is shown in Diagram 7.1 below. A draft procurement plan is attached to the
PIM.
the national and provincial
210
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Diagram 7.1 Mechanism of Procurement Plan Preparation
Any amendments to the Procurement Plan shall be subject to the IFAD 'No Objection'. Example
of Procurement Plan format are in Table 7.1 and Table 7.2. The Procurement Plan is an annex of
AWPB which shall include as a minimum:
1. A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period by each
and every Project Party;
The estimated value of each procurement activity;
The method of procurement or selection to be adopted for each activity; and
2.
3.
4. An indication as to whether shall carry out prior or post review by IFAD in respect of each
and every procurement activity.
Methods for procurement and IFAD review. The method of procurement of goods and services to
be used should be consistent with the Presidential Regulations Number 16 Year 2018. IFAD will
review the procurement of goods and services to ensure that procurement process is carried out
in conformity with IFAD’s Procurement Guildelines and LTB. The following procurement decisions
211
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
shall be subject to prior review by IFAD for the award of any contract for goods, equipment,
works, materials, consultancy and services under the TEKAD :
1. Procurement of goods, works and other services :
a. Prequalification documents and shortlist when Expression of
Interest
(EOI)
is
undertaken;
b. Bid documents/ Proposal;
c. Evaluation report and recommendation for awarding contract; and
d. Contract and amendments.
To ease tracking of procurement package for goods, TEKAD participating provinces should
indicate a unique reference / lot number for each package, for instance as follows :
Table 7.1 Format of Reference Number code
No
1
2
3
4
5
Provinces
Ref Number Code
Maluku
Maluku Utara
Nusa Tenggara Timur
Papua
Papua Barat
…../xx/yyy/MAL
…../xx/yyy/MUT
…../xx/yyy/NTT
…../xx/yyy/PPA
…../xx/yyy/PPB
212
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Province / District : ……………….
No. Description
Lot/
Ref.
No
Unit
Quantity
Unit
Cost
Table 7.2 Format of Procurement Plan for Goods/ Works
Basic Data
Total
Estimated
Cost (IDR)
Total
Estimated
Cost (USD)
Proc.
Method
Pre or Post
Qualification
Plan vs
Actual
Prior or
Post
Review
Bid
Document
Date  NOL
Bidding Period
Bid Evaluation
Contract Finalization
Bid
Invitation
Date
Bid Closing /
Opening
Bid
Eval.
Report
Date
 NOL of
Bid
Evaluation
Report
Contract
Amount
Date of
Contract
Award
Date of
Contract
Signature
Remarks
1
2
3
4
dst.
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Plan
Actual
213
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Table 7.3 Format of Procurement Plan for Services
Consulting Services
No. Description
Reference
number
Selection
Method
LUMPSU
M OR
TIME
BASED
 Estimated Amount
 (IDR
000)
(USD 000)
Prior
or Post
Revie
w
Request for
Expression of
Interest
TOR
Shortlist
Request for Proposal
Bid Proposals
Bid Evaluation Technical (T) & Financial Proposal (F)
Contract Finalization
Plan
vs
Actual
Term of
References
(TOR)
Dated
Publish
Closing
Date
Date No-
Objection
from IFAD
Date
Proposed
Date No-
Objection
from IFAD
Plan
vs
Actual
Date
Preposed
Date No-
Objection
Letter
Invitation
Date
Submission
/Opening
Date
Submission
Evaluation
Report (T)
NOL
Evaluating
Report (T)
Opening
Financial
Proposal
(F)
Submission
Evaluation
Report
(F) & (T)
NOL
Technical
& Financial
Proposals
Plan
vs
Actual
Remarks
Contract
Amount
(IDR.000)
Contract
Award
Contract
Signature
1
1
2
3
4
dst.
2
3
4
7
8
9
10
11
12
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
214
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
2.
Procurement of consulting services:
a. Expression of Interest (EOI) documents and shortlist when EOI is undertaken;
b. Request for Proposal;
c. Technical evaluation report;
d. Combined (technical and financial) evaluation report and the recommendation for
award; and
e. Contract and amendments.
3.
Procurement of individuals consultants
a. The terms of reference of the assignment
b. The evaluation report and recommendation for selection
c. Contract and amendments.
Prior or Post Review. Except as IFAD may otherwise agree, the prior or post review which
applies to various procurement of goods, works and consultant recruitments shall be defined as
follows, see Table 7.3:
Table 7.4. List of thresholds to define IFAD Prior or Post Review
Procurement method
Goods and Services (non-consulting)
National Competitive Bidding (NCB)
Shopping
Direct Goods
Recruitment of Consulting Firms
Quality and Cost-Based Selection (QCBS), Selection Based
on Consultants Qualification (CQS), Fixed Budget Selection
(FBS); Least Cost Selection (LCS);
Sole Source Selection (Single Source Selection)
Recruitment of Individual Consultants
Individual Consultants (Single Source Selection)
Individual Consultants (Competitive Selection Process)
Prior or
Post
Comments
Prior
Post
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
All contracts valued IDR 1 Billion
and above.
All contracts
All contract above IDR 200
Million and exception
communicated by IFAD
All contracts valued IDR 1 Billion
and above.
All contracts valued above IDR
100 Million and exception
communicated by IFAD
All contracts valued above IDR
100 Million and exception
communicated by IFAD
All contracts valued IDR 100
Million and above
D.
The implementation of the Procurement of Goods/ Services
It  takes  place  by  means  of  Self-Management;  and/or  the  selection  of  a  Providersof
Goods/Services
a. Procurement of Goods/ Services by Community Participation Procurement.
At  the  implementation  level,  community  participation  procurement  is technically  guided  by
Institutional  Regulation  of  NPPA  No.  8  Year  2018  :  Self-Management  Procurement. There
are four tpes of self management procurement. The self-management procurement type 1
215
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
and  type  2,  the  activity  planned  and  carried  out  by  internal  government  budget  user  or
project management.
For  procurement  type 3 and  type 4,  it’s  related  with  self-management  which  involving
community organization.
The procedures involving the community organization (self management procurement - type
III) should follow the existing government regulation as detailed below:
a. Budget  User/  Budget  User  Proxy  responsible  for  budgeting  survey  of  capable  and
closest any community organizations with the location of communities;
b.
If  the  one  who  meets  the  requirements  there  is only 1 (one)  community  organization,
the budget user/ budget user proxy submits an invitation to CSOs as executors of self-
management;
c. The community organization submits a letter statement of interest;
d.
In the event that there are several social organizations that fulfill condition, Budget User
can  carry  out  the  Competition  using  contest,  to  determine  which  Community
Organization can implement the activity.;
e. Budget  user/  budget  user  proxy  signed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  with
person in charge of community organization.
After  the  Memorandum  of  understanding  for  self-management  signed  by  community
organization and project management, the next step to be taken are as follows:
a. The  person  in  charge  of  community  organization  submits  a  proposal  that  include
budget and cost plan to Budget User/Budget User Proxy; and
b. Procurement  commitment  officer  compiles  the  Procurement  Planning  under  Self-
management modality. It’s as the basis to develop Work Plan and Budget of the project
both at national and/or sub-national level.
Diagram 7.2 Implementation of self management procurement by community organization
(type 3).
In  the  event  that  tools,  materials  &  materials  are  needed  through  the  Provider,
the procurement is carried out according to the provisions
216

Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
In the event that type III implementers are not capable to undertake the whole
activities, a separate contract can be made by Procurement Commitment Officer.
In  terms  of  procurement  of  goods  /  services  through  community  participation  (self
management  procurement - type  IV).  The  activity  planned  and  carried  out  by  the  budget
user or the activity carried out based on a proposal from the community and undertaken by
the  community  itself.  Based  on  the  proposal  from  community,  the  Budget  User  arrange  a
Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  the  Head  of  Community  to implement  the  work  with
self-management  modality.  Further, 
technical
specifications  /  ToR  and  the  community  organization  shall  submit  the  working  plan  and
budget to project..
the  project  management prepares 
Diagram 7.3 Implementation of self management procurement by community organization
(type IV).
b. Procurement of Goods / Services by Providers
At the implementation level, this method is technically guided by Institutional Regulation of
NPPA No. 9 Year 2018 : Providers. The methods of selecting goods/ services consist of:
i. Electronic Catalog (e-catalog)
E-catalog is electronic information comprising information related to price,
types,
technical specifications, unit cost, and suppliers of goods. The price listed in e-Catalog
is the smallest level of unit cost which usually includes tax and distribution cost. To
confirm the price listed in e-catalog, it should be checked to the concerned supplier.
The Procurement of goods through e-Catalog should be conducted under the e-
Purchasing mechanism by the concerned Working Unit.
The implementation of Procurement for Government’s Goods/Services using electronic
purchasing is mentioned as method of selecting at Chapter 38 Article (1) Presidential
Regulation No. 16 Year 2018. At the implementation level, this method will be executed
by Electronic Procurement Service as was technically guided by Institutional Regulation
of NPPA No. 11 Year 2018 : Electronics Procurement System.
To seek goods listed in e-Catalogue, the following URL could be accessed: https://e-
katalog.lkpp.go.id/.
217

Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
The technical guideline of e-Purchasing is available in the following URL : https://e-
katalog.lkpp.go.id/backend/konten_statis/view/5
The summary procedur of E-Purchasing is described as Diagram 7.3.
Diagram 7.4. Mechanism of E-Purchasing
218
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
ii.
Shopping (Direct procurement)
1.  Direct  Procurement  for  Other  Goods  /  Services  whose  prices  are  certain  with  a
maximum  value  of  IDR 200,000,000 (two  hundred  million  rupiah),  carried  out  with
the following stages:
Diagram 7.5. Mechanism of direct procurement.
Procurement Officer looking
for price information of
goods, works, other services
or consultancy services
Procurement Officer
shall comparing quality
and cost with minimum 2
source information
Prospective Providers
invited to submit their
offers as scheduled in
the invitation
Procurement Officer shall open the
offers and evaluate the
administration, technical and
qualification with the knockout
system, conduct technical
clarification and price negotiation
Procurement Officials  shall invite
prospective Providers who are
considered will able to deliver
administrative, technical,
price and qualification.
Procurement Officer
arranges the transaction
Procurement
Officer gets the
invoice
Providers deliver
goods/ services
with the approved
specification
YES
Goods/ Services
accepted by
Procurement
Commitment
Officer/User
Payment
Returning to provider for
improvement
NO
Procurement  commitment  officer  in  carrying  out  the  stages  of  Direct  Procurement
can be assisted by a supporting team.
2. Direct Procurement for:
a. Consultancy Services with a maximum value of IDR 100,000,000 (one hundred
million rupiah);
b. Other  goods/  services  with  a  value  up  to  the  most  value  IDR  200,000,000.00
(two hundred million rupiah); and
c. Construction  work  with  the  most  value  IDR 200,000,000.00 (two  hundred
million rupiah);
iii.
Direct Goods (Direct Appointment)
It  is  also  used  for  procurment  of  Goods  /  services  as method  of  selection  and  carried
out 
/ consultancy  services  under  certain
circumstances.
/  works/  other  services 
for  goods 
61.
Direct appointment is made by the Procurement Officer for procurement of goods /
works  /  other  service  that  are  valued  at  a  maximum  of  Rp.  200,000,000.00  (two
hundred million rupiahs) and for procurement of consultancy services that are worth
at most Rp. 100,000,000.00 (one hundred million rupiah).
219
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
62.
Direct  appointment  is  made  by  the  Working  Group  for  procurement  of  Other
Construction  /  Services  Work  /  Goods  with  a  value  of  at  least  more  than  Rp.
200,000,000.00 (two  hundred  million  rupiahs)  and 
the  procurement  of
Consultancy  Services  worth  at  least  above  Rp. 100,000,000 (one  hundred  million
rupiah).
for 
Diagram 7.6. Mechanism of direct appointment.
Procurement Officer (PP)
or Working group (Pokja
Pemilihan) looks goods/
services under certain
circumtances
PP/working group invites
prospective Provider who is
believed able to deliver
administrative, technical,
price and qualification.
Provider submit the
qualification document
PP/Working group
evaluate
qualification
document
PP/Working group
gives pre
appointment
meeting
Provider submit
proposal consist of
administrative,
technical and price
PP/working group opens offers and
evaluate administration, technical
and price with the knockout system,
conduct technical clarification and
price negotiation
PP/Working group
making transaction
Providers deliver
goods/ services with
the approved
specification
Goods/Services accepted
by Procurement
Commitment Officer (PPK)
Payment
iv. Quick Tender
Presidential Regulation 16/2018 introduces quick tender as a new method of selection
for  the  procurement  of  goods/construction  work/other  services,  which  may  be
conducted if the specification and work volume has been determined in detail and the
contractor  is  qualified  under  the vendor  performance  information  system  (sistem
informasi  kinerja  penyedia).  It  do  not  requires  qualification  assessment,  evaluation  of
administrative  offers,  evaluation  of  technical  offers,  objections  and  objections.  Quick
Tender can be done for Procurement of Goods / Works / Other Services with criteria:
1.
2.
Technical / ToR specifications and work volume have been determined in detail so
that technical requirements are not competed;
It  is  possible  to  mention  the  brand  in  the  technical  specifications  /  ToR  as  in  the
provisions of article 19 paragraph (2) of the Presidential Regulation Number 16 of
2018 concerning Procurement of Goods / Services
3.
Participants have been qualified in SIKaP.
Methods for submitting bids in Quick Tender using submission of repeated price offers
(E-reverse Auction).
220
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Diagram 7.7. Mechanism of quick tender.
Working group makes a quick
tender package and prepares
qualification criteria
Working group invites prospective
Provider who is believed able to
deliver administrative, technical,
price and qualification.
Provider receive invitation in
provider performance
information system (SIKAP)
Working group gives pre
appointment meeting
(if necessary)
Providers submit price
proposal
Working group verifies
the winner of a quick
tender
Procurement
Commitment
Officer (PPK)
awarding contract
Providers deliver
goods/ services
with the approved
specification
Goods/Services
accepted by PPK
Payment
v. Tender/ Selection.
Each contract for the selection of consultancy services shall be selected in accordance
with  any  one  of  the  selection  methods  as  per  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and
Procurement  Handbook.  TEKAD  will  procure  consulting  services  through  consulting
firm  and  individual  consultant.  The  procurement  method  for  procuring  consulting  firm
services, TEKAD will use QCBS as explained below :
1. Selection of individual consultants.
Individual  consultants  are  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  qualifications  for  the
assignment  of at  least  three  (3)  candidates among  those  who  have  expressed
interest  in  the  competitive  selection  process.  Individuals  employed  by  the  NPMO
and PPIUs shall meet all relevant qualifications and shall be fully capable of carrying
out  the  assignment.  Capability  is  judged  on  the  basis  of  academic  background,
experience  and,  as  appropriate,  knowledge  of  the  local  conditions,  such  as  local
language, culture, administrative system, and government organization.
Individual consultants or consultancy firms may be selected on a sole-source basis
with due justification in exceptional cases such as: (a) tasks that are a continuation
of  previous  work  that  the  consultant  has  carried  out  and  for  which  the  consultant
was  selected  competitively;  (b)  assignments  lasting  less  than  six  months;  (c)
emergency  situations  resulting  from  natural  disasters;  and  (d)  when  the  individual
consultant  is  the  only  consultant  qualified  for  the assignment. Procedures  for
individual consultant selection is indicated in Diagram 7.8
221
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Diagram 7.8. Procedure of Individual Consultant Selection
Procurment
Officer or Working
Group
TOR, OPE, budget,
draft adv
Advertisement
Selection of 3 CVs
and interview
Request for budget
NPMO
IFAD
Consultant
Review & confirm
TOR, OPE,
budget, draft adv
NOL
for
TOR
no
yes
Submit letter
of interest
Prepare & submit
budget
Evaluation report
and
recommendation
for selection
NOL
no
yes
Negotiation
Draft contract
with agreed price.
NOL
no
yes
Contract signing
Submit copy of
signed contract
to IFAD and
update contract
register
Copy of
Signed
contract
For IFAD
record
Contract signing
2. Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) should specify in introduction that
this is for consulting firms
a. Request for Proposal (RFP) and Terms of Reference (TOR). Procurement
commitment officer (PPK) is responsible in preparing RFP and TOR. The TOR
222
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
should define clearly the following aspects: objective, targets/ deliverable, and
scope of works including background of the concerned tasks (including relevant
studies and baseline data) to assist consultants in preparing a proposal. If
transfer of knowledge or training is the objective of the task, this should be
specifically explained in detail including number of staff to be trainees, etc. as
reference for
resources to be mobilized.
Technical assistance, survey, expected outputs (such as reports, maps, data,
etc.) should be clearly defined in a TOR. The responsibilities of the employers
and consultants should be clearly defined in a TOR. The draft of Request for
Proposal (including ToR) should be reviewed by IFAD for no objection.
the bidder estimate number of
b. Budget estimates. Budget
is estimated based on an estimate of required
resources to perform the assigned task, including staff, times, logistics and
other physical inputs (vehicles, equipment). The Budget should be divided into
two categories: (i) remuneration (based on type of contract used); and (ii)
reimbursable. If necessary, this cost could be split as local cost and foreign
costs. Presidential Regulation 16/2018, Chapter 26 can be a reference to
setting up estimate budget (HPS.)
c. Long list of consultants. PSU Working Group or Procurement Agent
is
responsible to prepare a short list of the consultants, and identify the consulting
firms which have submitted their interest and having required qualification. The
short
three up to six consulting firms from different
regions. IFAD could request to add or reduce the list. For procurement above
the threshold of prior review, the short list is subject for IFAD review and no
objection. The Project is not allowed to add or remove a consultant from the
short list which has been cleared by IFAD.
list should consist of
d. The shortlist could consist of national consultants only (a consulting firm which
main holder is registered in Indonesia) if the following occurs : (1) the estimated
budget is below the threshold as stated in a Financing Agreement / Letter to the
the requirement and
three consulting firms meet
Borrower;
competitive Price offered; and (3) competition with foreign consulting firm is not
possible. Nevertheless,
foreign consulting firms have been submitted an
interest needs to be considered. Expression of interest and shortlist evaluation
is subject to IFAD Prior Review as stipulated in the LTB.
(2) at
least
e. Technical evaluation. PSU Working Group or Procurement Agent shall evaluate
technical proposals for the following criteria: (i) relevance experience with the
assigned tasks; (ii) quality of methodology; (iii) qualification of key staff; (iv)
transfer of knowledge; and (v) involvement of key staff in the assigned tasks.
Each criterion should be given a proper and rational value weight. The value
weight should be indicated in RFP and to be used in the process of technical
evaluation.
f. PSU Working Group or Procurement Agent shall evaluate each proposal
responding to TOR. A proposal is considered not appropriate or rejected if a
proposal does not respond properly to the critical aspects of TOR or not able to
address minimum technical score as defined in RFP.
g. At the end of the process, PSU Working Group or Procurement Agent should
prepare a Technical Evaluation Report (TER) and submit it to IFAD for review
and clearance (for procurement with IFAD prior review). The TER should
explain the results of evaluation including strength and weakness of each
223
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
proposal. Overall note related to evaluation should be documented and kept up
to end of the project for audit purpose.
h. Financial evaluation. Upon approval of technical evaluation by IFAD, Working
inform to all participating consulting firms
Group or Procurement Agent will
which proposals failed to meet the minimum score or not responsive to RFP
and TOR. Their financial proposal will be returned without opened until the
procurement process is completed. Simultaneously, the PSU Working Group or
informs the participated consulting firms which their
Procurement Agent
proposals meet the minimum score regarding the dates and venue for the
opening of financial proposal. The date of the opening for financial proposal
should allow the consulting firms present. The opening of financial proposal is
open to representatives of consulting firms who are willing to attend. Name of
consulting firms, scores of
technical and financial proposals should be
announced in the meeting or submitted online and recorded. The PSU Working
Group or Procurement Agent prepare a minute of a meeting, and submit it to
PPK or Project Director. If the combined evaluation accepted by PPK or Project
Director, Project shall propose IFAD review and no objection with enclosing the
minute of evaluation
i.
j.
If Working Group or Procurement Agent finds an arithmetic error in evaluation
financial proposal, then it should be corrected. To compare each proposal, the
budget should be converted to the same currency (local currency or foreign
currency) as indicated in RFP. Working Group or Procurement Agent will
convert the currency using an exchange rate released by the Indonesia Central
Bank. RFP should explain the source of exchange rate to be used, and the
dates of exchange rate released should not be earlier than four weeks of the
submission of financial proposal or after the expired date of proposal validity.
include with taxes, but may include reimbursable
”Budget” should not
expenditures such as travel cost,
reports or
administrative cost. Financial proposal with the lowest price should be scored
100, and other proposals should be scored in proportion manner. Other
methods could be used, and should be defined in RFP.
translation, printing of
k. Final Evaluation. A total score is calculated by providing a weight score for
quality and finance, and add-up both score. Weight value for ”budget” is 20
point of the total score 100. This weight value should be indicated in RFP. A
consulting firm with highest score is invited for a negotiation and determine the
winner. Draft contract should be prepared and submitted to IFAD for no
objection. The procedure of QCBS is described as Diagram 7.9
224
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Diagram 7.9.Diagram Mechanism QCBS Method
PSU Working Group
NPMU/ PPK
IFAD
Consultant
Note
Document
Expression of Interest
Advertisement
Evaluation
Prepare
RFP
Invitation to short
listed bidders
Evaluate Technical
Proposal
Evaluation report
Evaluate financial
proposal & combined
Negotiation
Contract award
Awarding
Contract
Review & confirmation
of short list
Prepare TOR, OE & Draft Contract
NOL
NOL
Yes
Yes
No
No
Submission pf Letter of
Interest (LOI)
Short list: 3-5
provider
IFAD approval:
max 10 days
Prepare & submit
Proposal (technical
and finance)
Preparing
Proposal: max 30
days
Review & confirm
evaluation report
NOL
No
Review & confirm combined
technical & Financial
evaluation report
Yes
NOL
No
Yes
Review & confirm draft contract
NOL
No
Yes
Contract signing
Contract signing
Submit copy of
Signed contract
to IFAD &
update contract
register
225
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
E. Contract Management
All contracts should be recorded and systematically manner. The record of procurement process
from the bidding until the contract is completed and avilable in place. It’s including what is planned
and its implementaion, payment phase, issues and solutions during the contract period and also
any amendmend made.
All  contracts  will  be  listed  in  the  Register  of  Contracts  (  Annex  6  to  IFAD  Loan  Disbursement
Handbook)  by  NPMO  as  required  by  IFAD.  PPSUs  should  update  annually,  and  NPMO  will
consolidate and submit it to the IFAD Country Director every tri-semester.
The  mechanism  of  reporting  contract  register  and  payment  contract  monitoring  as  shown  in
Diagram 8.1 and 8.2 consecutively.
Diagram 8.1. Mechanism of the Submission of Contract Register (Form C-10)
Province/Districts
NPMO
IFAD
End of month
fill Form C-10
week I of the
following month
submit it to NPMO
Confirmation /
Clarification
Consolidate Form C-10
submit to IFAD on
week 2 of the 4th
month or after
confirmation /
clarification.
Revise
Consolidate Form C-
10
Review
NO
YES
Records
226
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
Diagram 8.2. Mechanism of the Reporting Payment Contract Monitoring (Form C-11)
Province/District
NPMO
IFAD
Fill Form C-11 at every
payment occurs
Review
Revise Form C-11
NO
YES
Consolidation of Form C-
11 + Withdrawal
application
Confirmation /
Clarification
Revise
Consolidation of
Form C-11
NO
Review
YES
Records
227
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
REGISTER OF CONTRACTS
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING FORMS C-10 AND C-11
FORM C-10 - REGISTER OF CONTRACTS
A.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE REGISTER OF CONTRACTS
Two conformed copies of each and all awarded contracts to be financed – in part or
1.
in full – from the proceeds of the financing must be submitted to IFAD on their signature or
before disbursement of financing proceeds with respect to such contract can be made
(whether for reimbursement, direct payment or replenishment to the designated account).
In order to verify that conformed copies of each awarded contract have been received by
IFAD, the monthly reporting procedure indicated below will be applicable.
2.
A record of contracts awarded by the lead project agency during a calendar month
that are expected to be financed – in part or in full – by proceeds of the IFAD financing
must be submitted to the Fund in the format Register of Contracts. A copy of this format is
provided as Form C-10, indicating the information required for due completion.
3 When a contract is amended, the amendment will be recorded in the Register of Contracts
for the reporting calendar month in which the amendment occurred, by indicating ‘AM -1’
after the contract serial number (in column 1) if it is the first amendment, or ‘AM-2’ if it is
the second amendment, and so forth. The information required in columns 2 through 11 of
the Register of Contracts pertinent to the amendment will also be recorded as may be
applicable (i.e. revised contract amount in column 9, date of amendment in column 4, etc.).
If a contract is cancelled or declared ineligible for financing by IFAD, this information
4.
should be given in the Register of Contracts and reported in the calendar month in which
the cancellation or financing ineligibility was declared; once again by indicating the
contract serial number in column 1, the date of cancellation or financing ineligibility in
column 4, and ‘cancelled’ or ‘ineligible for financing’, as the case may be, in the ‘remarks’
column.
5 If during a calendar month no contract award has taken place, the Register of Contracts
for that calendar month will be submitted to IFAD indicating ‘NIL’ in column 1.
FORM C-11 - CONTRACT PAYMENT MONITORING FORM
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE CONTRACT PAYMENT MONITORING
B.
FORM
1.
As and when payment of approved contracts begins, each contract needs to be monitored
using sample Form C-11. The information required is self-explanatory and needs to be updated as
and when events/payments affecting the contract occur. Each time a contract requires an instalment
(or other portion) to be paid, a copy of Form C-11, accompanied by a copy of the ‘no objection’ for
that specific contract, will also be required, as supporting documentation to the WA.
2.
through final payment.
Updated versions of Form C-11 will continue to be submitted for the life of the contract
228
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme implementation manual (PIM)
IFAD Financing
No.:
Project
Title:
Monthly Reporting Period:
IFAD xxxx - xx
xxx
xx/xx
(Month/Year)
FORM C-10 - REGISTER OF CONTRACTS
Date:
xx/xx/xx
Page No.:
xx
of
xx
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Contract Financier Contract Percentage
Serial No.
No.
of
Type of
Procurement
Description
of Works,
Name and
Address of Coordinator
Contract
Date of
Contract
Financing
Goods,
Consulting/
Contractor
/Supplier
Signing
Other
Services
Performance
,
Contract
Duration
and
Delivery
Contract
Amount (in
the
Currency
of the
Period
Contract)
Category Reference to Prior or
the
No. as per
Post
Remarks
and Date
Schedule 2
of IFAD
Approved
Procurment
Review
Financing Plan/AWPB
Agreement
of IFAD
‘No
Objection
’
Total
Certified
by:
(Project Accountant)
5 Submitted
by:
(Project
Director)
229
Indonesia
Rural Empowerment and Agricultural Development Scaling-Up Initiative (READ-SI)
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Annex 2 - FORM C-11- CONTRACT PAYMENT MONITORING FORM
(ENTER PROJECT NAME AND ACRONYM)
(Contract Number: as per contract register)
xxx
xxx
Comp.:
Xxx
Contract
Officer:
xxx
Description of
Contract:
Procurement
File No.:
Date(s) of ‘No
Objection’:
xx/xx/xx
Name and Address
of Supplier:
Xxxx
E-mail:
Telephone:
Document
Original Contract
Amendment (AM-1)
Amendment (AM-2)
Amendment (AM-3)
Total Amount
Bank Details:
Contract Summary
(ENTER CURRENCY)
Contract Reference
No.
Amount
Dates (Start/End)
Bank Securities or
Bonds ( -- currency)
xx
Document
Name of Financial Institution
Date
Amount
Expiry
Date
Extension
Advance Payment
Performance Bond
Other
Payment Schedule
Expected
Milestone
Amount
Total
Amount
Notes:
xx
Financial
Controller:
Monitoring of
Payments
(ENTER CURRENCY)
Progress
Certificate
Payments Issued
Payment Amount Cheque
Balance Due
on Contract
No.
Date
Invoice
No.
Date
Paid
or WA
No.
xx
Xxx
Signature
Programme
Coordinator:
xxx
Signature
230
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Attachment 2: Procurement Attachment 2: Procurement plan for the first 18 months
231
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
232
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
See IFAD Procurement Handbook for detail reference.
233
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Attachment 3: Summary of Appropriate Procurement Methods
I. Procurement of goods and works adapt as required
Method
Description
International
Competitive
Bidding (ICB)
Procedure for
procurement of goods
and works on the
international market with
open competition
Applicability/Characteristics
 High value procurement

Interest for international
business community
 Equal opportunity to bid
ICB by direct invitation
(no open advertisement)
 Smaller value

Limited number of suppliers
Limited
International
Bidding (LIB)
National
Competitive
Bidding (NCB)
Procedure for public
procurement in Borrower
Country
Advertising
Remarks
General
Procurement
Notices (GPN)
Open ITB or
invitation to pre-
qualify
UNDB/dgMarket
International
press
Restricted ITB
Local press
Internet
Open ITB
- Margin of
preference for
domestic goods
and works may be
applied
- Domestic
preference not
applicable
- IFAD to establish
acceptability of
national procedures
- Foreign suppliers
allowed to bid
Request for
quotation
(restricted)
Request for
quotation
(restricted)
- Purchase order or
brief contract
- Purchase order or
brief contract

 Small value contracts
 Geographically scattered,
labour-intensive or time-
spread works
Local prices below
international market
 No or limited interest from
international business
community
ICB advantages outweighed
by financial and
administrative costs
 Small value procurement
 Off-the-shelf goods, standard
specification commodities,
simple civil works
 Same as International

Shopping
 Goods available locally from
several sources at
competitive prices
International
Shopping
National
Shopping
Comparison of price
quotations from at least
3 suppliers in 2 different
countries
Comparison of price
quotations from at least
3 suppliers
Direct
Contracting
Single or sole-source
selection
 Extension of existing contract
 Standardization for vehicles,
No advertising
No competition
Procurement
from
Commodity
Markets
Procurement of goods
from commodity markets
Work by Force
Account
Use of the Borrower’s
own personnel and
equipment
 Proprietary equipment
obtainable from one source
only
 Condition of performance
guarantee
 Emergency procurement
 Grains, animal feed, cooking
oil, fuel, fertilizers, pesticides,
metals
 Multiple award for partial
quantities to secure supply
and prices
 Difficulty in defining work
quantities
234
Pre-qualified
bidders
Issuance of
periodic
invitations
Short bid validity
Single (market)
currency for bid
and payment
No advertising
No competition
IFAD ensure that
- force account
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
equipment to perform
construction work
 Small, scattered works in
remote locations
 Risk of unavoidable work
interruptions
 No disruption of on-going
operations
 Emergency situations
Procurement
from UN
Agencies
Procurement of specific
goods from specialized
UN agencies
Small quantities of off-the-shelf
products
No advertising
No competition
units are properly
staffed, equipped
and organized
- costs are
reasonable
- Use of UN agency
rules and
procedures
- Indication in loan
agreement
235
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
II. Procurement of Consulting Services
Method
Description
Applicability/characteristics Advertising Remarks
Quality and
Cost Based
Selection
Selection
Under a
Fixed Budget
Quality Based
Selection
Selection
Based on
Consultants’
Qualifications
Single Source
Selection
Selection of
Individual
Consultants
Competitive
selection from
short-listed
firms based on
quality and
cost of
proposal
Competitive
selection from
short-listed
firms based on
best technical
proposal
within budget
Competitive
selection from
short-listed
firms based on
quality only
Selection from
short-listed
firms based on
consultant’s
experience
and
competence
Selection of a
firm without
any
competition
Individuals
selected based
on
qualifications,
references and
other relevant
criteria, with
limited or no
competition
Two-step evaluation: quality
(technical proposal) and cost
(financial proposal)
GPN (large
contracts)
Request for
Proposal
(RFP)
 Simple and precisely
defined assignment
Request for
proposal
 Consulting firms requested
to bid within a fixed budget
 Complex/highly specialized
assignments
 High downstream impact
 No comparability of
GPN (large
contracts)
Request for
Proposal
proposals
 Very small assignments
 Cost of RFP preparation
and evaluation not justified
Request for
expression
of interest
Must be exceptional:
 Continuation of previous
No
competition
Preferred
selection
method for
most
consulting
services
Rejection of
proposals
above fixed
budget
Only technical
proposals may
be invited
Submission of
combined
technical-
financial
proposals
Clear
advantage
over
competition or
impossibility
to compete
must be
demonstrated
Request for
expression
of interest or
Direct
contact
Individuals
may be
selected on a
single source
basis
work
 Emergency situation
 Very small assignments
 Only one firm is
qualified/experienced
 Teams of personnel not
required
 No additional professional
support required
 Main requirement is
experience and
qualification of individual
consultant
236
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Attachment 2: Procurement plan for the first 18 months (loan and grant)
LOAN
Procutement Plan for GOODS (2020-2021)
SL No.
 Description of
Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons.
Serv
NPMU
Quantities
 Unit Cost 000
Unit
 Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Year
 Goods/
Works/
Non.Cons/
Cons. Serv
Proc.
Owner
Fund Source
 Estimated Cost
(Rp)
Estimated Cost
($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method of
Selec-tion
#
Pack/
Lot
Avg. value per
pack or lot
(Rp)
 Avg. value
per package
($)
Domes-tic Pre-
ference
(yes/no)
Prequa-
lifica-tion
(yes/ no)
CPPShopping
 Tablets for village cadres
 Per cadre      1 000
4 216 500  DT 1.1
2020
Goods
MoA
4 216 500 000
300 000
Prior
NCB
1000 Pack
4 216 500
 Demonstration Plots /d
 Demo plot
     5 000
3 513 750  DT 1.2
2020
Goods
MoA
17 568 750 000
1 250 000
Post
e-Purchasing
5000 Pack
3 513 750
300
250
4x4 /b
 Province
         15
562 200 000  DT 4
2020
Goods
MoA
8 433 000 000
600 000
Post
e-Purchasing
5001 Pack
562 200 000
40 000
Office furniture and filing cabinet /c
All electrical equipment /d
Laptops /e
Desktop computers /f
TOTAL
DISTRICT
4x4 Vehicle
 set
 set
 laptop
 unit
         49
           6
         49
           6
28.531.650  DT 4
70.275.000  DT 4
12.649.500  DT 4
11.244.000  DT 4
2020
2020
2020
2020
Goods
Goods
Goods
Goods
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
1 398 050 850
421 650 000
619 825 500
67 464 000
32 725 240 350
99 470
30 000
44 100
4 800
2 328 370.0
Post
Post
Post
Post
e-Purchasing
Shopping
e-Purchasing
e-Purchasing
5002 Pack
5003 Pack
5004 Pack
5005 Pack
28.531.650
70.275.000
12.649.500
11.244.000
2 030
5 000
900
800
Per District
25
562 200 000  DT 2.1
2020
Goods
District
14 055 000 000
1 000 000
Post
e-Purchasing
25.0 Pack
562 200 000
40 000
Motorcycles for facilitators /c
Motorcycle
Tablets for facilitators /d
Laptops
Office furniture and filing cabinet
TOTAL
TOTAL OVERALL GOODS
tablets
Per District
Set per
district
250
250
4
25
35 137 500  DT 2.1
4 216 500  DT 2.1
12 649 500  DT 2.1
2021
2021
2021
Goods
District
Goods
District
Goods
District
8 784 375 000
625 000
Post
e-Purchasing
250 Pack
35 137 500
1 054 125 000
75 000
Post
e-Purchasing
250 Pack
4 216 500
50 598 000
3 600
Post
e-Purchasing
4
Pack
12 649 500
28 531 650  DT 2.1
2020
Goods
District
713 291 250
50 750
Post
e-Purchasing
25
Pack
28 531 650
2 500
300
900
2 030
90 107 869 950
122 833 110 300.0
1 754 350.0
4 082 720.0
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
237
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Procurement Plan of Firm Selectin for Consulting Services (2020-2021)
100 000
CPPCV Comparison
SL No.
 Description of Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
NPMU
Quantities
 Unit Cost 000
Unit
 Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Year
Goods/Work
s/Non.Cons/
Cons. Serv
Proc. Owner Fund Source
 Estimated Cost (Rp)
Estimated
Cost ($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/P
ost)
Method of Selec-
tion
 # Pack
Avg. value per
pack or lot (Rp)
 Avg. value per
package ($)
Domestic Pre-
ference (yes/no)
Prequa-
lifica-tion
(yes/ no)
 NGO for implementing family-based approach /b
 Village
         248
21 082 500  DT 1.1
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
5 228 460 000
372 000.0
Prior
Community for
Participation
248
21 082 500
1 500.00
Yes
Yes
Consulting Firm for District Implementation Team (DIT)
 Package               5
22 862 887 047  DT 2.1
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
District
22 862 887 047
1 626 672.9
Prior
QCBS
5
22 862 887 047
1 626 672.86
Yes
No
 District Coordinator
District Marketing Specialist
 MIS/M&E Specialist
Village Governance Facilitator
 Economic Initiatives Advisor
 Communications - District
 Office rental - District
 Travel allowances - District
 Vehicle O&M
 Communications - Sub District
 Office rental - Sub District
 Travel allowances - Sub District
 M. Bike O&M
 Cost of meetings
National consultancies - Market opportunities and value
chain analyses
National consultancies - Services mapping
BUMDes assessment study
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
 PA
 PA
 PA
 PA
 PA
 PA
 PA
 meetings
 Study
 Study
 Study
Climate risk and vulnerability assessment + Database
 Study
Training modules for local market agents
 Provice
Consulting Firm for National Project Manajement Unit
(NPMU)
 Package
31.3
31.3
31.3
210
210
31.3
31.3
31.3
31.3
125
125
125
250
100
5
5
5
1
5
1
        9 172 803 197
6 158 901 000
6 158 901 000
35 418 600 000
35 418 600 000
422 324 640
791 858 700
3 079 450 500
791 858 700
1 686 600 000
1 581 187 500
12 298 125 000
1 054 125 000
281 100 000
421 650 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
2 108 250 000
150 000.0
Prior
QCBS
210 825 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 054 125 000
75 000.0
Prior
QCBS
210 825 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 054 125 000
75 000.0
Prior
FBS
1 827 150 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 827 150 000
130 000.0
Prior
QCBS
210 825 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 054 125 000
75 000.0
Prior
QCBS
10 715 981 760  DT 4
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
10 715 981 760
762 432.0
Prior
QCBS
5
5
5
1
5
1
421 650 000
30 000.00
210 825 000
15 000.00
210 825 000
15 000.00
1 827 150 000
130 000.00
210 825 000
15 000.00
10 715 981 760
762 432.00
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
238
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
 National Team Leader
 Financial Management and Administrative Expert
 Procurement Expert
 Senior GESI Specialist
 Senior M&E Expert
 KM and Policy Development Expert
 Senior Village Governance Expert
 Senior Economic Development Expert
 Senior Financial Services Expert
 Office rent
 Communications
 Travel allowances
 Office Consummables
 Car rental allowances
Consulting Firm for Province (Province Project
Implementation Unit)
 Provincial Team Leader
 Financial Management Expert
 Procurement Expert
 M&E/KM Expert
 MIS/GIS Expert
 GESI Expert
 Village Governance Expert
 Economic Development Expert
 Financial Services Expert
 Office rent
 Communications
 Travel allowances
 Office Consummables
 Vehicle Operating costs /a
Baseline Survey
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
PY
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Package
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
 PY
Province
Province
Province
Province
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
5
5
5
5
1
1 124 400 000
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
960 012 720
365 430 000
281 100 000
843 300 000
140 550 000
281 100 000
12 097 166 610  DT 4
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
12 097 166 610
860 702.0
Prior
QCBS
586 121 610
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
393 540 000
1 124 400 000
702 750 000
4 216 500 000
281 100 000
632 475 000
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
12 097 166 610
860 702.00
Yes
No
1 405 500 000  DT 4
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
1 405 500 000
100 000.0
Prior
FBS
1
1 405 500 000
100 000.00
Yes
No
 TOTAL OVERALL CONSULTING FIRM
      59 407 770 417.3      4 226 806.9
239
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Procurement Plan of Individual Consultant  (2020-2021)
100 000
CPP
CV Comparison
SL No.
 Description of Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Quantities
 Unit Cost
Unit
Total
 (Rp)
Com p
Year
Goods/W
orks/Non.
Cons/Con
s. Serv
Proc.
Ow ner
Fund Source
 Estim ated Cost
(Rp)
Estim ated
Cost ($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method of
Selection
 #
Pack
Avg. value
per pack or
lot (Rp)
 Avg. value
per
package
($)
Dom es-
tic Pre-
ference
(yes/no)
Pre-
qualifica-
tion
(yes/
no)
NPMU
 Adapting KOMPAK/developing methodology
 PM
4
210 825 000  DT 1.1
2020
Cons.Serv
 Village cadres /a
 Cadre
1000
12 143 520  DT 1.I
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
MoA
843 300 000
60 000 Prior
12 143 520 000
864 000
Post
QBS
Individual
Selection
4
210 825 000
15 000
No
1000
12 143 520
864
Yes
No
No
 International technical assistance - Family-based approach
 International technical assistance  - Market opportunities and value
chain analyses
 International technical assistance - Services mapping
International Technical Assistance -  District marketing strategies
 Adaptation of existing training modules
Programme expeditor (programme management)
Programme expeditor (technical)
TA for GESI strategy and follow -up
International consultant to set-up M&E/KM system
TA on demand
TOTAL INDIVIDUAL CONSULTANT
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
 PM
4
4
5
5
5
6
4
4
4
2
2
4
5
5
5
6
4
4
4
2
351 375 000
25 000
No
Yes
351 375 000
25 000.00
351 375 000
351 375 000
351 375 000
351.375.000
351.375.000
351.375.000
351.375.000
351.375.000
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
25 000.00
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
351 375 000  DT 1.1 2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
1 405 500 000
100 000 Prior
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
QBS
351 375 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 405 500 000
100 000.0 Prior
1 756 875 000
1 756 875 000
1 756 875 000
2 108 250 000
1 405 500 000
1 405 500 000
1 405 500 000
702 750 000
125 000.0 Prior
125 000.0 Prior
125 000.0 Prior
150 000.0 Prior
100 000.0 Prior
100 000.0 Prior
100 000.0 Prior
Post
50 000.0
28 095 945 000.0 1 999 000.0
351 375 000  DT 2.2
351 375 000  DT 2.2
351 375 000  DT 2.3
351.375.000  DT 4
351.375.000  DT 4
351.375.000  DT 4
351.375.000  DT 4
351.375.000  DT 4
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
Cons.Serv
Cons.Serv
Cons.Serv
Cons.Serv
Cons.Serv
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
2020-2021 Cons.Serv
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
240
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Procurement Plan of Non-Consulting Services  (2020-2021)
100 000
SL No.
 Description of
Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Quantities
 Unit Cost
Unit
 Total
 (Rp)
Com p
Year
 Goods/
Works/
Non.Cons/
Cons. Serv
Proc.
Ow ner
Fund Source
 Estim ated Cost
(Rp)
Estim a-ted
Cost ($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method
of
Selectio
n
 #
Pack
Avg. value
per pack
(Rp)
 Avg. value
per
package ($)
CPP
Shopping
Dom esti
c Prefe-
rence
(yes/no)
Prequal
i-
fication
(yes/no
)
No
Objection
from  Bank
for Draft
Prequalifi-
cation doc.
(Date)**
NPMU
 Aw areness Campaigns
Capacity Building
 TOT of Facilitators for Household
Methodology
 Economic development strategy -
Facilitation Expenses
  Study tour to Philippines /f
TOTAL
DISTRICT
 Distric
Village
 Per
facilitator
 per
district
      25
500
14 055 000  DT 1.1
1 405 500 DT 1.1
 1 000
35 137 500  DT 1.1
2021
2021
2021
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
      25
70 275 000  DT 1.1
2021
Non. Cons
 Lumsump         6
70 275 000  DT 2.1
2021
Non. Cons
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
351 375 000
702 750 000
25 000
50 000
Post
Post
Shopping
Shopping
25
500
14 055 000
1 405 500
1 000.00
100.00
35 137 500 000
2 500 000 Prior
NCB
1000
35 137 500
2 500.00
Yes
Yes
Yes
1 756 875 000
125 000 Prior
421 650 000
30 000 Prior
38 370 150 000.0 2 730 000.0
Direct
Purchase
NCB
25
6
70 275 000
5 000.00
Yes
70 275 000
5 000.00
No
 Provincial Start Up Workshops
 w orkshop         5
140 550 000  DT 2.1
2020
Cons.Serv
District
702 750 000
50 000.0
Post
NCB
5
140 550 000
10 000.00
 Skills Assessment
 Distric
   25.0
19 677 000  DT 2.1
 Trainee accomodation 2 w eek course /i
 Distric
     1.0
245 962 500  DT 2.1
2020
2020
Non. Cons
District
Non. Cons
District
491 925 000
35 000 Post
245 962 500
17 500 Post
25.0
19 677 000
1 400.00
1.0
245 962 500
17 500.00
 Distric
 556.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1 2020-2021 Non. Cons
District
6 485 320 220
461 424 Prior
 Distric
 556.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1 2020-2021 Non. Cons
District
6 485 320 220
461 424 Prior
 Distric
 556.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1 2020-2021 Non. Cons
District
6 485 320 220
461 424 Prior
 Distric
 Distric
     1.0
     1.0
28 110 000  DT 2.1
14 055 000  DT 2.1
2020
2020
2021
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
District
District
Non. Cons
District
28 110 000
14 055 000
2 000 Post
1 000 Post
Shopping
Direct
Purchase
Direct
Purchase
Direct
Purchase
Direct
Purchase
Shopping
Shopping
556.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
556.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
556.0
11 664 245
829.90
1.0
1.0
28 110 000
14 055 000
2 000.00
1 000.00
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
 Trainee accomodation 2 w eek course /I -
Village Governance Facilitators
 Trainee accomodation 2 w eek course /I -
Economic Initiative Advisors
 Trainee accomodation 2 w eek course /I -
PPLs
 Delivery support
 Course materials
 Village Governance Facilitators - Skill
Assessment
 Village Governance Facilitators - Trainee
accomodation 2 w eek course
 Economic Initiative Advisors - Skill
Assessment
 Economic Initiative Advisors - Trainee
accomodation 2 w eek course
 PPLs - Skills Assessment
 PPLs -Trainee accomodation 2 w eek
course
 Meetings of Value Chain Analysis
Reference Group
 Provincial Validation Workshops
 Translation and publication
 Training for data input and system
operation
 District Start Up Workshops
 w orkshop       25
70 275 000  DT 2.1
1 756 875 000
125 000.0
Post
NCB
25
70 275 000
5 000.00
 District
   25.0
19 677 000  DT 2.1
2020
Non. Cons
District
491 925 000
35 000 Post
Shopping
25.0
19 677 000
1 400.00
Yes
 District
 250.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1
2020
Non. Cons
District
2 916 061 250
207 475 Post
Direct
Purchase
250.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
 District
   25.0
19 677 000  DT 2.1
2020
Non. Cons
District
491 925 000
35 000 Post
Shopping
25.0
19 677 000
1 400.00
Yes
 District
 250.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1
2020
Non. Cons
District
2 916 061 250
207 475 Post
 District
   25.0
19 677 000  DT 2.1
 District
 250.0
11 664 245  DT 2.1
2020
2020
Non. Cons
District
Non. Cons
District
491 925 000
35 000 Post
2 916 061 250
207 475 Post
Direct
Purchase
Shopping
Direct
Purchase
250.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
25.0
19 677 000
250.0
11 664 245
829.90
Yes
 Province      5.0
42 165 000  DT 2.2
2020
Non. Cons
 Province      5.0
 Province      1.0
140 550 000  DT 2.2
421 650 000  DT 2.2
 Province      1.0
200 000 000  DT 3.1
2020
2020
2020
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
Non. Cons
 Project & Fiduciary Management Training
 Lumpsum      1.0
281 100 000  DT 4
2020
Non. Cons
 Project Steering Committee meetings
 meeting
     4.0
70 275 000  DT 4
2020-2021 Non. Cons
 National Start-up Workshop
 w orkshop      1.0
281 100 000  DT 4
2020
Non. Cons
TOTAL
TOTAL NON CONSULTING SERVICES
210 825 000
15 000 Post
Shopping
702 750 000
421 650 000
50 000 Post
30 000 Post
Shopping
Shopping
200 000 000
14 230 Post
Shopping
5.0
5.0
1.0
1.0
42 165 000
3 000.00
140 550 000
421 650 000
10 000.00
30 000.00
200 000 000
14 229.81
281 100 000
20 000 Post
281 100 000
20 000 Post
Direct
Purchase
Shopping
281 100 000
20 000 Post
Shopping
1.0
281 100 000
20 000.00
4.0
1.0
70 275 000
5 000.00
281 100 000
20 000.00
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
35 298 121 910.0 2 511 428.1
73 668 271 910.0 5 241 428.1
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
MoA
241
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
GRANT
Procurement Plan of Firm Selectin for Consulting Services (2020-2021)
100 000
SL No.
 Description of
Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Quantities
 Unit Cost 000
Unit
Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Goods/W
orks/Non.
Cons/Con
s. Serv
Year
Proc.
Owner
Fund
Source
 Estimated Cost
(Rp)
Estimate
d Cost ($)
Review
Bank
(Prior/Post)
Method of
Selec-tion
 #
Pa
ck
Avg. value per
pack or lot
(Rp)
 Avg. value
per
package ($)
CPPCV Comparison
Domesti
c Pre-
ference
(yes/no)
Prequ
a-
lifica-
tion
(yes/
no)
NPMU
National consultancies - Market opportunities
and value chain analyses
 Study
Climate risk and vulnerability assessment
 Study
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages
Policy development
 TOTAL OVERALL CONSULTING FIRM
Lumps
 PA
5
1
1
1
421 650 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
2 108 250 000 150 000.0
Prior
QCBS
1 405 500 000  DT 2.2
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
1 405 500 000 100 000.0
Prior
QCBS
7 838 473 500  DT 3.2+H10:WH10:I10
2020
Cons.Serv
MoA
7 838 473 500 557 700.0
Prior
QCBS
702 750 000
2021
Cons.Serv
MoA
702 750 000
50 000.0
Post
LBS
5
1
1
1
421 650 000
30 000.00
Yes
1 405 500 000
100 000.00
Yes
7 838 473 500
557 700.00
Yes
702 750 000
50 000.00
Yes
No
No
No
No
 12 054 973 500    857 700
Procurement Plan of Individual Consultant  (2020-2021)
100 000
CPP
CV Comparison
SL No.
 Description of Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Quantities
 Unit Cost
Unit
Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Year
Goods/W
orks/Non.
Cons/Con
s. Serv
Proc.
Owner
Fund Source
 Estimated Cost
(Rp)
Estimated
Cost ($)
Revie
w
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method of
Selection
 #
Pac
k
Avg. value per
pack or lot
(Rp)
 Avg. value
per
package
($)
Domes-
tic Pre-
ference
(yes/no)
Pre-
qualific
a-tion
(yes/
no)
NPMU
 International technical assistance  - Market opportunities and
value chain analyses
 Programme expeditor (technical)
TOTAL INDIVIDUAL CONSULTANT
 PM
 PM
4
4
351 375 000
 DT
2.2
2020
351 375 001  DT 4
2020
Cons.Ser
v
Cons.Ser
v
MoA
MoA
1 405 500 000 100 000.0 Prior
QBS
1 405 500 004 100 000.0 Prior
QBS
2 811 000 004.0 200 000.0
4
4
351 375 000
25 000.00
No
351 375 001
25 000.00
No
No
No
242
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Procurement Plan of Non-Consulting Services  (2020-2021)
100 000
CPPShopping
Quantities
 Unit Cost
SL No.
 Description of
Goods/Works/Non.Cons/Cons. Serv
Unit
 Total
 (Rp)
Comp
Year
 Goods/
Works/
Non.Cons/
Cons. Serv
Proc.
Owner
Fund Source
 Estimated
Cost  (Rp)
Estima-ted
Cost ($)
Revie
w
Bank
(Prior/
Post)
Method of
Selection
 #
Pack
Avg. value per
pack (Rp)
 Avg. value per
package ($)
Domestic
Prefe-
rence
(yes/no)
Prequal
i-
fication
(yes/no
)
No
Objection
from Bank
for Draft
Prequalifi-
cation doc.
(Date)**
NPMU
 Policy Workshops
 PA
        1
140 550 000
 DT
3.2
2021
Non. Cons
MoA
140 550 000
10 000 Post Shopping
Printing and dissemination of policy studiesLumsump
1
70 275 000 DT 3.2
2021
Non. Cons
MoA
70 275 000
5 000 Post Shopping
TOTAL NON CONSULTING SERVICE
210 825 000
15 000
1
1
140 550 000
10 000.00
Yes
70 275 000
5 000.00
Yes
No
No
No
No
243
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
Attachment 3: Summary of Appropriate Procurement Methods
I. Procurement of goods and works adapt as required
Method
Description
International
Competitive
Bidding (ICB)
Procedure for
procurement of goods
and works on the
international market with
open competition
Applicability/Characteristics
 High value procurement

Interest for international
business community
 Equal opportunity to bid
ICB by direct invitation
(no open advertisement)
 Smaller value

Limited number of suppliers
Limited
International
Bidding (LIB)
National
Competitive
Bidding (NCB)
Procedure for public
procurement in Borrower
Country
Advertising
Remarks
General
Procurement
Notices (GPN)
Open ITB or
invitation to pre-
qualify
UNDB/dgMarket
International
press
Restricted ITB
Local press
Internet
Open ITB
- Margin of
preference for
domestic goods
and works may be
applied
- Domestic
preference not
applicable
- IFAD to establish
acceptability of
national procedures
- Foreign suppliers
allowed to bid
Request for
quotation
(restricted)
Request for
quotation
(restricted)
- Purchase order or
brief contract
- Purchase order or
brief contract

 Small value contracts
 Geographically scattered,
labour-intensive or time-
spread works
Local prices below
international market
 No or limited interest from
international business
community
ICB advantages outweighed
by financial and
administrative costs
 Small value procurement
 Off-the-shelf goods, standard
specification commodities,
simple civil works
 Same as International

Shopping
 Goods available locally from
several sources at
competitive prices
International
Shopping
National
Shopping
Comparison of price
quotations from at least
3 suppliers in 2 different
countries
Comparison of price
quotations from at least
3 suppliers
Direct
Contracting
Single or sole-source
selection
 Extension of existing contract
 Standardization for vehicles,
No advertising
No competition
Procurement
from
Commodity
Markets
Procurement of goods
from commodity markets
Work by Force
Account
Use of the Borrower’s
own personnel and
equipment to perform
equipment
 Proprietary equipment
obtainable from one source
only
 Condition of performance
guarantee
 Emergency procurement
 Grains, animal feed, cooking
oil, fuel, fertilizers, pesticides,
metals
 Multiple award for partial
quantities to secure supply
and prices
 Difficulty in defining work
quantities
 Small, scattered works in
244
Pre-qualified
bidders
Issuance of
periodic
invitations
Short bid validity
Single (market)
currency for bid
and payment
No advertising
No competition
IFAD ensure that
- force account
units are properly
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
construction work
remote locations
 Risk of unavoidable work
interruptions
 No disruption of on-going
operations
 Emergency situations
Procurement
from UN
Agencies
Procurement of specific
goods from specialized
UN agencies
Small quantities of off-the-shelf
products
No advertising
No competition
staffed, equipped
and organized
- costs are
reasonable
- Use of UN agency
rules and
procedures
- Indication in loan
agreement
245
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Programme Implementation Manual
II. Procurement of Consulting Services
Method
Description
Applicability/characteristics Advertising Remarks
Quality and
Cost Based
Selection
Selection
Under a
Fixed Budget
Quality Based
Selection
Selection
Based on
Consultants’
Qualifications
Single Source
Selection
Selection of
Individual
Consultants
Competitive
selection from
short-listed
firms based on
quality and
cost of
proposal
Competitive
selection from
short-listed
firms based on
best technical
proposal
within budget
Competitive
selection from
short-listed
firms based on
quality only
Selection from
short-listed
firms based on
consultant’s
experience
and
competence
Selection of a
firm without
any
competition
Individuals
selected based
on
qualifications,
references and
other relevant
criteria, with
limited or no
competition
Two-step evaluation: quality
(technical proposal) and cost
(financial proposal)
GPN (large
contracts)
Request for
Proposal
(RFP)
 Simple and precisely
defined assignment
Request for
proposal
 Consulting firms requested
to bid within a fixed budget
 Complex/highly specialized
assignments
 High downstream impact
 No comparability of
GPN (large
contracts)
Request for
Proposal
proposals
 Very small assignments
 Cost of RFP preparation
and evaluation not justified
Request for
expression
of interest
Must be exceptional:
 Continuation of previous
No
competition
work
 Emergency situation
 Very small assignments
 Only one firm is
qualified/experienced
 Teams of personnel not
required
 No additional professional
support required
 Main requirement is
experience and
qualification of individual
consultant
Preferred
selection
method for
most
consulting
services
Rejection of
proposals
above fixed
budget
Only technical
proposals may
be invited
Submission of
combined
technical-
financial
proposals
Clear
advantage
over
competition or
impossibility
to compete
must be
demonstrated
Request for
expression
of interest or
Direct
contact
Individuals
may be
selected on a
single source
basis
Refer to the IFAD Procurement Guidelines for the following procurement methods:
agents and inspection agents
Procurement with community participation
Procurement for UN agencies, Civil Society Organizations, Auditors and Service
246


Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Medium
Medium
Indonesia has political stability, and it is expected that with
the re-election of the President, development priorities will
remain globally similar, particularly with regard to
redressing inequalities and lifting poorer provinces out of
poverty. However at the local level, risks have been
identified as follows: 
- Elite capture. This constitutes a strong risk because of
the low level of accountability, and a culture based on
dominant clans (in Papua and West Papua). 
Mitigation measures: One of TEKAD’s objectives is
exactly to improve community participation and village
heads accountability, in line with the Village Law. The
main strategy for avoiding elite capture will consist on
empowering rural communities, including organizations
strengthening, mobilization and capacity building,
emphasizing the poorest and more vulnerable segments,
for them to participate and make their rights and priorities
prevail in villages' decisions on the Village Fund resources
allocation. Furthermore, districts will be supported to fulfil
their role for mobilisation and empowerment. 
- Insecurity in Papua and West Papua: 
The level of insecurity has considerably decreased,
mainly because of the law on special autonomy, which
transferred the responsibility for health, education, and
other services to local governments and co-opted local
elites. In the highlands especially, administrative units
have been modified to allow a closer matching with clan
organisation. Besides, MoV has selected target districts
that are in areas with good security conditions, and a
similar criterion will be applied for selecting target villages.
Mitigation: further mitigation measures include: broad and
inclusive participatory approach at village level; inclusion
of traditional authorities; strong involvement of district
mayors; full on-demand approach.
2. Macroeconomic
Low
Low
The macroeconomic situation is expected to remain
stable.
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Low
A legal and policy enabling environment is in place, with
two pillars – the Village Law and Village Fund. The latter is
regarded by GoI as one of the main instruments to raise
villages’ livelihoods and reduce poverty especially in the
rural areas. The freshly re-elected President of Indonesia
is expected to further raise the Fund resources during his
second presidential mandate (2019-2024).
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
The programme will be implemented in 25 districts over
five provinces in Eastern Indonesia. Experience shows
that in order to develop scalable models in a large and
diverse country such as Indonesia, innovative models
need to be tested in a variety of environments. Besides,
as a programme supporting village development in the
framework of decentralization, TEKAD requires the
involvement of four main levels of implementation
(national, provincial, district, villages). These two features
(geographical dispersion and various levels of
implementation) undoubtedly constitute a management
challenge. 
Mitigation measures: other major design features will have
a mitigating effect: MOV’s strong participation and
involvement in the whole design process and full
ownership of the programme; TEKAD builds on a first
phase, VDP, and MoV has extensive experience with the
general programme context as well as the specific
environment in the two most difficult provinces
(Papua/West Papua); TEKAD strategy builds on existing
institutions at all levels and has a strong focus on capacity
building; partnerships are planned with competent public
institutions (Puslatmas, provincial universities), financial
institutions (BRD and BPDs) and projects (KOMPAK and
P3PD); phased implementation; close monitoring of
performance with dashboards and weekly assessment;
extensive capacity building at all levels. 
Furthermore, TEKAD will be able to build on successful
experience with implementation on widespread
implementation areas gained under IFAD-financed CCDP
will be built upon, particularly with regard to M&E and
teambuilding.
Implementation capacity in Indonesia varies across
administrative levels. MoV is still a young ministry, created
for implementing the 2014 Village Law. While it has
successfully implemented VDP, it still needs to build
experience with implementing a major donor-financed
investment programme. 
Mitigation measures: complementing implementation
teams with qualified and experienced consultants; provide
institution-building services to MoV and different levels of
local governments; resorting to technical assistance to
provide methodological guidance and capacity building;
outsourcing implementation for specific activities.
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Medium
Medium
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
High
High
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
3/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
6. Financial management
Medium
Medium
7. Procurement
High
Medium
The inherent risk for Indonesia is medium. The project
design has taken this medium risk in to consideration with
the proposed financial management arrangement to
ensure that an adequate system is in place at all level
including a qualified set of financial management team. .
MOV is a new ministry with capacity issue that need to be
addressed at the beginning of implementation. LPA has
experience in implementing internal funding projects,
including VDP. Project location: Papua and Papua Barat
are the most challenging provinces in the country. For risk
mitigation, use VDP lesson learned to improve financial
management system and provide better and clearer
guideline for TEKAD
Procurements will be carried out by National and
Provincial PIUs. Procurement planning is categorized with
moderate to high risk, development of human resources is
categorized with medium risk and governance and
institutions are categorized with moderate to low risk. 
Mitigation measures: TEKAD will integrate clear strategies
including strengthening preparation of procurement
planning and increasing the capacity and competence of
key procurement staff – including budget owners,
procurement commitment officer, evaluation working
group, and self-management organizer. Similar
perspectives and understanding among all stakeholders is
necessary for successful procurement. In addition,
National and district staff will: (a) implement standard
operating procedures and conduct socialization events
regarding the matrix of the responsibilities of each
stakeholder in the procurement process; (b) be assisted
by procurement professional who have experience with
Government of Indonesia's Procurement System (certified
by LKPP) to provide technical assistance and advice. This
procurement professional or consultant will be involved in
preparing procurement plans, preparation of bid
documents and technical specifications for key
procurement packages, including but not limited to
providing guidance to project staff on issues related to
procurement.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
4/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
Field visits during the design have shown that the major
obstacles to private sector engagement in the target areas
are: 
- Remoteness: in this first phase, focus on villages with
reasonable connectivity. Other mitigation measures: select
high-value commodities that can be stored and easily
transported; use ICT as tool to bridge remoteness;
support village clusters to facilitate aggregation from
remote areas; support inter-village owned organisations
(BUMDes Bersamah). 
- Small volumes: support to village-owned enterprises
(BUMDes) and village clusters are the two main measures
that will promote bigger volumes and support increased
linkages with private sector, aside from increased
producers’ skills and abilities to deliver higher volumes of
better-quality produce. 
There may also be a limited interest of private sector
players to partner with village producers because of risks
involved. This is addressed by de-risking measures
including: financial and business education; technical
advisory services; support to contract farming and
business linkages.
Adverse impact of climate change is already significant.
This is addressed by: promoting climate smart practices
through capacity building packages; building farmers’
resilience through savings.
8. Stakeholders
High
Medium
9. Environment and social
High
Medium
Overall
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
ANNEX 10: EXIT STRATEGY
1. The programme strategy and implementation framework have been designed so that by the end
of
the six years, sustainable mechanisms are in place to ensure sustainable planning and
implementation of village resources for economic growth and activities can continue. Rather than
being a late stage concern to be addressed in the final years of programme implementation, the
into TEKAD programme of activities from day 1 and across the three
exit strategy is built
components:
At the village level, Component 1 will build the capacities of village governments and communities
to plan Village Fund resources for economic development and to implement profitable economic
initiatives;
At  the  district  and  provincial  level,  Component  2  will  promote  a  sustainable  ecosystem  whereby
villagers  will  be  able  to  access  profitable  markets,  to  receive  support  from  qualified  public  and
private service providers and to use financial services;
At the national level, Component 3 will develop evidence-based Orientation and Capacity Building
Packages to support village economic development in Eastern Indonesia, will improve the policy
framework and will raise MoV capacities to make use of these new instruments (Component 3).
2. The components will jointly contribute to improved investment delivery in support of village-based
economic development, but they will also create conditions so that TEKAD approach can be
continued once the programme is over, and further replicated in other villages, districts and
provinces.
3. Against this background, key features that will facilitate TEKAD exit, continuation and replication
by national and local players are as follows:
Project implementation set-up: TEKAD design builds on existing organisations from village to the
national  level,  consolidates  them  and  further  builds  their  capacities,  instead  of  creating  new,
project-driven  structures.  This  is  aimed  at  ensuring  that  by  the  end  of  the  programme,  these
organisations  will be able to continue delivering similar outcomes, services  and benefits. This is
the case in particular with community groups and governance structures, district and sub-district
administrations and their teams of facilitators and extensionists, existing farmers’ training centres
(P4S),  provincial  universities,  MoV’s  Community  Training  Centre  Department  (Pusat  Pelatihan
Masyarakat – Puslatmas), partnering financial institutions;
Capacity building: capacity building will be provided to ensure that stakeholders have the right mix
of technical and management competences to carry on activities beyond project completion, from
village level to district, provincial and national level, for both public and private sector players and,
at  village  level,  for  both village  governments  and  community  groups,  including  traditional  ones.
Capacity  building  is not  intended to only cover  building the skills  of stakeholders participating in
TEKAD implementation. It also involves the development and implementation of tools, guidelines,
strategies and plans that will be used by TEKAD stakeholders from the village up to the national
level, and that will enable replication;
Gradual phasing out of programme support: while in the first years of programme implementation,
TEKAD  District  Team  will  take  full  responsibility  for  the  implementation  of  activities  with
participation  of  district  staff,  TEKAD  facilitators  will  be  tasked  with  building  the  capacities  of
existing,  permanent  facilitators,  so  that  responsibility  will  gradually  shift  to  the  latter  and  by  the
end  of  the  programme,  they  will  be  fully  in  charge  for  extending  support  to  villages.  A  similar
approach  is  taken  for  other  programme  support  instruments  at  village  or  district  level  (including
the  provision  of  financial  resources  for  hiring  service  providers,  or  allocations  to  P4S  centres),
whereby  programme  support  is  gradually  phased  out,  with  village  or  district  budget  resources
taking over;
Orientation and Capacity Building Packages: evidence-based and tracking programme successful
achievements, they will remain available to sustain project achievements, and to guide economic
development and to support capacity building in Eastern Indonesian provinces;
252







Indonesia
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Village  Desks: Village  Desks  will  continue  to  operate  beyond  project  completion  to  offer  village
governments easy access to information and support services related to economic development
at the district administration;
Financial  sustainability: financial  education,  business  planning,  capacity  building  of  key  players
and linkages to performing financial service providers will support the viability and sustainability of
village-based economic initiatives.
4. Furthermore, the Village Fund will keep extending annual allocations that will be available to
finance support costs initially paid by the programme, such as the cost of village cadres,
additional facilitators, peer-to-peer activities or trainings.
5. The two Interim Reviews will make recommendations with regard to key measures required to
further secure the sustainability of project achievements. The NPMU will prepare a detailed exit
strategy building on the recommendations of the Second Interim Review.
253


Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex 12: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Indonesia 
Integrated Village Economic Transformation (TEKAD) 
Project Design Report 
Annex 11: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS 
ANNEX 11: LIST OF ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES TO BE FINANCED BY FIPS 
At this stage it is not expected that TEKAD will access FIPs. 
254 
Indonesia
Transformasi Ekonomi Kampung Terpadu - Integrated Village Economic
Transformation (TEKAD)
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex Fiduciary Summary
Document Date:
08/10/2019
Project No.
2000002562
Report No.
5148-ID
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7: Financial Management Issues Summary 
FIDUCIARY SUMMARY OF COUNTRY PORTFOLIO 
 COUNTRY 
   Indonesia  
 Design  
  TEKAD  
COUNTRY – Fiduciary KPIs: 
Fiduciary Inherent Risk: 
MEDIUM 
-2018 Disbursement 
Ratio1 
- Year to Date 2019 
5.1 % (divisional target: 17.1%) 
0.9% ( divisional annual target 
17%) 
Disbursement Profile 
Unsatisfactory  
Pending Obligations 
• 
• 
• 
Ineligible expenditure 
SOLID); refund processes 
ongoing for SOLID) around 
USD 29,000.  
Ineligible expenditure for 
CCDP , (past closure IDR 
131 580 000 (USD 9 398.57) 
of ineligible expenditure 
identified in 2017 audits has 
not been refunded. 
Ineligible expenditures in the 
amount of IDR 741,584,000 -
approximately equivalent to 
USD 52,000 were identified 
by the auditors in the 2018 
Audit report. Source of the 
funding ( IFAD /Gov) were 
not indicated by the auditors 
( there are ongoing follow 
ups from IFAD to auditors 
Counterpart Funding - 
Profile 
Ranges from Mod. unsatisfactory 
to satisfactory 
PBAS – project's cycle 
coverage: 
IFAD 11  
PBAS – allocation 
(IFAD 11) :  
USD 84 355 555 
Public Financial Management 
• 
The inherent risk is deemed to be medium. Indonesia was 
ranked 89th out of 180 countries in the 2018 TI Corruption 
Perception Index, with a medium score of 38.  
• 
The latest PEFA report for Indonesia was published in 2017. It 
described a reasonably well-functioning PFM system, with 
significant improvements from 2011 to 2016. The assessment 
over time shows significant improvements in the quality of PFM 
including: (i) Aligning the legislative and regulatory framework to 
the latest international budget, accounting and reporting 
standards with the adoption of the COFOG classification and 
accrual accounting standards; (2) Establishing a multi-year 
budgeting framework and a robust macroeconomic fiscal 
framework to optimize expenditure management in line with 
revenue mobilization; (iii) Rolling out the FMIS SPAN as a 
platform for the integration of the Treasury system and the 
consolidation of cash management operations at the central 
government level; and (iv) Strengthening the effectiveness of 
the oversight function by the internal audit and external audit 
institutions. in PFM systems linked to predictability and control 
over budget execution, particularly PEFA performance scores 
are slightly below B, which is above the basic level of 
performance broadly consistent with good international 
practices.  
• 
The Indonesian Corruption Perception Index (CPI) score for 
2018 according to Transparency International website is 38 
(2017: 37; 2016: 37; 2015: 36; 2014: 34; 2013: 32), scale 0-
high and 100-low risk 
• 
The Indonesia portfolio consists of six investment projects, 
with a disbursement ratio of 5.1% in 2018 (USD 8.19 Million 
out of USD 162 Million). Three projects are in completion or 
closing stage (CCDP, VDP &SOLID). Three projects are on 
the second year of implementation (IPDMIP, co-financed with 
ADB, READSI and SMPEI) and one project in preparation 
stage of implementation (YESS). The disbursement 
performance of IPDMIP & READSI are unsatisfactory. 
•  MoV through the Directorate of Natural Resources and 
Applied Technology, under the Directorate General of Village 
Community Empowerment and Development will be the 
leading agency which has experience in implementing IFAD 
project. 
• 
• 
The Financial Management Assessment (FMA) for TEKAD 
was undertaken based on IFAD requirement and Guidance 
Notes on Undertaking Financial Management Assessment at 
Design. The assessment was conducted by reviewing 
government regulations and documents, interview several 
government officials at national, 2 provinces and 2 districts. 
The Directorate of Natural Resources and Applied 
Technology, under the Directorate General of Village 
Community Empowerment and Development, Ministry of 
Villages as experience in implementing international funding 
project from World Bank and IFAD through VDP. However, 
VDP audit report 2017 states that the internal control of the 
1  Disbursement  RATIO  =  Disbursement  during  reporting  period/  disbursable  (available  at 
beginning of reporting period) 
project was not adequate due to the capacity of the 
government in the fiduciary aspect of the project. Under these 
circumstances, the overall FM risk rating is Medium (M).   
Replenishment contributions 
 IFAD10 pledge = USD 9.972 paid 10 million 
 IFAD11 pledge = USD 10 million 
 PROJECT Concept Note – Observations: 
Project FM risk 
Duration: 
Financing Sources: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
IFAD -Loan 
IFAD-Grant 
Government 
Financing Gap 
Beneficiaries 
To be assessed during design 
6 years 
(USD millions) 
35 
  1.5 
            845 
              85 
              17 
(%) 
3.56% 
0.15% 
85.92% 
8.64% 
1.73 % 
Proposed size:   
USD 984.5 million 
Lending Terms: 
- 
2018 
- 
2019 (IFAD11) 
- 
- 
maturity premium category) 
Ordinary   
Ordinary (with Discount under 
According to the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), Indonesia’s public sector debt remains 
moderate. The debt dynamics have been also 
favourable, with strong real GDP growth and 
moderate real interest rates。 
Indonesia’s external debt remains moderate 
and sustainable at 34.4% of GDP in 2017 after 
steady increase in recent years; however; the 
downward trend was projected at end-2017 
with external debt declining to 34 percent of 
GDP. Furthermore, IMF alarmed that 
potentially weaker-than expected revenue, 
contingent liabilities from SOEs and PPPs 
should be carefully monitored to avoid the 
fiscal risk exposures; though total government 
debt was forecasted to be stabilized at 36 
percent of GDP or 258 percent of revenue by 
2022. 
The overall contribution of international financing for the project is estimated at USD 984.5 million, of which IFAD would provide 
• 
a loan of USD 35 million (3.56%) , a component grant of USD 1.5 million (0.15%) and financing gap of USD 85 million (71%). 
Government's foreseen contribution is USD 845 million which much beyond / exceed IFAD11 targets of 1:0.8 and  methods of valuing in-
kind contributions should be further specified in the PIM. 
• 
in financial management aspect in particular 
One of the key risks appears to the remoteness , Inadequate dedicated government official to implement the project, 
Remoteness might create issue in coordination and communication. A special consideration could be given to this in terms of : 
-Government commitment to have a stronger and dedicated team to manage the project. 
-Financial Management consultants to be hired at national, provincial and district level to support FM function 
-FM consultants will be hired individually. Not through service provider/company 
-in order to accelerate the project implementation , training /capacity building , strong government  
  Ongoing Portfolio: 
Project 
 VDP (ex 
PNPM) 
 SOLID 
 CCDP 
Financing 
instrument 
G-I-C-1053- 
L-I--755- 
G-I-C-835- 
L-I--835- 
G-I-C-1392- 
L-E--16- 
L-I--880- 
FLX 
Status 
DSBL 
DSBL 
DSBL 
DSBL 
EXPD 
EXPD 
EXPD 
Lending Terms 
Currency 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
HIGHLY CONCESSIONAL TERMS 0.75 pc 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
INTERMEDIARY TERMS SDR 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
ORDINARY TERMS EUR 
ORDINARY TERMS SDR 
 IPDMIP 
200000144500 
DSBL 
ORDINARY TERMS EUR 
200000144600 
DSBL 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
 SMPEI (GEF5) 
200000095600 
DSBL 
ECD GRANTS 
 READSI 
200000195900 
DSBL 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
200000196000 
DSBL 
ORDINARY TERMS USD 
YESS 
200000260300 
APPR 
LOAN COMPONENT GRANTS 
200000260400 
APPR 
ORDINARY TERMS USD 
2 
Amount 
(million) 
Completion 
date 
0.25  
30/12/2018 
42.03  
30/12/2018 
0.68  
30/01/2019 
30.30  
30/01/2019 
1.19  
6.29  
15.87  
93.15  
1.41  
4.77  
1.00  
30/12/2017 
30/12/2017 
30/12/2017 
30/03/2023 
30/03/2023 
29/09/2021 
30/03/2023 
39.89  
30/03/2023 
2.00 
55.3 
09/12/2023 
09/12/2023 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
XDR 
EUR 
XDR 
EUR 
EUR 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
IMPLI (GEF 6) 
2000000957 
QE 
Approved 
ECD GRANTS 
B.  PORTFOLIO, FM RISK & PERFORMANCE  
USD 
4.895 
10/05/2023 
Project 
VDP (ex 
PNPM) 
 Financing 
 instrument 
Curr.  Amount 
(million) 
Project 
risk 
rating 
PSR quality of FM 
PSR audit 
PSR disb. rate 
G-I-C-1053- 
XDR 
0.25 
Medium 
Mod. unsatisfactory 
Mod. satisfactory 
Mod. satisfactory 
L-I--755- 
XDR 
42.03 
SOLID 
G-I-C-835- 
XDR 
0.68 
Low 
Mod. satisfactory 
Mod. satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
L-I--835- 
XDR 
30.30 
CCDP 
G-I-C-1392- 
XDR 
1.19 
High 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Mod. satisfactory 
L-E--16- 
L-I--880- 
EUR 
6.29 
XDR 
15.87 
IPDMIP 
200000144500  EUR 
93.15 
Medium 
Mod. unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Highly Unsatisfactory
200000144600  EUR 
1.41 
SMPEI (GEF5) 
200000095600  USD 
4.77 
Medium 
Mod. Satisfactory 
READSI 
200000195900  USD 
1.00 
Medium 
Mod. satisfactory 
  Not yet assessed 
  Unsatisfactory 
  Not yet assessed 
  Unsatisfactory 
200000196000  USD 
39.89 
YESS 
2000002603 
USD 
2.00 
Medium 
Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
2000002604 
USD 
55.3 
Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
IMPLI – GEF 6 
2000000957 
USD 
4.895 
Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
  Not yet assessed 
VDP (ex-PNPM) was administered by the World Bank from 2009 to 2014, under a co-financing arrangement. In early 2017, 
implementation was resumed with remaining IFAD funding under modified arrangements and IFAD supervision. The 
project's closing date is 30th June 2019. The 2017 audit was qualified with audit observations including poor contract 
management, overpayments and weak internal controls. Ineligible expenditure was resolved for VDP with the last transfer 
from Ministry of Finance to Designated Account in Q1, 2019.  
Sufficient internal control system should be set up. Risk identification and risk analysis needed to be conducted in a 
structured, formal, and comprehensive manner for the new project.  
SOLID is jointly funded by an IFAD loan of US$49.11 million, an IFAD grant of US$1.08 million and a Government of 
Indonesia contribution of $14.81 million.  It is implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and has been effective since 2011. 
FM and disbursement performance have picked up since 2016.  FM risk, high in 2015, is now assessed to be low based on 
positive feedback from ACD and supervision mission in 2017 and 2018. The project closing date is 31th July 2019. Ineligible 
expenditure from audit prior to FY 2017 has been cleared and been transferred to Designated Account (DA). Current DA 
balance for Loan is USD 612,514.39 and for Grant USD 7,353.60.  
CCDP, (with PCD 30/12/2017) managed by the Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries, completed in December 2017 and 
passed closing date on 30 June 2018. Some delays with the account closure due to pending obligation on ineligible 
expenditures in the amount of  IDR 128.4 million (USD 9,171). Two closure letters were sent on 02 October 2017 and 15 
May 2018 on the pending obligation. The risk has been raised to high in view of the potential negative impact from the 
pending obligation on the portfolio. 
IPDMIP, co-financed by ADB, was approved in December 2015.  The main executing agency for IFAD's portion of the 
funding is the Ministry of Agriculture, with oversight from the Ministry of Works on the entire programme. Start-up has been 
slow with a two year gap from the date of approval to the first disbursement date (Dec 2017), due in large part to the 
complexity of implementing through the Government's on-granting mechanism for the decentralisation of resources to sub-
national levels which is new to IFAD-funded projects, and disbursement performance is highly unsatisfactory with only 
3.75% for the loan and 31.62% for the grant including the initial advances. The project closing date is 30th September 2023.  
READSI, implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture was approved by the September 2017 EB. The project's closing date is 
30th September 2023.The project has not fully started up yet although preparatory activities are ongoing. However, the 
disbursement rate was rated as unsatisfactory as of 28 February 2019, total cumulative disbursement was USD 2.99 million 
(5%) with USD 2.5 million (6%) for loan and USD 0.3 million (30%) for grant, which are outstanding initial deposit for the 
project. Like IPDMIP, READSI is implemented through on-granting systems. The first audit submission is due in 30 June 
2019. Disbursement performance is not satisfactory.   
SMPEI is implemented by the Ministry of Environment with GEF funding. The financing agreement was signed in July 2017, 
the project is in the initial phases of implementation. 
3 
IMPLI is implemented by Ministry of Environment and Forestry with GEF funding. The project has been approved by both 
IFAD and Government of Indonesia. Financing agreement is expected to be signed in 2019. 
YESS is implemented by Ministry of Agriculture (Executing Agency). The Financing Agreement was signed in March 2019. 
The project is currently under start-up preparation period.  
Overall, all IFAD-funded projects in Indonesia are fully mainstreamed through national public financial management systems 
(budget, treasury, accounting, asset management, audit).  Based on lessons from ongoing projects, strong management and 
effective coordination systems will be essential to ensure efficient financial reporting and fund-flows, which will be key to 
successful project implementation.  
Due to a change in Government policy, there has been a rapid deterioration in country disbursement performance and project 
implementation. The current mechanism allows the national level to reimburse only based on output delivery. However, the local 
government is often not sufficiently confident to pre- finance the project activities thereby creating a bottleneck. Implementation 
progress and disbursement could be improved by providing advance payments based on some key indicators.  
To speed up the project implementation progress and  ensure a smooth start-up of the project,  early and continuous 
consultation with Government is essential to mitigate delays including early recruitment of service providers and 
implementation of construction activities in PY1, preparatory planning, establishment of the PSU, recruitment of staff and 
procurement of service providers will take place at earlier stage. Training on financial management procedures, including 
disbursement requirements are provided 
Sufficient internal control system should be set up. Risk identification and risk analysis needed to be conducted 
in a structured, formal, and comprehensive manner for the new project.  
Automation financial reporting system shall be developed. Provide guidance on how to capture GOI and community contribution 
in the project financial report 
The  newly approved projects financed by ADB and WB  will be audited by BPK (SAI), in contrast to the situation to date  as 
IFAD-funded projects have always been audited by BPKP (GoI Internal Audit) except READSI.   Adopting a harmonised 
approach with other IFIs, BPK (SAI) as a member of INTOSAI, should be the external auditors for IFAD Projects and it should 
be specified in the project design document. 
Prepared by: Irene Li, Senior Finance Officer 
Date: July 2019 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
4 
