The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project  
Final project design report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date: 
Project No. 2000001577 
Report No:  4529-IQ 
15-Sep 2017 
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
B.  Rationale 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Outcomes/Components 
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
B.  Organizational framework 
C.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
D.  Supervision 
E.  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project financing 
B.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
C.  Sustainability 
List of Figures 
Figure 1: IDPs and Returnees by Governorate 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Estimated Households and Land Area in Target Governorates 
Table 2: Risk Matrix 
Table 3: Project Financing 
i 
iv 
iv 
v 
vi 
vii 
i 
1 
1 
8 
11 
11 
14 
14 
18 
21 
21 
22 
25 
26 
27 
27 
28 
28 
29 
11 
27 
28 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Table 4: Risks and Mitigation Strategies 
Table 5:  women’s background characteristics (GoI 2008) 
Table 6: Procurement Method Thresholds 
Table 7: Irrigation efficiency and crop intensity targets 
44 
45 
75 
86 
ii 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendices 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 13: SECAP Review Note 
Appendix 14:  Contents of the Project Life File 
31 
35 
47 
49 
55 
63 
67 
73 
77 
86 
93 
97 
99 
115 
iii 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
US$1.0 
= 
= 
Iraqi Dinar 
1176 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
1 dunum 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
0.25 ha 
iv 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
AF               Adaptation Fund 
ASAP 
AWPB 
CCAS 
CPM  
FAO   
FARMS 
GCM  
GDP   
GMT  
GNI   
GoI 
ICARDA 
IDP 
IFAD  
IMF 
IOM   
IPM   
MoA   
MoE   
MWR  
PARM 
PDS   
PMT   
PPP   
PSC   
RIMS  
SARP 
SECAP 
SPN   
SSTC 
UNIDO 
WHO  
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Climate Change Adaptation Specialist 
Country Programme Manager 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural Stability  
Global Climate Models 
Gross Domestic Product 
Governorate Management Team 
Gross National Income 
Government of Iraq 
International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas 
Internally Displaced Persons 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
International Monetary Fund 
International Office of Migration 
Integrated Pest Management 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Ministry of Environment 
Ministry of Water Resources 
Platform for Agricultural Risk Management  
Public Disbursement System 
Project Management Team 
Purchasing Power Parity 
Project Steering Committee 
Results & Impact Management System 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Social Protection Net 
South-South and Triangular Cooperation 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
World Health Organization 
v 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Map of the project area 
vi 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Executive Summary1 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
The Republic of Iraq is an oil-rich upper middle-income country struggling from the impact of a 
turbulent past and the on-going insurgency in the north of the country and the decrease in the 
price of oil. These crises have combined with political instability, low levels of government 
spending and limited investment by the private-sector, leading to increasing levels of poverty 
and inequitable income distribution. The standard of living has deteriorated and a noticeable 
share of the population has fallen into poverty or is extremely vulnerable to falling into poverty.  
Iraq‘s extreme fragility has affected its capacity to deal with rural development significantly, 
reducing institutional capacity and service delivery. The government is facing the challenge of 
maintaining macroeconomic stability, undertaking structural reforms to improve the delivery of 
public services, reconstructing core physical infrastructure and assisting the large number of 
people displaced by the conflict.  
Agriculture is one of the most important sectors in Iraq after oil and gas.  Agricultural workers 
are estimated to make up 20% of the workforce in the country.  However, agriculture is mostly 
practiced on small farming units and it is a low input–low output system. Low agricultural 
productivity has been a characteristic of Iraq’s agriculture for the last two decades and has 
made the country dependent on imports to meet its domestic food needs. The agriculture 
extension services for technology transfer, particularly for small producers, are weak.  There 
are considerable losses reported due to lack of post- harvest facilities. Iraq suffers from a series 
of environmental and natural resource management issues. The country is prone to impacts of 
climate change, particularly on the already scare water resources and fragile farming systems. 
This has resulted in increasing threats of land degradation, desertification, water shortage and 
increased soil salinity. The agriculture sector has also suffered due to food import policies that 
have encouraged the import of cheap food which has driven prices down and negatively 
impacts the farmer.  
The rationale for the current project stems from the fragility of Iraq and IFAD’s commitment to 
assist countries with fragile situations. IFAD has significant experience in areas in which the 
Government of Iraq needs assistance such as agriculture and rural development. Investment in 
agricultural growth is not only important to growth in national income, but is also vital to growth 
in employment, food and nutrition security and reduction of poverty in Iraq. The project would 
assist in increasing the competitiveness of agriculture, preventing post-harvest losses and 
removing marketing bottlenecks through farmer organizations. The project would also assist in 
the diversification of the economy with a particular focus on women and youth. The Smallholder 
Agriculture Revitalization Project would be IFAD’s first investment operation in Iraq.  There is 
significant scope in the current investment for the effective utilization of the funds from the 
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP), and leverage financing from  the 
Adaptation Fund. 
The overall Goal of the project would be to assist rural people overcome poverty and achieve 
food security through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods.  The Development 
Objective would be to enable poor smallholder farmers to improve crop and livestock 
productivity, resilience to climate change and diversify incomes. The proposed Project would be 
implemented in the four southern governorates of Muthanna, Qadisiya, Missan and Thi Qar. 
The level of poverty in these Governorates is among the highest in the country. It is estimated 
1 Mission composition: The mission was provided guidance by Rami Salman CPM who accompanied the mission 
throughout.  Maliha Hussein (Team Leader), Norman Messer (Senior Technical Specialist-IFAD), Faisal 
Awawdeh (Livestock Specialist), Khudhair Abbas Jaddoa AL-Salih (Agronomist), Walid Dhouibi (Procurement 
Specialist), Malek Sahli, Senior Finance Specialist, FMD-IFAD), Mr. Pedro Regato (Environment and Climate 
Change-SECAP (home-based), Davis Atugonza (Economic and Financial Analyst (home-based). A PDR 
Validation Workshop with participation of GoI (Ministries of Finance, Planning, Agriculture and Environment) and 
IFAD was held from 23 – 25 May 2017 in Amman. The Workshop team was led by Rami Salman (CPM)  and 
comprised Vrej Hanna Jijyan  (Programme Office), Edward Heinemann, PTA Lead Advisor, Isabelle Stordeur 
(Programme Associate), Faisal Awawdeh (Livestock Specialist), Jelle Tas (Economist), Erik Zigterman (Water 
and Irrigation Specialist) and David Rendall (Team Leader). 
vii 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
that the proposed project would target 15,795 of the households and is likely to yield benefits 
for around 140,000 people given the current household size of 6.9 in rural areas.  
The target group of the project would be smallholder households engaged with crop and 
livestock production, poor households who have been forced out of agriculture due to lack of 
access to adequate water and high levels of salinity in the soils, women-headed households 
and IDPs interested in undertaking productive activities and youth interested in undertaking 
enterprises and income generating activities particularly centred around agriculture and the 
ancillary services critical to support agricultural growth.  The project would also target the 
marshland communities who are engaged with fisheries, livestock and hunting in the wild to eke 
out a meagre livelihood.  
The Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project (SARP) would be implemented over a 7 year 
period and would consist of two main components namely; (i) Climate Resilient Investments; 
and (ii) Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification.  The first component would include two sub-
components; (i) modernization/rehabilitation of Irrigation Infrastructure schemes and (ii) 
Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening. The component is designed to deal 
with one of the major constraints in the country that centres around the growing scarcity of 
irrigation water and to assist the country with strengthening its capacity at the national level for 
monitoring climate change patterns and providing relevant information to key stakeholders and 
farmers to enable them to undertake adaptation and risk mitigation measures through an early 
warning system.  The second component would consist of two subcomponents; (i) Crop, 
Livestock & Off-Farm Development and (ii) Skills Development & Capacity Building. The 
purpose of this component would be to assist poor households enhance their level of food 
security and diversify their incomes from agriculture as well as improve their skills and assets to 
enable them to engage in off-farm income generating activities.  
The project is estimated to cost USD 31.77 million including the Government in kind 
contribution and the beneficiary contribution. The project would be jointly financed by IFAD, the 
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP), the Adaptation Fund (AF) and the 
Government of Iraq and beneficiaries.  IFAD would provide a loan of USD 15.734 million and  
an IFAD grant of USD 500,000. ASAP would provide a grant of USD 2.0 million. IFAD is in 
discussion with the Government to mobilize USD 9.17 million from the Adaptation Fund to 
finance the climate change adaptation subcomponent for ensuring climate proofing of the 
investment, and mainstreaming climate adaptation throughout the project.  
The Project would improve food security and nutrition and reduce poverty through increase in 
farm and off-farm incomes. The rehabilitation and completion of some of the existing and 
incomplete irrigation schemes is expected to ensure the supply of water for about 33.250 
dunums or 8322 hectares in the project area.  Nutrition would be enhanced through the 
diversification of the agricultural crops and the development of livestock as well as access to 
increased dairy production and protein from animal sources especially poultry and fish 
production. The project would also introduce high value vegetable production through providing 
support for establishing green houses, apiculture, fisheries, IPM for dates and other crops, 
provision of livestock packages for women, assets for men and youth that would help them 
engage more effectively in agriculture production or providing the support services to the 
agriculture and rural sector. The project would strengthen farmer organizations, women and 
youth groups and associations and enable them to undertake productive investments that 
would enhance their production in the agriculture sector as well as in off-farm income 
generating activities.  The Project would improve agriculture production and profitability and 
make farmers more resilient to climate change. 
The design of a project in Iraq under such a fragile situation brings unique challenges, 
specifically in terms of the details that could be available at the design stage. Moreover, this 
project being the first IFAD investment in the country also calls for a more participatory 
approach in terms of design, and investing the start-up phase in working closely with all 
partners on detailing implementation arrangements. For that, the first year of the project would 
be a preparatory year and would begin by recruitment of staff, identifying service providers, 
preparation of the AWPB, the project implementation manual, monitoring and evaluation 
arrangements as well as identifying further information that needs to be gathered to inform the 
infrastructure investments and preparing the feasibility studies.  
viii 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Ministry of 
Planning, World 
Bank and 
Baseline and 
End- surveys  
Baseline/benc
h-mark survey 
in Y1 and 
survey at 
completion 
M&E Officer in 
PMT to collect 
published 
information. 
Assumption
s (A)/ Risks 
(R) 
Stable security 
situation in 
project area. 
DoA Statistics 
Baseline and 
EndLine 
Survey 
DoA 
Stable security 
situation in 
project area. 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Logical Framework 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Results Hierarchy 
Goal: About 16,000 rural 
households supported to 
overcome poverty and achieve 
food security through 
remunerative, sustainable and 
resilient livelihoods.  
Development Objective: 
Poor smallholder farmers 
enabled to improve crop and 
livestock productivity, resilience 
to climate change and diversify 
incomes. 
Outreach (RIMS CI) 
Mid-Term 
Reduce at least 
by 20% the 
proportion of 
men, women 
and children of 
all ages living in 
poverty 
Increase in 
income by at 
least 8%.  
Name 
Baseline 
 %  of  population  below 
the  poverty  line  of  $2.2 
day/person. 
Muthanna (53%), 
Missan (42%) Thi 
Qar (41%) and 
Qadisiya (41%), 
The baseline 
income of 44% of  
the households in 
the project districts 
is below the poverty 
line of about $66 a 
month or $2.2 a 
day. 
 Increase  in  income  from 
agriculture.  
 
 
Number  of  persons 
receiving 
services 
promoted/  supported 
by the project 
Corresponding 
number 
households 
and 
corresponding 
number 
of 
members 
of 
reached 
estimated 
total 
Hh 
i 
Reduce at 
least by 50% 
the proportion 
of men, 
women and 
children of all 
ages living in 
poverty (SDG 
1.2)  
Increase in 
income by at 
least 20% for 
targeted 
households.   
140,000 pers 
16,000 hhs 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Baseline 
Outcome 1: Increase poor 
rural people’s productive 
capacities 
  Number  households 
reporting  an  increase 
in  the  production  of 
high value crops. 
Mid-Term 
2,500 
households 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
6,300 
households  
Beneficiary HH 
Surveys 
Annual Outcome 
Survey 
Year 3 & 6 
Third Party 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Outputs: 
Outcome 2: Increase poor 
rural people’s 
participating in rural 
enterprises 
 Number  of  hectares  of 
farmland  under  water 
related 
infrastructure 
constructed/rehabilitated  
rural 
accessing 
inputs  and 
producers 
production 
technological packages 
 Number 
of 
 Number  of  supported 
rural 
producer 
organization  members 
or 
reporting 
services 
improved 
provided 
their 
organization 
new 
by 
0 
0 
2000 hectares. 
8322 hectares 
Irrigation design 
reports of MWR 
3,700 rural 
producers (at 
least 1300 
women) 
6650 rural 
producers. ( 
at least 2500 
women) 
Reports of 
Training Officer 
& Service 
producer 
500 households. 
1000 hhs or 
50% of the 
2000 HHs in 
400 groups.  
Survey of 
Groups  
Annual Outcome 
Survey 
Quarterly & 
Annual 
Reports 
Quarterly & 
Annual 
Reports 
Annual 
M&E Officers 
at national & 
Governorate 
level 
M&E Officers 
at national & 
Governorate 
level 
M&E Officers 
at national & 
Governorate 
level 
Outputs:  
  Number 
enterprises 
business 
services 
of 
rural 
accessing 
development 
800 enterprises  
At least 2000 
enterprises 
Beneficiary HH 
Surveys 
Year 3 & 6 
Third Party  
ii 
Assumption
s (A)/ Risks 
(R) 
  Water  will  be 
released from 
main canals. 
  Technologies 
disseminated 
be 
would 
relevant 
for 
smallholders. 
  Macro-
economic  
conditions 
are 
supportive  for 
doing 
business 
Availability of 
appropriately 
experienced 
and qualified 
Assumption
s (A)/ Risks 
(R) 
non-
government 
service 
providers. 
Climatic 
changes are in 
line with current 
predictions 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
End Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
persons 
income-
of 
in 
 Number 
trained 
generating  
activities or business 
management 
of 
 Number 
rural 
producer  organizations 
supported 
Outcome 3: Strengthen 
the environmental 
sustainability and climate 
resilience of poor rural 
people’s economic 
activities 
Outputs: 
of 
reporting 
of 
 Percentage 
households 
adoption 
environmentally 
sustainable  and  climate 
technologies 
resilient 
and practices 
  Number 
of 
persons 
provided  with  climate 
information services 
3000 (1500 
women and 
1500 men). 
20 groups with 
at least 7 for 
women. 
50 groups 
with at least 
20 for women. 
TBD 
70% of the 
HHs  of 5000 
participating 
adopt the 
practices 
Reports of 
Training Officer 
and service 
provider 
Reports of 
Training Officer 
& Service 
provider  
Beneficiary HH 
Surveys 
Quarterly & 
Annual 
Reports 
Quarterly & 
Annual 
Reports 
Year 3 & 6 
M&E Officers 
at national & 
Governorate 
level 
M&E Officers 
at national & 
Governorate 
level 
Third Party 
3000 persons. 
5000 persons.  Agro metre ology 
Network of MoA 
Quarterly & 
Annual 
Reports 
AMN of MoA 
iii 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
1. 
The Republic of Iraq is estimated to have a population of 36 million people of which 33% are 
reported to be living in rural areas. The country is an oil-rich upper middle-income country with a per 
capita gross national income (GNI) of USD 5,550 in 2015 corresponding to a purchasing power parity 
(PPP) of USD 14,850. Economic growth has averaged 7.1 percent per year over the past five years, 
and it is projected to grow at 7.2 per cent in 2016 and at around 5 per cent in the next few years. 
However, conflict, and excessive dependence on oil pose significant challenges to Iraq’s socio-
economic development. The agriculture sector accounts for 8.6% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
including the oil sector and 32% without the oil sector. The country has not done well on social 
indicators of development or its Gender Development Index. Iraq was ranked 141 out of 187 countries 
in the 2015 Human Development Index. Unemployment rate is 11% nationally (7% of males and 13% 
of females). Youth (15-24 years) unemployment is high at 18% (27% for females and 17% for males).  
Inflation was reported to be 1.4% in 20152 and is expected to remain low at 2 percent in 2016, with 
the government subsidizing electricity, food and fuel.3 
Iraq is included in the list of countries with the most fragile situations for 2016. The country is 
2. 
included in the list of countries with the most fragile situations by IFAD, the World Bank and the 'high 
alert' category in the Fund for Peace Index, which forms the basis for OECD's assessment of fragility. 
The two key indicators used by IFAD to define fragile solutions in a country namely (i) institutional 
capacity and (ii) conflict are not only present in the country as a whole but the negative consequences 
of these factors have permeated to even those regions in the south where there is no active conflict 
situation. The overall rural sector performance is at a low level. Iraq‘s extreme fragility has affected its 
capacity to deal with rural development significantly, reducing institutional capacity and service 
delivery. Development outcomes are consistently lower in fragile situations, and IFAD's mandate of 
rural transformation is threatened by this fragility.   
Iraq has faced two simultaneous crises since the second half of 2014: the ISIS insurgency and 
3. 
the oil price shock. The double shock has severely dented growth, diverted resources away from 
productive investment, and increased poverty, vulnerability and unemployment. Private consumption 
and investment remain subdued due to an unstable security and political situation and a poor 
business environment. The crises resulted in a sharp deterioration of both fiscal and external 
accounts and worsening poverty. The fiscal deficit widened to 14.5% in 2015, due significantly to 
lower oil revenues and higher humanitarian, and security-related expenditure.  The large fiscal deficit 
has been financed through external borrowing, including loans from the IMF and the World Bank.  The 
government implemented fiscal consolidation measures in mid-2015, aimed at improving revenue 
collection, in particular from oil, and at containing non-oil primary spending. Macroeconomic risks 
remain elevated due to Iraq’s continued exposure to a volatile oil market.  The Government is facing 
the challenge of maintaining macroeconomic stability, undertaking structural reforms to improve the 
delivery of public services and reconstructing core physical infrastructure in the areas liberated from 
ISIS. 
Internally displaced persons (IDPs): Iraq today has a total population of 4 million IDPs, 
4. 
second only to Syria and Colombia. This represents a staggering 11 percent of the population. The 
addition of refugees, mostly Syrians fleeing the conflict at home, brings the total number of displaced 
persons to 4.3 million. IDPs account for half a million of the total number of people who fell into 
poverty. Unemployment among IDPs is estimated at 27 percent.4  According to the IOM tracking 
website, currently around 70000 IDPs are present in the southern Governorates. Some of these have 
become what is referred to as ‘protracted displacements’, and individuals and households falling into 
this category are a key part of IFAD’s target group. Figure 1 gives a visual illustration of the number of 
IDPs and returnees by Governorate in Iraq.  
2 http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/iraq/publication/economic-outlook-spring-2016 
3 http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/iraq/overview 
4 World Bank 2017 
1 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Figure 1: IDPs and Returnees by Governorate 
There is a range of initiatives aimed at supporting IDPs in Iraq, but they appear to be far from 
5. 
sufficient to cover even their basic needs. Many are very localised micro-projects implemented by 
NGOs registered with the Governorates, under the aegis of the Ministry of Social Affairs, discontinued 
as soon as financing stops, and frequently unsustainable. One of the many challenges of working with 
IDPs is that they are scattered over many localities within any given district. UNHCR is running a cash 
distribution scheme which seeks to satisfy requirements related to food, shelter, and medicines. Most 
of the IDPs are landless, but Governorates are willing and able to provide them with some land for 
productive activities if financing becomes available. 
Rural poverty: Rural poverty in Iraq is a direct consequence of the failure to invest in rural 
6. 
areas, create opportunities for employment and income generation and enterprise development which 
has been compounded by rapid population growth, internal conflict and insecurity, increasing water 
scarcity, climate change and rising salinity. In 2012, rural poverty rate stood at 31%, nearly double that 
of urban poverty (15%) with 19% of the total population in Iraq living below the national poverty line of 
less than US$ 2.2 per person per day.  The standard of living has deteriorated and a noticeable share 
of the population has fallen into poverty or is extremely vulnerable to falling into poverty. The Iraqi 
Government estimated that the direct impact of economic, social and security disruptions were 
estimated to have doubled poverty rates to 41.2 percent.  Out of the 18 Governorates in Iraq, the 
poverty ratio ranged from 35% to 52% for the 5 poorest governorates.  
In the rural areas of the 5 poorest governorates, small-scale farmers and livestock producers 
7. 
are the most marginalised households with unemployed young men and women members as the 
most vulnerable. In the South/Centre of Iraq, female-headed households make up 9.5 percent of the 
total households. Rural households spend a significantly higher share of their income on food 
compared to urban households (33.3 percent for rural and 19.6 percent for urban).5 Poverty in rural 
Iraq is not so much a function of food insecurity and low incomes as it is a direct consequence of 
decades of conflict and sectarian violence which has ripped the social fabric of communities and 
many families apart. The psychological effects thereof have only recently become more apparent. The 
constant feeling of insecurity is further exacerbating by perceptions of marginalization and 
disenfranchisement in the country’s rural areas. 
8. 
Livelihoods and nutrition: As a consequence of the war in Iraq, malnutrition among Iraqi 
children has doubled and acute malnutrition rates among children under the age of five were reported 
to be 7.7 per cent in 2005 compared with 4 per cent prior to the fall of Saddam Hussein. More recent 
estimates of malnutrition in the country report the wasting at 4.7%, underweight at 9.1% and stunting 
at 21.8%.6  The food security situation of the country has been further compromised by the civil war. In 
5 IFPRI 2014 
6 WHO. 2007. http://www.emro.who.int/irq/programmes/nutrition.html 
2 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
2014, Iraq lost 40% of its agricultural production capacity after the Islamic State (IS) took control of the 
most productive provinces in the north.7  The International Grain Council (IGC’s) most recent quarterly 
update on world trade in wheat flour shows Iraq importing a projected 2.3 million tonnes in 2016-17, 
unchanged from 2015-2016. This level makes the country the largest wheat importer in the world.8 
The humanitarian crisis that followed also led to the dramatic increase in food insecurity for 4.4 million 
people who now require food assistance. The nutrition status of both rural and urban population is 
increasingly dependent on the heavily subsidized ‘’food basket” provided by the Iraqi Public 
Distribution System (PDS) which is an essential policy measure to ensure food security and avoid 
possible malnutrition. The subsidized food rationing on a national scale, with imported food, has also 
had a negative impact on the local grain market with consequent depressing effects on producer 
prices and on agriculture sector investment.  However, the decrease in Government revenue has led 
to sporadic implementation of the food safety programme. PDS wheat flour distribution in 2016 is 
reportedly providing only 70% of the requirements. The Government has launched a new poverty 
targeting programme in April 2016 aimed at reforming the social security network and improving its 
targeting efficiency.  
Agriculture context: Agriculture is one of the most important sectors in Iraq after oil and gas.  
9. 
Agricultural workers are estimated to make up 20% of the workforce in the country. Agriculture is 
practiced from North to South in eight agro-ecological zones (ACZs). The production systems include 
an irrigation-based system in the Center and South and a rain-fed-based system predominantly in the 
North. In the irrigated system, cereals, winter and summer vegetables, corn, rice and fruit trees 
predominantly date palm are grown. The rain-fed farming system is crop/small ruminant based. In 
both systems, the productivity is low.  The total agricultural area of variable quality and potential, 
amounts to 11 million hectares (ha) of which only 6 million ha is cultivated. Agriculture is mostly 
practiced on small farming units and it is a low input–low output system. Crop yields are low by 
comparative standards, as farmers tend to minimize costs concerned with land preparation, planting, 
weeding and harvesting.  Low agricultural productivity has been a characteristic of Iraq’s agriculture 
for the last two decades and has made the country dependent on imports to meet its domestic food 
needs. Cheap food imports flood into the country and farmers are unable to compete with them due to 
their lack of organization and inability to make strategic crop choices.  
10.  The land holding system in Iraq is a mixture of owner operator, lease holding and 
sharecropping arrangements. In the rural areas of the four poorest governorates, small-scale farmers 
and livestock producers are the most marginalised households with unemployed young men and 
women the most vulnerable. Small-scale farmers with a holding size ranging from 2.5 to 7.5 ha 
account for 35 percent of total number of farmers (for irrigated lands less than 4 ha). Medium-sized 
farmers account for 34% with a holding size ranging between 7.6 ha and 12.5 ha. In Muthanna – the 
largest of the four – smallholders account for 60 percent of the total farming population.  
11.  Farmers have focused in the past almost entirely on wheat and barley, which were described 
as “strategic crops”. The centralized policy to promote these subsistence cereal crops by providing 
subsidized inputs and purchasing them at fixed prices made the farmers ignore other more 
commercially oriented crops. As a result the farmers continue to grow these crops even though the 
Government has withdrawn some of its earlier policies. Cereal production now accounts for 58% of 
the cultivated area in the country. Farmers need to shift to high value crops but need assistance in 
doing so. The agriculture extension services for technology transfer, particularly for small producers 
are weak.  There are considerable losses reported due to lack of post-harvest facilities.  
12.  Water resources:  The two dominant rivers in Iraq are the Tigris and Euphrates. The 
watersheds, including their tributaries, account for almost all of the country’s surface water. The fact 
that these important rivers originate in Turkey and not within the country has been a long-standing 
source of tension with Iraq’s riparian neighbours, and puts Iraq in a difficult position when trying to 
plan for and manage its water resources. Although ground water is also used for supplemental 
irrigation, the potential for Iraq’s annual active groundwater recharge rate has not been properly 
estimated. Currently, of the total cultivated area, 2.5 million ha is under rain-fed conditions in the North 
and 3.5 million ha under irrigation in the Center and the South. Increasing water scarcity and reduced 
water availability are dominant economic and environmental challenges in Iraq. Current water use for 
7 https://www.aei.org/publication/weaponization-grain-iraq/ 
8 http://www.world-grain.com/Departments/Country-Focus/Country-Focus-Home/Iraq-2016.aspx 
3 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
all purposes far exceeds renewable supplies. The average yearly inflow of the Euphrates declined 
from 30.44 billion m3 for the period between 1933-1971 to 12.75 billion m3 (42%) for the period 2008-
11. The inflow of Tigris declined from 49.22 billion m3 for the period 1933-98 to 33.11 billion m3 (67%) 
for the period 1999-2011. The decline in the inflow is due to the Ataturk Dam in Turkey, over 
exploitation, poor management practices compounded by the impact of climate change. The annual 
share of renewable fresh water resources per capita in Iraq declined from 4,587 m3 in 1964 to 998 m3 
in 2014.  
Irrigation infrastructure includes (i) a wide range of hydraulic dams and water reservoirs with 
13. 
a cumulative retention capacity of 70 billion m3; (ii) 45,000 km of water conveyance systems and 
85,000 km of drainage canals; and (iii) 38,000 pumping and control stations for irrigation and 
drainage. Most of the conveyance canals are in a state of disrepair as a result of poor maintenance 
and most of the drainage canals are non-functional due to lack of proper maintenance and lack of 
proper cleaning. Water use efficiency both at the conveyance level and on farm level is low and 
ranges from 35% to 40%.  The quality of water poses another problem as the underground water is 
brackish and the level of salinity in the water has gradually increased over time. Government 
investment in the irrigation sector has declined and many of the schemes have been left partially 
complete or poorly maintained due to lack of Government funds. Water User Associations were 
established sporadically but there is little tradition for these to assume the responsibility for operation 
and maintenance of the infrastructure.  However, farmers are beginning to realize the importance of 
investments in improved irrigation efficiency and install modern irrigation technologies.  
14.  Environment and Natural resource management: Iraq suffers from a series of environmental 
and natural resource management issues.  Iraq’s environmental conditions have suffered greatly from 
the impact of poor policies. This has resulted in increasing threats of land degradation, desertification, 
water shortage, increased soil salinity, reduced soil fertility and a low forest cover of only 4%. There 
are high levels of salinity in Iraq’s Shatt al-Arab waterway, formed by the confluence of the Tigris and 
Euphrates in the southern province of Basra, which have forced many families to abandon their once 
relatively fertile farms.9  It is estimated that in 1960 Iraq had along the Shatt al-Arab some 62 million 
date palms. In 2007 the figure was believed to have shrunk to around 10 million. While the wars took 
their toll, much of this decrease is attributed to the salinization of the agricultural lands along the Shatt 
al-Arab.  The level of salinity especially in the Euphrates River is high and is expected to increase with 
the development of irrigation in the basin and, as a consequence, the diminutions of the water flow 
particularly in the dry season. With excessive use of irrigation and high evapotranspiration rates the 
use of adaptive management practices such as drip irrigation, conventional residue management 
have become critical. 
15.  Climate change: Located in an arid and semi-arid environment, Iraq is prone to impacts of 
climate change, particularly on its fragile farming systems. In Iraq, climate change is manifested in 
higher temperatures, lower rainfall with uneven spatial and temporal distribution, higher frequency and 
severity of droughts and sand storms, and emerging new pests and diseases. According to an IFAD 
financed analysis,10 the annual precipitation in Iraq is set to decline significantly.  The trend of 
declining precipitation that emerges from the comparison of the current climate with the future one 
projected by the Global Climate Models (GCMs) is very much in line with the trend of the past.  The 
changes in mean annual temperature between current climate and those for 2010–2040 across the 
study area are in the range 1–1.5°C. The combined impact of these changes is expected to contribute 
to the impoverishment of the rural poor, their migration to urban cities, and reduction of food security 
at household level.  This is already in evidence during field visits by IFAD missions. There is need for 
appropriate adaptation actions at all levels including policy making, institutional and technical capacity 
development, implementation of climate-resilient agronomic systems and technologies, prevention 
and restoration of climate-induced soil and water degradation and awareness raising about the impact 
of climate change and adoption of adaptation and mitigation measures. 
 Research and extension: Most of agriculture research assets, buildings, laboratories and 
16. 
government extension farms have been damaged or in a poor state of maintenance and under 
resourced.  Technicians are insufficient in number and quality. The sanctions imposed on Iraq 
disrupted for a long time contacts with the outside world except to some extent with ICARDA and 
9 Climate Change, Energy & Natural Resource Management. UNDP Iraq. 2009.  
10 De Pauw, E. et al (2015) Mapping climate change in Iraq and Jordan. ICARDA Working Paper 27. 
4 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
FAO. There is a lack of a real extension and training strategy with adequate operating budget, 
involving effective decentralisation, privatisation, gender empowerment, farmer participation, use of 
modern information technologies, linkages with research and other institutions such as universities, 
private sector, and support to women and youth.  
17.  Farmers’ organizations: According to FAO, organizations at producer level exist but they are 
weak and ineffective.11 The authority of traditional farmer associations has been eroded by the unrest 
of the last two decades, and the various land reforms that fragmented ownership, including tenure 
reform associated with irrigation development. Unions of farmer associations, of which membership 
had earlier been compulsory for a large number of farmers12, are present in all Governorates. In 1983, 
their strong connection to the Ministry of Agriculture was dissolved. They have nonetheless remained 
key actors in implementing government programmes such as the Public Distribution System (PDS). 
There are a however a number of other, smaller farmer associations that exist in the four SARP 
Governorates including the Poultry Association of Thi Qar, which has acted as a “value chain service 
provider” for smaller farmers. The union of farmer associations in Nasiriya (Thi Qar) has the potential 
for date processing.  Farmer associations are also interested in investing in and managing cold 
storage facilities. Women and youth have also been involved in the past in vegetable and dairy 
production and processing. However, these groups are of varying capacity and need institutional 
support. 
18.  Private sector: Given the absence of security and stability and an uncertain policy 
environment, the private sector has not made any significant investments in agribusiness. Problems 
include security, unclear requirements for registering and closing businesses, license requirements, 
limited communication infrastructure and logistics, difficult access to finance and a non-competitive 
business environment lacking transparent and clear legal frameworks for rules-based-market 
competition. 
19.  Target groups: The socio-economic characteristics of IFAD target groups in the Governorates 
covered under SARP are very heterogeneous and not well documented by quantitative data. Because 
of this heterogeneity, it is not possible to craft a stylised typology of smallholder farmers in the four 
southern Governorates. At least not at this stage – one of the outputs of SARP would be to attempt to 
fill such information gaps. Qualitative data shows that agricultural income levels and sources of 
income vary considerably by geographic location, with reliable access to a source of water as one of 
the main determinants of the presence of farming activities. The next determinant of whether or not 
smallholders engage in crop farming relates to soil salinity, which is a huge problem in the southern 
part of the country. In several parts of the south, smallholders appear to have abandoned crop farming 
altogether because of absence of water and/or presence of salinity. Typically, the livestock activities of 
IFAD target groups consist of sheep and goat rearing and backyard poultry farming. Households 
owning a cow can be said to be relatively better off, and will use its milk for consumption and 
processing into cream and cheese for the local market. Date palms are not necessarily a feature of 
relatively better-off households, and are mostly in bad shape in terms of their current productivity and 
are prone to pests. Beekeeping is a promising activity but is not very widely practiced. Fisheries is 
also important for some of the Governorates. 
20.  Women: In the 1980s, Iraqi women enjoyed more basic rights than other women in the region 
although the structure of society, like in the other countries in the region, is not very egalitarian and 
the rights of women are suppressed. Years of sanctions and conflict have led to a further deterioration 
in women’s status. Despite steps taken towards gender equality since 1990, Iraqi women today do not 
have equal educational or employment opportunities.  Traditional societal views of women, insecurity 
and weak performance of state functions are affecting the role of Iraqi women in rebuilding the 
country. However, there are some positive signs of women’s participation in higher levels of the public 
sector and government. In 2010, the average rate of parliament seats held by women was 27 percent.  
21.  The ratio of girls to boys in primary school rose from 0.88 in 2006 to 0.94 in 2011; in secondary 
school, the ratio rose from 0.75 in 2006 to 0.85 in 2011.13 It was estimated that in 2011, 28.2 percent 
of women 12 years or older were illiterate, more than double the male rate of 13 percent.14 Only one 
11 FAO 2012 
12 IFAD Study on Institutional and Policy Gap Analysis in Iraq, 2016 
13 Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS) conducted by the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Government. March 2013. 
14Iraq Knowledge Network (IKN) survey of 2011. 
5 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
third of young women - those aged 15 to 24 - living in rural areas are educated. Women’s health has 
seen some gains. The percentage of births attended by skilled personnel has risen significantly in the 
last decade. And the maternal mortality rate - which at 84 per 100,000 births in 2006 was the highest 
in the region - appears to have dropped significantly, to 24 per 100,000 in 2011.15  
22.  There is considerable inequality in the labour force. Only 14 percent of women are working or 
actively seeking work, compared to 73 percent of men. Those who are employed are mostly working 
in the agricultural sector. The percentage of women in paid employment in the non-agricultural sector 
has risen from 12.1 percent in 2008 to 14.7 percent in 2011. Women with a diploma have a harder 
time finding jobs: 68 percent of women with a bachelor’s degree are unemployed. The rural 
unemployment rate is higher for females than males. Due to years of war and political instability, 10 
percent of households are headed by women, most of them widowed, but many of them divorced, 
separated or caring for sick spouses. They represent one of the most vulnerable segments of the 
population and are generally more exposed to poverty and food insecurity as a result of lower overall 
income levels.16 The agriculture sector has a particularly high share of women, whose participation in 
the sector has increased from 30 to 50 percent between 1980 and 2010.17 Nearly half of the workers 
in public administration are women, although few of them are in senior or decision-making positions.18 
Within rural areas, the literacy divide between men and women is wider. There are an estimated 1.6 
million widows, an increased number of female-headed households, and large numbers of orphans. 
23.  Women in Iraq have been significantly affected by insecurity. In addition to imposing restrictions 
on movement that reduce access to education, health, and jobs, a feature of post-conflict settings with 
high unemployment and poor overall security such as Iraq is often a high incidence of violence, 
particularly various kinds of gender-based violence.19 In the more traditional rural communities, 
women are mostly confined to their residential homestead, and feel uncomfortable and are often 
unwilling to engage in any income-generating activity away from their homes. This acts as a powerful 
limiting factor and constraint to opportunities for off-farm activities for women, which are much 
influenced by traditional gender roles. As a rule of thumb, however, in the more remote rural villages, 
husbands will consent to their wives earning money away from home, as long as this takes place 
within commuting distance. 
24.  Although no law prevents them from owning land, custom and Islamic norms entail that very 
few women are officially owners of agricultural land. Women do have use rights which are reasonably 
secure, and have no problem using the land near their houses, for example for growing vegetables, or 
for poultry farming and the rearing of goats or sheep. As per law 35/1983, they can rent agricultural 
land – but only few women seem to be willing or able to do so formally. 
25.  Youth: Iraq is facing a ‘youth bulge’ and individuals between 15–24 years old.  represent 19.6% 
of Iraq’s population.  The number of young people entering their reproductive years and the labour 
force has increased significantly between 2011 and 2015, creating both an opportunity and a 
challenge to Iraq’s society and economy. This segment of the population has been deeply affected by 
the on-going war and conflict that they have witnessed for much of their lives.  The various conflicts 
have significantly limited young people’s educational and employment opportunities in Iraq and deeply 
impacted their vision of their future.  The enrolment ratio in intermediate education is barely 40 
percent; for secondary education it is less than 30 percent. The illiteracy rate is high, and the 
unemployment rate for both sexes combined is estimated at about 30 percent. Adolescent girls are 
worse off than boys in every respect. There is a high probability that girls will be married before their 
18th birthday without their consent. In terms of participation, only 40 percent of youth perceive the 
value of taking part in social and political life. A survey20 indicated that only 56.9% felt optimistic about 
the future, they have little trust in the current system of governance and almost 17% expressed a 
strong desire to emigrate.21 Despite several measures taken by the Government recently to deal with 
youth, significant challenges remain. 
15 World Health Organization. 
16 UN Fact Sheet. March 2013. 
17 World Bank, 2016) 
18 UNDP Iraq 2012 
19 UNDP Iraq, 2012 
20 National Youth Survey by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Government of Iraq. 2009 
21 http://uniraq.org/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=1140:iraqi-youth-key-statistics-and-
resources&Itemid=606&lang=en 
6 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Policy, Governance and Institutional Issues 
26.  The Government has formulated a 2013-2017 National Development Plan (NDP) designed to 
enable the Iraqi economy to take off and start to free itself from a revenue-generating economy 
dependent on a single resource, oil, to expanding its base to depend on other activities, whether 
production, service, or distributional. The plan defined the roles of the public and private sectors and 
civil society in achieving its developmental, economic, human resource, and environmental goals.  
The vision embodied in the 2013-2017 Plan represents aims to build a diversified and prosperous 
economy with industry, energy, agriculture and tourism as the main drivers and pillars of development, 
where the public and the private sector along with civil society are partners in development, and 
where centralized and decentralized roles complement each other in managing development.  The 
Federal budget will correspond with the plan’s goals as part of comprehensive and balanced policies 
to realize the following goals: achieving fiscal and monetary stability; developing the primary and 
secondary spatial poles in order to close the gap between urban areas and the countryside as well as 
between governorates; guaranteeing equal opportunities on the basis of gender so as to boost 
economic participation rates; fostering knowledge and skills to keep pace with the demands of the 
knowledge economy and the job market; guaranteeing integrated health care for both the sick and the 
healthy; raising the level of quality social care to cover the needs of vulnerable groups in order to 
enhance social development opportunities; and achieving environmental sustainability and thereby 
laying the groundwork for the green economy.22  
27.  Policy and Institutional issues relevant to the agriculture sector: The capacity of the MoA 
and MoWR and other government institutions to provide services to the agriculture sector has 
significantly deteriorated over the past 20 years. Budget cuts have reduced the level of services, 
resulting in the departure of skilled human resources in agriculture support services such as research, 
extension, animal health, artificial insemination, plant quarantine and disease control. The recovery of 
these services is very slow, and there is a need to enhance capacities of government and smallholder 
organisations, as well as identify policy gaps that need to be addressed to help increase 
competitiveness of the sector and enhance its contribution to rural development and poverty 
alleviation.  
28.  Decentralization: Historically, responsibility for basic service delivery was lodged almost 
exclusively in central government ministries, but that arrangement is changing. The Constitution of 
2005 provided for decentralizing powers and functions to the Governorates. The first major step 
toward a decentralized state was taken with the election of governorate councils in 2005.  Successive 
elections, each more openly organized and with high voter turnout, were held in 2009 and 2013. The 
popular election of governorate officials has created the expectation among citizens that governorates 
are the primary authorities responsible for improving service delivery. Popular and open elections of 
governorate officials have given governorates a political presence and popular legitimacy. The 
government of Iraq has enacted several legal, policy, and institutional reform initiatives, the intent of 
which is to shift political and administrative powers and responsibilities from the Central Government 
to the Governorates. Decentralization is designed to improve service delivery and provide greater 
ownership to Governorates for charting their own development path. The Ministry of Agriculture is one 
of the institutions which has been decentralized.  
29.  National Programmes: There are currently several emerging national programmes being 
carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture that are piloting new practices and aiming at productivity 
enhancement and efficient use of natural resources and adaptation to climate change. These 
programmes are relevant to IFAD engagement and pose an opportunity to promote smallholder 
agriculture development. These include: (i) the national programme for the use of on-farm modern 
irrigation systems; (ii) the national programme for the improvement of wheat production; (iii) the 
national programme for the development of drought and salinity tolerant crops; (vi) the program for the 
establishment of an agricultural meteorology network; (vii) the programme for the genetic 
improvement of local animal breeds; and (viii) the conservation agriculture project.  In addition to 
introducing new agriculture practices, the national programmes listed above are in the process of 
promoting two relevant supportive instruments - namely the use of land suitability maps for the 
selection of crops according to respective agro-ecological zones; and the establishment of an 
effective network of an early warning system for monitoring and mitigation of climate change risks. 
22 National Development Plan.  2013-2017. Republic of Iraq. Ministry of Planning. January 2013. 
7 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
30.  Social security transfers: Iraq’s Social Protection Net (SPN) is a cash transfer program that 
aims to target poor and vulnerable populations. The SPN distributes monthly grants to beneficiaries 
based on household size. In 2012, the SPN covered 4 percent of the population but with minimum 
targeting effectiveness as 71 percent of the beneficiaries were non-poor, while 89 percent of the poor 
did not receive SPN assistance that year. The program is inefficient and fragmented, providing cash 
transfers based on categorical targeting (including households with orphans, married students, 
widows, divorced women, and others), leading to significant leaks (GoI 2012). WFP has started to 
provide food aid to eligible households who should have received PDS ration cards after 2014 but 
have not received them as the system is overstretched. 
B.  Rationale 
31.  The rationale for the current project stems from the fragility of Iraq and IFAD’s commitment 
to assist countries with fragile situations.  The fragility in the country stems from deep-rooted 
inequality, exclusion, poverty, poor management of natural resources and the absence of institutions. 
The Fund’s current strategy regarding fragility expressly recognizes that fragility also plays a key role 
in rural development and food security as it can reduce institutional capacity, disrupt rural livelihoods, 
and increase volatility in food prices. Research conducted for the IFAD Rural Development Report 
2016 indicates that countries suffering chronic fragility can become prematurely urbanized, as people 
leave rural areas affected by limited availability of basic services or rule of law to seek security and 
jobs in the cities. When this occurs without any significant underlying structural or rural transformation, 
it can result in high levels of food insecurity and in unsustainable patterns of urbanization leading to 
unemployment and unrest. This is precisely what is happening in Iraq and the country needs urgent 
assistance. 
IFAD has significant experience in areas in which the Government of Iraq needs assistance 
32. 
such as agriculture and rural development.  The country is experiencing growing poverty, degradation 
of the natural resource base, rising water scarcity, increasing salinity and climate change.  Low 
agricultural productivity has made Iraq dependent on imports to meet its domestic food needs and 
making it a major importer of agricultural products. In Iraq today the yield gaps remain very significant 
due, in part, to the effects of prolonged wars, civil strife, sanctions, droughts, and deteriorated 
infrastructure and its inability to be competitive.23 The farmers in the governorates to be targeted by 
the current investment need support in responding to market demand, shifting to high value vegetable 
and horticulture crops, particularly dates, invest in a range of livestock production and grow more 
saline tolerant wheat, barley and fodder in marginal lands. The agriculture sector has the potential to 
provide employment to a growing number of people with proper investments in the sector and reduce 
the dependence on foreign imports of food. Investment in agricultural growth is not only 
important to growth in national income, but is also vital to growth in employment, food and 
nutrition security and reduction of poverty in Iraq. The Iraqi National Development Plan (NDP) for 
2013-2017, identified agriculture as one of the key sectors to advance non-oil growth, raising 
incomes, and improving income distribution and gender equality. 
33.  The current project can assist to enhance the relevance of the emerging on-going national 
agriculture programmes and replicate and expand its experience in reducing  the gap between the 
current and potential yields of crops and livestock, the dissemination of available production 
technology packages piloted by regional projects co-financed by IFAD and other partners. The very 
specific comparative advantage of IFAD relative to this project lies in two broad areas. The first is its 
proven result-oriented approaches, its focus on targeting and the empowerment of smallholder 
farmers through the strengthening of their grass-root institutions and social capital, the development 
of farmer’s capacities and skills, as well as gender mainstreaming in all activities.  The second area is 
the broad implementation approach that IFAD would seek to promote. In support of the 
decentralization policy of Government, the project would build capacity at the governorate level and 
support the governorates to set their development agenda. The project would also promote 
collaborative ways of working: between different government agencies, and between government and 
non-government service providers. It would also encourage more participatory ways of working, which 
23 Towards Sustainable Agricultural Development in Iraq. The Transition from Relief, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction to 
Development. FAO> 2003.  
8 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
involve rural communities themselves in planning and decision making at local level. In support of the 
latter agenda, the project would also invest in building the capacity and organization of the rural 
communities themselves, to enable them to participate more effectively in local planning processes. 
Even modest success in these related dimensions of ‘institutional culture’ would represent a major 
shift in the context of Iraq.  
34.  The project approach is based upon a number of elements, all considered critical in the context 
of current rural Iraq. These include the following. 
Increasing water availability and investing in irrigation infrastructure: Although there has 
35. 
been a sharp reduction in the share of water of the Southern Governorates due to decreasing 
supplies in the Euphrates and Tigris, in some areas availability of water is not an issue. However, 
there has been little investment in irrigation infrastructure, as a result of which many of the farming 
households have had to abandon agriculture and rely on daily wage labour or depend upon the 
Government food security programme.  The issue is critical in a number of the Governorates such as 
Muthana, where some of the villages visited by the mission indicated that they could not cultivate their 
land anymore due to scarcity of water.  The households in these villages were suffering acute food 
shortages and women and children were particularly under nourished. Discussions with the 
Directorate of Water Resources in Muthana and Missan identified several schemes with the potential 
to be supported by the proposed project – either by completing the works or by rehabilitating/ 
modernizing the schemes, including those in Janub al  Rumaitha, Suwahiya , Sumawa Abu 
Shwamilani, etc. 
36.  Building resilience to climate change: The adverse effects of climate change are projected to 
reduce agricultural production and make the problem of water shortage in Iraq worse. Thus, as a 
priority, measures need to be taken for better adaptation and mitigation. These include: (a) increasing 
irrigation efficiency through better water management practices and usage of efficient irrigation 
technologies such as drip and  sprinkler irrigation, which also necessitates re-engineering of the 
irrigation systems to include pressurized systems at field level; (b) introducing already tested crop and 
fodder varieties with low water requirements and resistance to drought, high temperatures, pests, and 
soil salinity; (c) using integrated methods for agricultural pest management and reducing reliance on 
pesticides and herbicides in agricultural systems; and (d) establishing an effective monitoring system 
for weather changes including early warning systems to ensure that famers receive this information in 
a timely and actionable manner. The project framework offers the opportunity to draw on funds from 
the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to reduce the adverse effects of 
climate change facing the smallholders of the Southern Governorates in Iraq. Within the framework 
provided by the project, there is scope to also leverage financing from the Adaptation Fund provided 
under the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol (KP) to reduce the adverse effects of climate change 
facing the smallholders of the Southern Governorates in Iraq. The project can assist the Government 
use these grant resources efficiently within the proposed project. 
Increasing the competitiveness of agriculture, preventing post-harvest losses and 
37. 
removing marketing bottlenecks through farmer organizations. Small holders dominate 
agriculture production in Iraq with limited ability to organize, realise economies of scale or reduce their 
transaction costs or deal with post-harvest and marketing issues.  There is a high degree of variability 
in prices of agricultural commodities and limited market information.  Farmers are not able to compete 
with cheap food imports. There is a lack of post-harvest and marketing facilities and low levels of 
agricultural industrialization.  Local markets are underdeveloped, and the marketing infrastructure 
(transport, cold storage, grading, processing and packing facilities) is poor. Although there is only 
limited data on the magnitude of food losses in the country, it is generally estimated that about 15% of 
cereals and legumes and 33% of perishable horticultural crops are lost, as a result of inability to 
manage the crops after harvest.24 Farmers individually do not have the resources to invest in the 
marketing infrastructure and the private sector has not yet fully emerged to capitalise on the 
opportunities available. While a cooperative framework exists for the establishment of agriculture 
cooperatives and farmer associations, there has been limited attention paid to their development. The 
cooperatives established several decades ago currently exist only on paper with limited incentives 
and support available to encourage their formation and growth. The proposed project would support 
24 Kader, A. L et al. Role of Agro-industry in Reducing Food Losses in the Middle East and North Africa Region February 2012. 
9 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
selected groups by building their capacity and demonstrating the benefits of collective group action for 
improved input supply, post-harvest and marketing functions. For women, groups are able to assist 
them manage their risks better, and manage their  multifarious roles. This is an area in which IFAD 
has significant experience from the region, which it could utilise in the country. 
38.  Diversification of the economy: Iraq has lacked capital, technology, and skills for more than 
two decades due to prolonged sanctions and war. These vital inputs are needed in many sectors of 
the economy as the country embarks on the mammoth task to rebuild itself. The Iraqi government is 
keen on diversifying the economy away from oil and has steadily opened the market to attract external 
investment and joint ventures in many sectors such as industry, manufacturing, agriculture, food 
processing, transportation, financial services and tourism.  In order to capitalize on this opportunity for 
the unemployed rural youth, the project would provide opportunities for development of skills to 
increase their marketability and assist many of them to establish their own enterprises and income 
generating activities with support from the project in acquiring productive assets. The project would in 
particular focus on women and youth who have been given limited attention in the past. 
39.  Vocational training: The traditional system of apprenticeships is one of the few ways for youth 
to acquire a new skill. But opportunities are limited due to the limited economic activity in the region. 
Off-farm income generating activities of interest to youth are numerous and are those found in micro-
enterprise development projects, namely concerning trades such as those of mobile phone repairer, 
electrician, plumber, carpenter, etc. Rural vocational training centres are being rebuilt and new ones 
built all over the country. The Ministry of Social Affairs is responsible for vocational training centers in 
all Governorates. Some NGOs have their own centers. UNIDO has a network of enterprise 
development centers in southern Iraq in which youth can also be trained in relatively more 
sophisticated trades such as business development services provider. NGO service providers have 
experience in organising vocational training sessions and have experience in doing so which can be 
capitalised upon by the project. The project would draw on this expertise and establish partnerships 
for implementing these activities. 
40.  Scaling-up: Much of what is being proposed under the project – and particularly the 
implementation approach in combination with the thematic areas of focus – is new in the context of 
Iraq. The project will deliberately adopt a gradual, learning-by-doing approach. The implementation 
strategy, and potentially even the activities too, will evolve during the project life-time, in response to 
the lessons learned. As the project moves forward, the expectation is that the approach will be refined 
and become more effective, capacity will be developed, new ways of working will become entrenched, 
and Government ownership will grow. All of these elements will provide a platform for future scaling-
up, both in subsequent projects, supported by IFAD and, potentially, other development partners, and 
in national strategies and programmes. 
41.  A number of specific innovations offer promising opportunities to engage with, build on and 
scale-up within and beyond IFAD’s first investment project in Iraq.  One of the first innovations would 
be multi-stakeholder collaboration that bridges the lines between the farming communities and 
groups, public sector, the NGO community and private sector businesses. A second innovation that 
could be scaled up is SARP’s work with youth and UNIDO through its network of enterprise 
development centers in southern Iraq. A third and last pre-identified innovation for scaling-up consists 
of the “conversion” of mature farmer organisations with infrastructure and assets in good condition to 
“value chain service providers”.  The project can, by focusing on women and youth, illustrate how 
such efforts could be made an integral and effective part of Government programmes.  Most 
importantly, the project can demonstrate that through financing assets rather than subsidizing only 
food packages, the Government can assist in creating a sustainable source of income generation and 
poverty alleviation. The success of these measures can be mainstreamed in the Government’s own 
safety net programmes and provide a viable model for poverty alleviation. 
10 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
42.  The project would be implemented in the four southern governorates of Muthanna, Qadisiya, 
Missan and Thi Qar. The level of poverty in these Governorates is among the highest in the country 
and ranges between 41% and 51%. It is estimated that these Governorates have 72,480 farming 
households of which more than 90% are smallholders. . It is estimated that the proposed project 
would target about 16,000 of the households over its seven-year duration. This is likely to yield 
benefits for around 140,000 people given the current household size of 6.9 in rural areas. 
Table 1: Estimated Households and Land Area in Target Governorates 
Al-Muthannā 
Al-Qādisiyah  
Thī Qār 
Maysān 
Household 
18639 
18,798 
18,570 
16,473 
72,480 
Arable Land 
Area Ha 
363,363 
458,440 
447,662 
636,818 
1,906,284 
Irrigated (Ha) 
136,119 
207,912 
88,863 
150,875 
583,769 
43.  The four project governorates share roughly similar socio-economic characteristics. The climate 
is generally dry desert climate. In summer, temperatures easily surpass 40°C, while rainfall is very 
limited and restricted to the winter months and is reported to average around 110 mm annually.  
These governorates were neglected for long, and despite some of them producing oil, there is lack of 
investment in these areas. The UN sanctions, which were imposed after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 
1990 and lasted until after the 2003 invasion, were detrimental for Iraq’s economy but had a 
particularly devastating impact on these areas. Infrastructure suffered due to the war and the limited 
investment in the area. The agriculture sector has suffered from adverse side effects of the Public 
Food Distribution programme, which was set in place after the 1990 invasion of Kuwait to provide 
Iraq’s population with subsidized food rations. The programme pushed down the prices of staple 
crops like wheat and rice, making them unprofitable for farmers.  
44.  The southern part of Thi Qar and Miysan governorates are also home to the Mesopotamian 
Marshlands or al-Ahwar located in the southern part of the country.  The area is a rare wetland within 
a desert landscape.  It hosts a freshwater eco-system and provides a habitat for wildlife,.  The Ma’dan 
or Marsh Arabs inhabited the marshlands of Southern Iraq for centuries, living in reed houses and 
practicing traditional methods of agriculture, fishing and water buffalo breeding. Women are in the 
forefront in the marshlands, and actively participate in dairy and fish marketing. Until the 1970s, the 
marshlands used to cover an area of up to 20,000 square kilometers around the confluence of the 
Tigris and Euphrates rivers.  The marshlands were partially drained in the 1970s and 1980s to clear 
land for oil exploration. After 1991 the government constructed a series of dams and canals that  
drained the marshes resulting in the disappearance of 90% of the marshland and  increasing the level 
of salt in both the soil and the water in the area. Owing to initiatives by the inhabitants with the 
reopening of waterways, and, to good rainy seasons, the unique marshland environment is slowly 
being brought back to life. The site was recently declared a UNESCO World Heritage site. The partial 
restoration of the Mesopotamian marshes has been heralded as one of the few success stories to 
emerge in Iraq. 
45.  The Muthana Governorate’s landscape is dominated by desert plains, with only a narrow ribbon 
of irrigated farmland along the Euphrates River in the north. The population is concentrated along the 
Euphrates River in the north of the governorate, while the southern desert districts are only sparsely 
populated. Muthanna is an important center for the production of cement and other construction 
materials. In 2005 an oil refinery was opened in Muthanna, which processes crude oil from the Kifl oil 
field. The salt waters of Lake Sawa provide salt, which is used as a raw material in various industries. 
The lake’s touristic infrastructure has dilapidated over the years, but the area still holds the potential to 
be developed into a touristic hotspot.  The governorate is divided into four districts: Al-Samawa, Al-
Khidhir, Al-Rumaitha and Al- Salman 
11 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
46.  The governorate of Qadissiya has Euphrates and one of its major tributaries, the Shamiya 
River, running through the governorate. The abundance of water and rich soils make the governorate 
one of the most fertile areas of the country. Rice, wheat and barley are the main crops cultivated in 
Qadissiya, while hibiscus and melon are also grown on a smaller scale. A number of factories 
producing tires, dairy and cotton textiles are located in Qadissiya. Qadissiya’s economy is hampered 
by a number of factors. A large number of jobs provided by the agricultural sector are informal and 
unwaged. Other economic sectors like industry remain underdeveloped. The informality and 
underdevelopment of Qadissiya’s labour market is one of the explanations for the high number of 
unemployment and child labour in the governorate. The governorate is divided in the following 
districts: Diwaniya, Afaq, Al-Shamiya and al Al-Hamza. 
47.  The governorate of Thi-Qar is the poorest governorate of Iraq and one of the most 
underdeveloped. The level of poverty varies between the various districts, and is most acute in the 
marshland areas. The economy has remained relatively rural compared to other regions in Iraq; 
however the agricultural sector fails to provide jobs and income for the governorate’s population, while 
the local agricultural based economy of the marshlands, based on traditional fishing and farming, has 
been devastated by their draining. During the past decade, the public sector and construction have 
been major job providers, but low wages have been an issue for public service workers. Tribal identity 
and structure remain strong in Thi-Qar. A patchwork of tribes, many of them descendants of the 
Muntafiq tribal confederation that governed the area in Ottoman times, is living across the 
governorate. The governorate of Thi-Qar is divided into five districts: Al-Chibaysih, Nassiriyah, Al-
Rifa’i, Al-Shatra and Suq Al-Shuyukh. 
48.  The governorate of Thi Qar hosts a number of IDPs. The majority of these IDPs fled the 
violence resulting from the militant takeover of large parts of north-western Iraq in the summer of 
2014. Rented housing and the host community (friends, relatives and non-related families) are the 
main form of accommodation for the IDPs.   
49.  The governorate of Missan is located in south-eastern Iraq on the border with Iran. The Tigris 
River runs through the governorate and feeds the marshlands which once covered two thirds of this 
governorate. The marshlands of Miysan form part of the ancestral homeland of Marsh Arabs. Tribal 
bonds and identity remain strong in the governorate. The economy of Missan has long been based 
around agriculture, thought the productivity of the agricultural sector has suffered greatly from the 
destruction of the marshlands. The governorate is an important industrial center, hosting a range of 
factories that are mainly producing construction materials like gravel and cement. The crumbling 
infrastructure and a lack of investment however are hindering industrial development. The Halfaya 
oilfield is also located in Miysan and oil production started in 2012. The governorate of Miysan is 
divided into six districts: Ali Al-Gharbi, Al-Mejar Al-Kabir, Al-Maimouna, Al- Kahla, Amarah and Qal’at 
Saleh.  
The Target Group and Targeting Strategy 
50.  The target group of the project would be smallholder households engaged with crop and 
livestock production, poor households who have been forced out of agriculture due to lack of access 
to adequate water and high levels of salinity in the soils, women-headed households interested in 
undertaking productive activities and youth interested in undertaking enterprises and income 
generating activities particularly centred around agriculture and the ancillary services critical to 
support agricultural growth.  The project would also target the marshland communities who are 
engaged with fisheries, livestock and hunting in the wild to eke out a meagre livelihood.  
51.  Within each of the four project governorates, project activities would target those areas where 
the project has the potential to offer interventions to improve the livelihoods of the households through 
its package of interventions, areas where the poor are concentrated and from where demand is strong 
for project activities. However, within each governorate, the project would not spread its activities too 
thinly over a vast area. Thus an initial assessment based on the following would be made; (i) poverty 
profile; (ii) potential for agriculture development and off-farm enterprises; (iii) demand for project 
interventions and (iv) need for irrigation investments; and (v) contiguity. With the support of SARP, the 
Governorates in collaboration with the Directorate of Agriculture would make this assessment and 
identify the potential target districts and within them the administrative units in which the project would 
target individuals and groups and associations.  
12 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
52.  From the selected districts individual beneficiaries would be selected based on an eligibility 
criteria that would include the following; (i) smallholders with less than 50 dunums and or less than 5 
large animals and 10 small ruminants; (ii) demonstration of demand to undertake the selected activity 
and (iii) willing to abide by the terms and conditions of partnerships identified by the project. Groups, 
Unions and Associations of men and women would also qualify to participate provided they include a 
minimum of 5 participants which include the project target group of smallholders, poor households, 
women and youth from these households or women headed households. The service providers 
recruited to interact with the target beneficiaries would ensure that the selected individuals and groups 
have a strong commitment to undertake the proposed activity and are willing to undertake the 
requisite training and abide by the terms of partnership.   
53.  Within the framework of the project’s overall poverty targeting strategy, the project would focus 
particularly on ensuring the full participation of women and youth: 
  Women: The project has developed a very proactive strategy for the participation of women in 
project activities especially recognizing that women have received a significant setback in Iraq 
due to years of conflict which has led to the deterioration of women’s rights and confined 
many of them within the homestead in rural areas. The Project would have specific gender 
dis-aggregated targets and budget allocations, service providers with women staff to ensure  
outreach to women and integrate gender aspects in all reports. Each of the components 
would have an approach to encourage the inclusion of women and specific targets have been 
identified for them (Appendix 2). The identification of assets, skills training and enterprise 
development would be designed to address opportunities of relevance for women.  
  Youth: The project would put in place special arrangements to target youth. This would be 
undertaken primarily by linking with Youth associations and Unions. Given the high 
unemployment rate among youth, opportunities for vocational and enterprise training, 
apprentice ship and job placement would be identified with the private sector especially in 
ancillary services that are critical for the agriculture sector. Those from among the young men 
and women who demonstrate their willingness and commitment to participate in innovative 
enterprise development would be provided technical assistance and access to assets. 
Exchange visits and learning tours would be identified for them where appropriate. The 
service providers would be given specific targets for participation of youth in different project 
activities. 
54.  The project area is home to a number of population groups with special status, be this for 
historical, political, religious or socio-cultural reasons. The most prominent of these are the Maʻdān 
populating the Mesopotamian Marshlands. Their precise number is unknown and estimates vary 
widely between “a few thousand” and 125,000-150,000 people.25 Having had to abandon rice 
cultivation, they nowadays derive their livelihoods from fishing and handicrafts, whilst a sub-group has 
continued to rear water buffalos. There are several NGOs such as, ‘Nature of Iraq’, “Daughter of the 
Marshes” which are specialised in working in the marshlands and have been exploring economic 
opportunities with different people inhabiting this fragile and unique ecosystem and world heritage 
site. Poverty is severe in the marshlands; population groups in the Hammar Marshes, for example, 
suffer from a lack of clean drinking water, sanitation, health care and education facilities. A number of 
other minority groups are also present in the project area, which would be targeted as per their 
poverty status and income-generating potential. 
55.  The typology of the typical target households would vary marginally between one governorate 
and another but would include (i) poor irrigated date and vegetable irrigation farmers with small 
ruminant as an important contributor to income (Thi Qar and Muthanna governorates); (ii) Poor 
farmers producing cereal crops in irrigated areas which suffer from soil salinity conditions with small 
ruminant as an important contributor to income (Qadisiya governorate); (iii) Poor date palm producers 
with livestock as a secondary activity (Miysan governorate); (iv) the farmers of the marshlands; (v) 
Poor rural households, especially women headed households, engaged in various on farm and off 
farm income generating activities: and (vi) the youth who would be assisted with skills developed and 
enterprise development. 
25 Kubba 2011 
13 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
56.  Small livestock is arguably the single most promising activity for many rural households to 
invest in, followed by vegetable gardening and fruit orchards as well as dates. On the whole, low input 
agriculture offers a range of interesting options for IFAD target groups. Plastic houses have proven to 
be successful, if sufficient training on how to use and maintain them, is provided. Beekeeping is 
another activity that would be pursued as honey has an assured internal market. Apiculture  is not 
new to southern Iraq, and has been promoted several times before. The key success factor seems to 
lie mostly in thorough training during which the potential beekeepers are made well aware of the 
implications of what maintaining their beehives entails. 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
57.  The overall Goal of the project would be to assist rural people overcome poverty and achieve 
food security through remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods.  The Development 
Objective would be to enable poor smallholder farmers to improve crop and livestock productivity, 
resilience to climate change and diversify incomes. The project would assist  20,000 rural households 
improve their livelihoods, incomes and food security through investments in productive infrastructure, 
adoption of improved crop practices and varieties better adapted to the conditions in the project area, 
improved livestock management practices, asset creation, and skill development. The specific impacts 
expected from the project include increasing people’s economic status, improving production, improving 
market access and enhancing resilience to climate change.  
C.  Outcomes/Components 
Outcomes 
58.  The project outcomes would include the following; (i) number of people experiencing economic 
mobility and changes in economic status including income, consumption, wealth, food diversity or 
nutrition; (ii) the number of persons reporting adoption of new & improved inputs, technologies or 
practices and (iii) the number of persons reporting an increase in production.  
59.  The project’s intermediate outputs are expected to include the following; (i) improvement in irrigation 
& drainage infrastructure; (ii) enhancement in agriculture productivity and diversification through asset 
creation women farmers, women headed households and women entrepreneurs interested in off-farm 
activities; (iii) adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate resilient technologies and practices; 
(iv) increase in crop and livestock productivity; (v) increase in off-farm enterprise development and 
vocational skills; (vi) increase in new jobs created and employment generated; (vii) Increase in rural 
enterprises reporting an increase in profits; (viii) Increase in rural producer organizations engaged in 
formal contracts with public or private entities; (ix) rural producer organization members reporting new 
or improved services provided by their organization; (x)  increase in capacity for processing and 
marketing of agriculture produce especially dates, seed potatoes and high value vegetable crops. Gender 
equity, integration of youth and environmental sustainability would be pursued as key cross-cutting 
themes in the project design. 
Components 
60.  The Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project (SARP) would be implemented over a 7 year 
period and would consist of two main components namely; (i) Climate Resilient Investments, and; (ii) 
Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification. 
Component 1: Climate Resilient Investments 
61.  Climate Change poses a growing threat to the agriculture sector especially because of its 
impact on the length of the growing season, reduction in precipitation and increasing water scarcity. 
This component would respond to this threat by supporting irrigated agricultural production, within the 
14 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
context of the growing scarcity of irrigation water, and by strengthening capacity at the national level 
to monitor climate change patterns and provide relevant information to key stakeholders and farmers 
through an early warning system, so that they can adapt and take risk mitigation measures.  It will 
comprise two related sub-components; (i) Rehabilitation/ completion of irrigation Infrastructure and 
(ii) Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening for climate resilient agriculture. 
62.  Sub-Component 1.1: Modernisation/rehabilitation of irrigation Infrastructure: The main 
emphasis of the subcomponent will be on micro and small irrigation networks, the component would 
rehabilitate and complete existing networks. There is potential in many of these Governorates to 
invest in irrigation infrastructure that was left incomplete by the Government due to its financing 
constraints and the political instability in the country over the last two decades. As a result the 
profitability of the supported small farms/agri-businesses will increase and the sub component will 
also contribute to the improvement of the income of the rural poor who will get access to the jobs 
created by the expansion of these agribusinesses, particularly as wage labour for the production of 
cash crops. 
63.  The irrigation networks to be financed under the sub component will be typically small irrigation 
schemes that cover a compact geographical area and which will be fully rehabilitated/modernized. 
The project will support investments in those irrigation channels that will remove the bottlenecks 
hampering the regular access to water and the establishment of village based profitable agri-
business.   
64.  The Directorate of Water Resources at the Governorate level would identify the networks to be 
rehabilitated. It is estimated that given the resources available for this sub-component around 33,250 
dunums or 8130 hectares can be irrigated with the selected networks.  These networks would be 
identified by the Governorates in close coordination with the Directorate of Agriculture and Directorate 
of Water Resources in each Governorate. A preliminary list of networks has already been developed 
and would be finalised prior to project appraisal by the Governorates. Selection criteria for prioritising 
irrigation schemes for rehabilitation were developed during the final design workshop and included in 
the Water and Irrigation Resource paper that will be incorporated in the Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM). Training of key stakeholder staff and farmers in modern water and irrigation 
management techniques is provided for.  
65.  Training of key stakeholder staff and farmers in modern water and irrigation management 
techniques is provided. During the first year of project implementation technical design including 
hydrological assessment will be conducted for the selected schemes.  The projected shift to high 
value and more labour intensive crops will be one of the key aspects to be evaluated in the 
prioritization of investment proposals as it will not only provide the basis for the assessment of the IRR 
but also of the potential for employment generation. There is an established system in the country for 
the operation and maintenance of these networks and would be the responsibility of the MWR. The 
lessons learned from IFAD’s interventions in countries, similar to Iraq, which have been practicing 
agriculture for a very long time, is that imposing a standard set of institutional arrangement for water 
management practices will not deliver the expected results. It’s rather more effective to put the focus 
on considering and upgrading of local water management arrangements, which are in place. 
66.  Sub-Component 1.2: Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening for climate-
resilient investments; The Ministry of Environment is interested for developing a climate change 
adaptation strategy for dealing with the agriculture sector.  The project would assist the Ministry in this 
endeavour. In the context of such a strategy, the Ministry of Agriculture has established an Agro 
Meteorological Monitoring Network with over 100 Agro-Met stations installed across the country from 
which it receives regular information on weather patterns; 40 remote monitoring stations with 
communication via EUMETSAT Satellite; and two receive sites that collect data in the central 
locations of Baghdad and Erbil. The system measures wind speed and direction, solar radiation and 
sunshine hours, barometric pressure, etc. Some of the parameters also include dew point, 
precipitation, soil temperature, soil moisture, leaf wetness and evapotranspiration.  
67.  The project would upgrade the receive system and install an additional six remote monitoring 
stations needed for providing greater resolution in the data.  There is a team of young technical 
specialists working on receiving and analyzing the data.  The team has received initial training 
regarding the operation, maintenance, troubleshooting and installation of the system. The staff needs 
additional training and the project would arrange technical training for the staff to strengthen their 
15 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
programmatic and analytical capacity.  In developing the early warning system, the project would 
assist the Agro Meteorological Monitoring Network to work closely with farmers to understand how 
they assess and identify changes in weather patterns, growing seasons, planting and harvesting 
dates and other information useful for them. A technical specialist would be recruited under the project 
to develop a plan for the dissemination of the early warning system to farmers. SARP would provide 
support to this component through the use of the Adaptation Fund. The system will facilitate early 
warning access to farmers to critical information about climate related risks (e.g. predicted shortage of 
water for crop production; predicted livestock disease risk) through media information and 
communication technologies (MICT) and SMS message services to support decision-making in the 
planning and management of the crop production, livestock production, sanitary and veterinary, etc. 
This will be coupled with a capacity building program to prepare institutions and beneficiaries in the 
implementation and use of the system. 
Component 2: Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification 
68.  The purpose of this component would be to assist poor households enhance their level of food 
security and diversify their incomes from agriculture as well as improve their skills and assets to 
enable them to engage in off-farm income generating activities. The component would consist of two 
subcomponents; (i) Crop, Livestock & Off-Farm Development and (ii) Skills Development & Capacity 
Building. 
69.  Sub-Component 2.1: Crop, Livestock & Off-Farm Development: For crop production, the 
project interventions would focus on enhancing the productivity of high value crops and vegetables 
and other horticulture crops such as date production.  The project would provide smallholder farmers, 
women and farmer associations and cooperatives, grants that would be used establish crop , livestock 
and off-farm enterprises. The selection of individuals, groups or associations would depend upon the 
capacity, risk appetite, level of investment and feasibility. The PIM would elaborate the selection 
criterion at each level in more detail. The packages could include assistance in installing improved 
irrigation systems, small greenhouses for high value vegetable production, apiculture, fisheries and 
livestock packages for women from poor households, etc., identified on a demand driven basis by the 
smallholder men and women farmers and their groups or associations. The off-farm activities could 
include a wide range of enterprises based on local demand but typically are expected to include for 
women establishment of small retail stores, bakeries, food catering and processing businesses, 
beauty salons, handicrafts, stitching, etc. For men, it could include kits that would assist them in 
gaining apprenticeships as carpenters, plumbers, electrician or mobile outlets or repair, etc. The 
groups would include at least 5 men or women to undertake collection production and marketing 
activities and could consist of Unions, Cooperatives or informal associations or groups.  The 
beneficiaries would be given an asset and other needed inputs under this sub-component.  The value 
of the asset and inputs would, on average, be around USD 1500 per person or USD 10,000 for 
groups or associations. The upper limit could be relaxed if justified by a higher number of 
beneficiaries. Beyond this limit the beneficiaries would have to contribute their own funds in cash or 
kind. It is expected that the project would benefit around 7400 households to get a productive asset 
that would increase their incomes on a sustainable basis. 
70.  The grant packages will be mostly for capital investment and for purchasing of goods and 
equipment. Nevertheless, in order to ensure sustainability and in line with the methodology of 
graduation from poverty, the grant package might include expenses allocated for working capital (up 
to 25%). Small farmers, youth and women will be supported on off as well as on farm activities. The 
project envisages to allocate funds to conduct rapid market assessment for the grant packages that 
will be distributed to farmers. Also, the first year of project implementation will be used to conduct 
market assessment for some high value products, such as date palm and dairy products. 
71.  Sub-Component 2.2: Skills Development & Capacity Building: To build the technical and 
business capacities of beneficiaries under Sub-Component 2.1, the project would provide several 
types of trainings; (i) technical and business training associated with the provision of the asset; (ii) 
training in climate resilient approaches and technologies and (iii) vocational training for young men 
and women; and (iv) management training for community groups and farmer organizations and (v) 
Public Sector institutional Strengthening. It is expected that the project would train around 4900 
individuals in the project area of which at least 1500 would be women. At the same time, it would offer 
16 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
institutional capacity building for Government extension staff involved in the implementation of Sub-
Component 2.1, including learning and exposure visits.  To maximize the impact of limited budget 
resources, the sub-component will not provide generic capacity building but use NGOs and other 
service providers which will be trained on how to conduct training needs assessments to focus on 
specific skill gaps. 
72.  Technical & Business Training related to Assets: The first type of training would be provided 
to all those who have been selected to receive an asset for on-farm or off-farm activities.  This would 
include training in technical, managerial and business aspects and would precede all provision of 
assets.  Community groups and associations would also be given training in management and 
business plan development for the operation and maintenance of collectively owned assets such as 
post-harvest facilities, food and dairy processing, apiculture, plastic houses, fisheries, etc. In all cases, 
each beneficiary would be assisted in closely examining the economic and technical feasibility of their 
enterprises and the monitoring of the expenditure and revenue streams. There are several NGOs in 
the project areas which have the capacity to provide these trainings and hand holding support on an 
individual and collective basis. UNIDO has been providing support in one of the project governorates 
in Thi Qar through its Enterprise Development and Investment Promotion Programme since 2008. 
UNIDO has maintained its presence in South Iraq and has indicated its willingness to provide support 
to the project. 
73.  Training in climate resilient approaches and technologies: The second type of trainings the 
project would provide would be for the promotion and adoption of climate resilient approaches and 
technologies that would enhance crop and livestock production. The project would promote crop 
rotations away from monoculture to a shift to high value fruit and vegetable crops.  The training would 
also include improved irrigation practices and on-farm water management to deal with the growing 
water scarcity in the area. The project would also provide trainings for the introduction of saline 
resistant wheat, rice and fodder crop varieties which have been developed in Iraq but have not been 
widely disseminated. The training would also focus on the date palm, which is the most common and 
widely cultivated plant in the arid regions of the Middle East and is an important crop for smallholders 
in Iraq. Pests such as Dubas Bug, Borers, and Fungal diseases directly affect the product but others 
such Red Palm Weevil (RPW) Rhynchophorus ferrugineus which have invaded the country, pose a 
real threat to the date palm wealth in Iraq. The project would collaborate with the Food and Agriculture 
Organization to use their experience of Training of Trainers for the surveillance, monitoring and control 
of the disease through using Integrated Pest Management. The interventions would also include 
support to livestock extension and health services including training of small ruminant holders in 
animal nutrition, animal health, integration of livestock into farming systems and the use of crop 
residues in improved livestock feed.  
74.  Vocational Training for ancillary services to support on-farm activities: The third type of 
training would support the young men and women in these governorates who have very limited 
opportunities for productive employment within the agriculture sector or are under-employed or 
unemployed but motivated to pursue vocational training or practical training to establish their own 
income-generating activities (IGAs) or enterprises. The types of IGAs would be based on local 
opportunities and demand and could include operation of farm machinery services, rural handicrafts 
and small-scale rural services such as training as para-vets, operators of agriculture machinery, 
operation of drip irrigation systems, generators, hatcheries, or carpentry, electricians and plumbing. 
The Government’s vocational centres could also be used in providing support for the training. UNIDO 
and other NGOs have developed tailored training programmes for the youth in a wide range of 
vocations. The Iraq Programme is the second largest UNIDO country programme. UNIDO has also 
recently launched a project on increasing the competitiveness of existing small and medium 
enterprises by integrating the traditional UNIDO approaches in local and foreign investment promotion 
with the use of an innovative e-learning platform. Where relevant the project would make use of this 
experience available locally. 
75.  Strengthening Community Organizations: The project would support the range of small-
farmer unions, associations and cooperatives that exist in the project area. Some of them like the 
Beekeepers Association, Poultry Union and Youth Association have gradually grown in the area but 
have been provided very little support or capacity building. The Poultry Union has in particular been 
assisting small poultry producers with undertaking poultry production. The services that they have 
provided has enabled their members to capitalise on economies of scale and reduce transaction costs 
17 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
and become much more competitive.  Women’s groups have also organized into small groups in a 
few cases but have had few opportunities to organize and grow.  The management and members of 
these groups would be provided tailor made support under the project. Some small local NGOs which 
have been working closely in providing safety nets to the poor, as well as a range of training and 
social sector services would be strengthened to support local communities on a sustainable basis. 
76.  Public Sector institutional Strengthening: The project would provide opportunities for the 
staff from the Directorate of Agriculture in the project governorates and other relevant staff to avail of 
special training opportunities and learning and exposure visits especially within the region. The 
National Programme Coordinator would develop the training programme for the public sector 
agencies in coordination with the officers of the Directorate from the governorate. It is expected that 
300 people from different agencies could avail of specific trainings in addition to the learning and 
exposure visits. South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) would be explored as a tool to 
understanding how countries in the region with similar socio-economic profile have resolved some of 
the challenges in agriculture and rural development. These areas could include understanding how 
different countries have dealt with some of the following issues important for Iraq; (i) climate change 
issues and developed early warning systems (Nepal and Bangladesh); (ii) implemented integrated 
pest management approaches especially for the elimination of the Red weevil in date palm (Iran and 
Kuwait); (iii) development of the cooperative movement (Morocco). Visits would be organized to these 
countries which would be followed by the key resource visiting the project areas.  
77.  SARP will be IFAD’s first engagement in Iraq, and in this regard, the policy approach will be 
cautious, and will be based largely on exploring new (in the context of Iraq) implementation 
approaches under the project, learning lessons from them, and assisting Government to take them on 
board in their policies and practices. Nevertheless, the project, through the funding from the 
Adaptation Fund,  will seek to mainstream Climate Change adaptation strategies in the project and try 
to create cross-sectoral cooperation between relevant ministries. 
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies 
78.  Lessons Learnt: IFAD support to Iraq has so far been limited to grant financed regional 
agriculture research projects implemented by ICARDA. While few donors have worked in the 
agriculture sector in Iraq and most have concentrated on humanitarian interests or large infrastructure 
projects, there is relevant experience that can be gleaned from the experience of IFAD investment 
projects in NEN countries and from those of a few donors who have worked on some aspects of 
agriculture.  Some of the important lessons that emerge from this analysis which are critical given the 
fragility of the country and the neglect of the agriculture sector include the following; 
  The implications of fragility: Responding to the lessons that IFAD has learned through its 
experience in fragile states, the corporate-level evaluation on fragility and the IFAD strategy for 
engagement in countries with fragile situations, the current project has been kept intentionally 
simple and flexible to accommodate the weak institutional structures in the country and the 
conflict in the North, which has its reverberations across the country. The strong focus of the 
project on rehabilitating livelihoods and building capacities and local institutions stems from the 
fragility of the country. 
  Policy and institutional framework: In advance of the project design process, IFAD conducted a 
brief review of the policy and institutional framework in the country. The project design responds 
to the institutional weaknesses found; avoids engaging directly in the cereals sector, in which 
policy distortions are extreme; and seeks to establish a basis for an eventual policy dialogue in 
the irrigation sector, where much needs to be done to establish an enabling policy environment. 
  Proven technologies and approaches. A series of national agriculture development programmes 
in Iraq have tested and demonstrated the effectiveness of a wider range of climate change 
adaptation approaches and advanced technology packages. Among the promising validated 
approaches and packages are supplemental irrigation for a number of crops for increased water 
use efficiency, while increasing productivity; integrated pest management and organic fertilization 
practices for date palm; diversification of rainfed integrated crop-livestock production systems, to 
spread the risk and increase revenues; and for small ruminants, the application of holistic 
packages to improve sheep flocks’ reproductive performance, increase fertility and twinning rates, 
increase milk production and reduce mortality. 
18 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
  Diversification goes beyond agricultural production systems, and points also to the importance of 
including the non-farm rural sector as key for employment generation and poverty alleviation. 
While the agriculture sector is key in rural areas, many of the districts in the south of the country 
have over the years significantly lost their potential for agriculture production due to reduction in 
water supply and increasing levels of soil salinity. These households have limited options within 
the agriculture sector and need to identify livelihood opportunities outside the agriculture sector.  
  Recognising the strengths and weaknesses of collective action in developing countries: 
Assessing the capacity of farmer institutions is key for project activities that require collective or 
group action. However, recognizing that the cooperative movement has not been a strong 
movement in this part of the world will help in realistically identifying the limits of group action, 
avoid elite capture and at the same derive some of the benefits of group action such as reducing 
transactions cost, aggregating produce for collective marketing and bargaining and achieving 
economics of scale. The project will demonstrate that a participatory approach and collective 
actions work better than a top-down one and this is expected to lead to enhance the demand for 
decentralisation on the part of both rural citizens and Governorate staff. 
 
In the crop sector emphasis has to be on both production and post-harvest and marketing 
activities: Too many projects have by focusing only on enhancing production and ignoring the 
capacity of the farmer to undertake post-harvest and marketing activities have as a result failed to 
appreciably enhance incomes of farmers.  Farmers everywhere typically have a lagged response 
to production decisions as they are generally responding to the previous years market condition in 
making cropping decisions.  In this regard it is better to begin from the market backwards in 
guiding farmers on how to assess market demand.  
  Recognizing the risk mitigation strategies of small farmers and designing to encourage their 
participation: Small-scale farmers are willing to adopt improved production technologies, but they 
need to see results first. Given small scale farmers are risk averse, incentives to pay for the first 
year the cost of incremental inputs and services of the new technologies, are essential to help 
taking risk. 
  Capacity building and training in the adoption of new technologies and assets is key for the 
effective use of any investments and needs to be accompanied by a comprehensive course of 
training and skill development. There are many examples of different agencies providing assets to 
the rural communities and introducing new technologies without proper training in the use of those 
technologies.  
  Dedicated resources, well specified targets and staff are key for the participation of any 
marginalised target group such as women, women headed household, youth and other marginal 
groups. 
79.  Adherence to IFAD Policies: IFAD’s fifth Strategic Framework covers the period 2016-2025. It 
serves as an overarching policy guideline to provide direction to IFAD’s work, and as a key instrument 
for consolidating IFAD’s development effectiveness.  The current project is well aligned to meeting its 
overall goal and is well aligned with its five principles of engagement  to consistently aim to target and 
benefit the largest number of poor rural people possible, empower them socially and economically, 
and promote gender equality. IFAD will place a premium on innovation, learning and scaling up of 
successes and, in the process, leverage effective and efficient partnerships where comparative 
advantages are exploited for greater impact. SARP is also well aligned to achieving IFAD’s strategic 
objectives in its key areas of thematic focus. 
80.  Following commitments made under the Consultations on the Ninth and Tenth Replenishments 
of IFAD’s Resources, and the corporate-level evaluation on fragility, the project explicit incorporates a 
number of the key elements of IFAD strategy for engagement in countries with fragile situations. The 
design benefitted from the guidance tools such as those targeting, gender, small farmer organizations, 
community development, climate change and the private sector. IFAD’s poverty targeting and gender 
sensitive design and implementation guidelines updated in January 2013 were also completed for the 
Project and are provided in Appendix 2. Women and youth are given a central role in the project 
design and dedicated staff, specific targets and separate budget line items have been allocated for 
them.    
19 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
81.  Smallholder Farmers' Organizations (FOs) are considered strategic partners for IFAD, not 
simply as project beneficiaries but as institutions that deliver services to their members, speak on their 
behalf and are becoming key actors in social and policy dialogue at the local, national and 
international levels. The project retains this focus on farmer’s organizations and community driven 
development in its approach in the implementation of the project. Given the local social development 
context, separate women’s groups and associations would be formed which would work with women.  
82.  The current design is in full accord with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership 
Strategy, which places strong emphasis on further developing and strengthening the linkages of 
smallholder farmers with the private sector. The project would follow an approach that works 
backwards from the market to ensure that there is a demand for the products of the smallholder and 
that market links are established with private firms prior to initiation of any activities.   
83.  Environmental and social category The project is considered to be Category B. Overall, the 
project incorporates ASAP and AF funding to upscale and expand best practices developed by NARS, 
ICARDA, and FAO, through several regional agriculture research for development (R4D) projects, in 
terms of improving water availability and efficient use through the rehabilitating of irrigation and 
drainage infrastructure, and applying environmentally-sound agronomic systems and technologies. 
The project will promote participatory and capacity development tools with a gender focus both at the 
national level (institutional development and policy improvement) and at the local level.  
84.  Climate risk category IFAD’s climate change strategy recognizes that the speed and intensity 
of climate change are outpacing the ability of poor rural people and societies to cope.  That poor rural 
people are in the front line of climate change impacts, and that the ecosystems and biodiversity on 
which they rely are increasingly degraded, are both particularly true in the southern Governorates of 
Iraq.  The project incorporates IFAD’s assessment that climate-related risks, and potential 
opportunities, can be addressed more systematically within its projects and policy advice. 
85.  On the basis of a detailed climate change vulnerability assessment, undertaken in collaboration 
with WFP the project's climate risk classification is Moderate. The project will support the 
implementation of priority adaptation measures identified by the Government of Iraq and will use 
ASAP and AF funding to: (i) support institutional and technical development of the MoA for the 
expansion and effective functioning of the meteorological monitoring network and the setting up of 
early warning systems, and to the MoE for the development of a a climate change adaptation strategy 
for the agriculture sector; (ii) increase water use efficiency in irrigated agriculture through water 
infrastructure rehabilitation and the promotion of micro-pressurized efficient irrigation technologies; 
(iii) Promote the use of integrated methods for agricultural pest management with special focus on the 
date palm disease, and reduce reliance on pesticides and herbicides in agricultural systems; (iv) 
promote crop varieties which are low water demanding, and resistant to drought, high temperatures, 
pests, and soil salinity, as well as livestock breeds climate-adapted, disease-resistant and highly 
productive; (v) and support income diversification opportunities (e.g. beekeeping, post-harvesting 
storage equipment to reduce the perishability of the produce, small green house, processing and 
marketing of agriculture produce especially dates, seed potatoes and high value vegetable crops to 
reduce the risk of climate shocks due to the dependence on just one economic activity, with especial 
focus on women and youth. Social, 
86.  SECAP Consideration in the Project Design The project has fully integrated the Social 
Environmental and Climate Assessment (SECAP) recommendations into design. In fact, SARP fully 
integrates in the project design the enhancement of environmental and social resilience in the target 
areas, with special focus to gender equity and integration of youth. The project components 
addressed the most important adaptation measures for the agriculture sector proposed in the 
emerging national programs of the MoA, namely in terms of: (i) water use efficiency through 
investments in improved irrigation infrastructures and efficient irrigation technologies, (ii) the 
transferring of know-how to project beneficiaries on climate-resilient agronomic systems and 
technologies and the upscaling of successfully tested by NARS and other regional partners, the 
support to income diversification opportunities with a climate-risk reduction approach, and (iii) the 
support to institutional and technical development of governmental organizations at national and local 
level to mainstream CC adaptation in policy development, and establish effective early warning 
systems. 
20 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
87.  Guiding principles for engaging in the most fragile situations: The starting point for the 
project design and implementation approach are the guiding principles for engaging in the most fragile 
situations: (a) risk management and resilience; (b) focus on root causes (within IFAD's mandate and 
comparative advantage); (c) gender mainstreaming and targeting; (d) institution-building to promote 
trust and social cohesion; (e) flexible and responsive resources, instruments and approaches; (f) 
strategic and complementary partnerships; and (g) results measurement and learning. Programme 
activities would enhance the resilience of target communities and enable them to manage risk and 
would be resilient to the effects of conflict and other shocks.  In addressing some of the underlying 
roots causes of the fragile situation, the project would foster inclusive community-based organizations 
and in partnership with public sector institutions at the governorate level capitalise on the 
decentralised structures to encourage effective and responsive local government service delivery. The 
project would engage with communities on long-term development programmes to achieve long-term 
development outcomes. It is expected that the funding to the governorates through the project would 
serve to highlight their credibility with the people and build a relationship of trust so critical for dealing 
with the root cause of the conflict and strife in the country. 
88.  Preparatory Phase: Given both the lack of information and quantitative data upon which to 
base the project design, and the lack of project management experience in Iraq, a sequential 
approach would be adopted both to further refine the project design and ensure that implementation 
arrangements are in place prior to the start of the project activities on the ground. For this purpose, 
much of the first year of the project would be used to undertake preparatory activities, prepare 
implementation manual, recruit and second project staff, establish the various steering and advisory 
committees, recruit and brief service providers, guide staff on IFAD procedures and processes, 
prepare work plans, etc. The project would have four stages:  
  Stage 1: Preparatory and Diagnostic Phase: This would entail recruitment and training of 
project staff, holding participatory dialogues with local communities to assess constraints, 
needs and market opportunities, prepare feasibility studies and technical designs and 
coordination with UN agencies based in Basra to identify opportunities for collaboration and 
synergy;  
  Stage 2: Institutional Development: The investments in infrastructure, management capacity 
and feasibility studies and skills would be used as an entry point around which individuals and 
institutions would be strengthened and management and entrepreneurial capacity of local 
people would be built;  
  Stage 3: Production and Livelihood Intensification: This stage would begin with providing 
assets to individual households and groups and guiding them through the process to initiate 
sustainable livelihoods and links with markets;  
  Stage 4: Sustainability and Exit: This phase would be expected to be reached when the 
individuals, institutions and rural enterprises need less and less support from the project and 
start becoming sustainable through profits that accrue.  
89.  The context in Iraq warrants a differentiated and flexible operational approach to project 
management, project roll out and supervision because of its classification as one of the most fragile 
countries. Implementation and supervision procedures would be fine-tuned as required and would 
keep in mind the evolving security conditions in consultation with FSU/ UNDSS. The project has kept 
the design simple and has specified procedures that recognize the challenges of working in the 
current context. Recognizing the limited capacity of local public and private sector institutions, the 
project implementation arrangements count on the combined capacity of both public, private and 
community institutions to assist in project implementation.  The supervision arrangements also take 
the local context into account and propose arrangements which would ensure that the teams assigned 
to undertake supervision can travel to the field given the heightened travel restrictions in some of the 
areas. However, the quality of fiduciary management or social, environmental and climate safeguards 
would not be compromised and would strictly comply with IFAD and Government guidelines. The 
21 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
project also makes a sharp distinction between development assistance and humanitarian assistance 
and would only intervene in development interventions and would refer all cases qualifying for safety 
net programmes to the Directorate of Social Welfare or to the International Office of Migration (IOM) 
which is working on a community stabilization programme and supports host communities as well.  
90.  Achieving, measuring and learning from results: The project recognizes that given the 
hardships suffered by the local communities, it would be critical to design investments that are simple, 
easy to implement and show quick results and demonstrable impact. This is key for the credibility of 
IFAD and local governments that in some cases have been recently decentralized and to justify 
incurring the higher levels of risk and higher cost of implementation. The need to learn from IFAD's 
engagement would be crucial not just for the organization, but for Governorates which could replicate 
the experience over time. Given limited capacity, the project would explore options to develop 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) processes and impact assessment methodologies that are simple 
and cost-effective, yet capable of capturing coherent data on results. The outcome and impact level 
assessment would also include indicators on institutional development and women's empowerment, 
given the centrality of these issues to fragility.  
91.  Participatory and Demand Driven Approach: The implementation approach of the project 
would be demand driven and would follow a process in which individual and group beneficiaries would 
participate in selecting their activities. A diagnostic process would be adopted and implemented by the 
service providers hired especially to assess  individual and group investment opportunities and 
develop plans based on their potential, aspirations and capacities. The project would tailor project 
activities and services to the needs of the target beneficiaries and ensure their capacity to operate 
and manage the services for long-term sustainability. The project would ensure close partnership with 
each of the beneficiaries and rural community institutions to clearly identify the roles and 
responsibilities of each, the terms of partnership agreed by both parties, implementing arrangements, 
roles and responsibilities of each and if required agree on MOUs with Unions, Associations, groups 
and individuals to clarify expectations and agree on targets and monitoring and reporting 
responsibilities. Through awareness raising and demonstrating the benefits of participatory 
approaches, the project will increase local demand for effective and responsive local government 
service delivery. In order to succeed, it will enhance existing downward accountability and citizen 
feedback mechanisms and thus contribute to a higher level agenda of improving governance whilst 
improving prospects of sustainability.  
92.  Strategic and complementary partnerships: The project design recognizes that partnerships 
help IFAD to manage risks and enable it to stay engaged in more challenging contexts because they 
provide the means to address root causes of fragility that lie outside IFAD's areas of comparative 
advantage. The IFAD Partnership Strategy would guide IFAD’s use of partnerships in fragile 
situations. Partnerships with the Rome-based agencies (RBAs), would be prioritized, as would 
partnerships with other development partners with strong implementing capacity, such as trusted civil 
society organizations.  The project design includes partnership with UNIDO to provide support in 
management of micro-enterprises, with FAO in disseminating the IPM technologies for date palm and 
SSTC, as well as synergy with UNICEF which is providing complementary social sector services to 
the people of the marshlands.  The project would also coordinate with IOM to identify and locate IDPs 
should additional funding become available to assist them. The project also envisages using the local 
farmer Unions, Poultry Unions and the private sector involved with vegetable marketing, dairy 
processing and packing and processing of dates. Partnerships with humanitarian agencies specially 
IOM, WHO, UNICEF, WFP, etc., and civil society are included as a key strategy for bridging the 
humanitarian-development gap.  
B.  Organizational framework 
93.  National Level: The Ministry of Agriculture would be the lead agency responsible for the 
implementation of the project. The Ministry of Agriculture will implementation of the AF funded 
activities through direct and regular coordination with the Ministry of Health and Environment. The 
project would have a Project Steering Committee (PSC) at the National Level which would be led by 
the Deputy-Ministry of Agriculture and have as its members the Director General of Ministry of 
Environment and the Director General Ministry of Water Resources, Director-General of Planning and 
the Director-General of Planning of the Ministry of Agriculture.  The PSC would also include technical 
resource people to be nominated by the Ministry of Agriculture. The PSC would meet at least once a 
22 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
year to approve the programme and provide guidance on key aspects.  The National Project 
Coordinator would be the Secretary of the PSC.  
94.  A Project Management Team (PMT) would be established in Baghdad and be responsible for 
overseeing implementation of the project. The PMT would be led by a National Project Coordinator . 
He/she would report to the PSC and would be assisted by a Financial Officer, a Procurement Officer, 
a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist who would coordinate the reports from the Governorates to 
present quarterly statistical reports and annual progress reports on the project. The PMT would also 
include a Climate Change Adaptation Specialist (CCAS) who would be responsible for implementing 
the AF funded activities in coordination with the Ministry of Environment and  would assist in 
developing an early warning system based on discussing with farmers what would be relevant 
information to provide them. The PMT will prepare a draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
acceptable to IFAD and submit it for approval to the PSC. 
95.  Governorate level: The Director of the Directorate of Agriculture would assume the overall 
responsibility for the project, at the governorate level.  The structure would include an Advisory 
Committee that would advise the Department of Agriculture in each Governorate on key technical, 
social and institutional aspects of the project during implementation. The Governorate level Advisory 
Committees will comprise: (max 11 people with at least 4 women):. The Governorate Director of 
Agriculture as chair, the Governorate Director of Water Resources,  the Department of Environment, 
The Governorate Council representative (a woman), Business Representatives of 3 key Value chains 
(including women), NGO representatives ( 2) including women and a Representative of an Agriculture 
University. The Department of Agriculture could co-opt key resource persons as and when required to 
provide guidance and advice. 
96.  A Governorate Coordination Team (GCT) would implement and coordinate project activities. 
The GMT would have a dedicated Governorate Coordinator who would  report to the PMT and would 
be responsible for day- to-day implementation in each governorate. The staff of the GCT would 
include a Training and Community Organizer and a Monitoring & Evaluation Officer.  The Directorate 
of Water Resources would implement the irrigation investments. The team would be supported by a 
competitively recruited service provider who would be selected from local NGOs or private sector 
firms that would be responsible for identifying the target group and supporting them in the 
implementation of the various project activities in coordination with the Department of Agriculture 
Extension.  Short Term Technical Assistance would be used for any specific assistance during project 
implementation.  However, the service provider and technical assistance would be supported by IFAD 
financing. The project would also provide vehicles, office equipment, operation and maintenance and 
support all field activities.   
Planning 
97.  The design process to date has had little hard quantitative data upon which to base the project, 
In addition, this is IFAD’s first investment in Iraq and the Government, and the implementing partners 
are not familiar with project implementation modalities.  Furthermore, the country is suffering from 
extreme fragility and conflict and requires a flexible approach to project implementation and 
supervision arrangements. For all these reasons, the first year of the project would be a preparatory 
year, aimed at building the capacity of the different implementing partners for project management 
and procurement, and so establishing the basis for subsequent project implementation.  
98.  The start of the process would be the recruitment of staff and identification of service providers. 
There would then be the conducting of a Start-up Workshop, aimed at sensitizing and training the 
MoA, the Project Management Team and the Governorate Management Teams and other potential 
implementing partners, such as the service providers, to the project objectives and scope. All 
participating partners would be oriented to the process of planning and annual work plan preparation 
as well as the monitoring and evaluation system of IFAD. The staff of the project would also be 
provided an opportunity to learn about IFAD’s systems of procurement, financial management, 
AWPBs and monitoring and evaluation. The first six months would be spent in establishing the project 
implementation arrangements and competitively hiring the service providers for implementation and 
project supervision. During this initial period, the staff would also be prepared in the preparation of the 
PIM, the next AWPB and the M&E system, finalizing the selection criteria (for irrigation schemes, for 
grants, etc.), and selecting project districts within the selected governorates and understanding and 
making the arrangements for the baseline survey and putting in place a monitoring and evaluation 
23 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
system (further details based on the findings and agreements reached at the FDR Workshop held in 
Amman May 23 – 25, 2017 are presented in Appendix 5). 
99.  The AWPBs and corresponding procurement plans would be the project’s principal planning 
instruments. The AWPB would be used as a tool for specifying implementation priorities, identifying 
the financial and procurement requirements and establishing a work plan for the staff. The AWPB 
would constitute the basis for release of funds and for financial management. The National Project 
Coordinator in the PMT would assume the overall responsibility for the preparation of the AWP/B.  
He/She would coordinate with the Governorate Coordinators for the purpose. The AWPB would be 
prepared at a time which would enable its inclusion in the Government of Iraq’s budget each year and 
would be submitted six months prior to the start of the next Financial Year in June each year. The 
AWP/B would be submitted to IFAD for its no-objection prior to its inclusion in the Government budget. 
Appendix 6 gives some more details of the planning, monitoring and evaluation aspects of the project. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
100.  The Project’s Logical Framework provides indicators for Project implementation along with their 
corresponding means of verification. The M&E system is expected to generate quantitative and 
qualitative information on the project’s performance in a form that would compare physical progress 
against the planned targets and allow assessment of performance and undertake any remedial action 
if required. The project uses IFAD’s revised RIMS framework to enhance the measurement of IFAD's 
results at the outcome level. The monitoring and evaluation indicators have been disaggregated by 
gender. The project team would fine-tune the progress and performance and impact indicators of the 
project at the Start-Up Workshop with support from IFAD, if required. The Project Management Team 
would define targets and indicators for subsequent years annually as part of the internal planning 
processes and build on the experience gained as the project evolves. The development of the SARP 
M&E system will draw on key lessons from relevant fragile country situations in order to ensure that 
the system is suitable and practical in this challenging project environment. 
101.  The overall responsibility for the M&E activities would be assumed by the National Project 
Coordinator who would be assisted by the Monitoring and Evaluation Officer at the national level and 
the M&E officers at the Governorate level in preparing all progress and monitoring reports. Given the 
limited capacity for monitoring and evaluation overall in the country especially among the NGOs and 
some of the local partners who are expected to partner with the project, the project would select 
strong monitoring and evaluation staff and provide them proper guidance on IFAD’s RIMS and provide 
guidance on the statistical and narrative report formats.  
102.  A Third party would be contracted to undertake a Baseline Survey that would be conducted 
during the first year of the Project. IFAD would provide the PMT guidelines in developing the terms of 
reference and the household questionnaire for the baseline survey. Assistance would be sought from 
IFAD’s newly established Strategic Planning and Impact Assessment Division if required. Beneficiary 
feedback surveys would be conducted in year 3 and year 6 through a Third Party to track some 
intermediate outcomes. A Mid-Term Review would be carried out towards the end of the Project’s 
third year. The review would cover: (i) physical and financial progress as measured against AWPBs; 
(ii) progress in the implementation and emerging outputs and intermediate outcomes of the irrigation 
infrastructure schemes; (ii) assessment of the efficacy of the institutional development and capacity 
building activities; (iii) progress in crop and livestock productivity through provision of assets, training 
and market linkages; (vi) progress in establishing off farm income generating activities providing 
ancillary services for agriculture growth (vii) implementing of climate change resilient activities; (vii) 
the participation of women and the emerging outcomes reported by them. Moreover, and based on 
the updated RIMS guideline the project will conduct Annual Outcome Surveys after the Mid-Term 
Review. 
103.  Final Evaluation: An independent Final Evaluation would take place three months prior to the 
Project completion date, and would assess overall project outreach, outcomes and impact. The final 
evaluation would also review the sustainability of results and the potential for scaling-up. The final 
evaluation would provide recommendations based on lesson learnt that would be taken into 
consideration while designing similar projects in the future in similar contexts.  The Final Impact 
24 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Assessment would be undertaken by a neutral agency with no previous involvement in project 
implementation. The Terms of Reference for this evaluation would be prepared by IFAD. 
104.  During project implementation, weak institutional capacities and low level of coordination might 
be a constraint for collecting consistent data on a regular basis at the Governorate/District levels. In 
this regard, the project and the M&E Specialist will play an important role in building the capacity of 
government staff and facilitating the coordination among different Governorates on data collection and 
analysis. 
Learning and knowledge management 
105.  Given that this is the first IFAD loan financed project in the country, the compilation and 
dissemination of project information, experiences and results on an on-going basis for the country and 
for IFAD headquarters are important. The project would package and disseminate information to the 
respective stakeholders in the appropriate formats (e.g. brochures, studies, articles, newsletter, and 
web). This knowledge-sharing process would be supported by a well-focused series of workshops and 
joint learning events and visits. 
106.  The overall responsibility for Knowledge Management and communication would be shared by 
IFAD and the PMT in Iraq. The PMT would coordinate with the Governorate Coordinators and the 
M&E Officers in identifying specific case studies of interests which illustrate how the project activities 
have had an impact on rural livelihoods.  The PMT would be assisted by the project Service Providers 
in the preparation of special case studies and Learning Notes, which would play an important role in 
informing the project implementation approach and, eventually, broader policy dialogue.   These 
would be shared more widely by IFAD through its various tools for sharing the knowledge gleaned 
from IFAD-supported projects and programmes such as through the use of what is termed as 
“Learning Routes" with the objectives of valuing local knowledge and facilitating the development of 
platforms in which experiences are shared and as a complementary model for knowledge transfer 
among development partners  
C.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
107.  Overall risk assessment. The country risk is rated as High. Transparency International’s (TI) 
Corruption Perception Index ranked Iraq 166th out of 176 countries in 2016 with a score of 17/100. 
The analysis of the trend of TI rating, for the period 2012-2015, had shown recurrent structural and 
institutional issues related to the country’s public systems and governance capacities. The most 
recent PEFA dated from June 2008, highlighted large areas of weakness related to public financial 
management systems including budgeting process, central bank organisation and centralisation and 
sustainability of internal and external controls of public expenditures. The lack of recent data related to 
the country public financial management systems and governance could be considered as indicator of 
the high inherent risk.  
108.  Financial management: GoI will second competent staff to the PMT ensuring that relevant 
competencies are identified and that full-time availability is guaranteed and subject to IFAD no-
objection. The SARP financial management team would be part of the PMT, which would be fully 
embedded and located within the MoA, and vested with financial and administrative autonomy. The 
financial officer would be seconded from MoA staff  
109.  The borrower/recipient would open three (3) USD denominated Designated Accounts (DAs) for 
the IFAD loan, for the ASAP grant and for the Adaptation Fund grant at Central Bank in order to 
receive IFAD loan and grant resources. The authorized allocation would be equal to approximately 3 
months of project expenditure, from both IFAD loan and grant resources. Flow of funds: A chart of the 
flow of funds arrangements is shown in Appendix 7 (Attachment 1).  
110.  The Central Bank under the MoF maintains the accounts of general budget public institutions 
and executes the replenishments of Project’s bank accounts opened at MoA. For that purpose, GoI 
has developed a web-based Public Expenditures and Accounting Information System as Integrated 
Public Financial Management-IPFM system includes budget, procurement and contract management, 
monitoring and evaluation modules, etc. However, the system will not enable the PMT to directly 
25 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
generate financial reports, withdrawal applications and statements of expenditure as per IFAD 
reporting requirements, which would lead to the use of an Excel based financial reporting mechanism.  
111.  Within the first six months, the project would meet these conditions in order to submit first 
disbursement request. The project would (i) acquire and configure a financial, accounting and 
operational software to support all the transactions, budget and cash forecasts analysis, operational 
and financial dashboards; and (ii) prepare a draft Project Implementation Manual (at minimum the 
fiduciary part), acceptable to IFAD, including financial, accounting, procurement and administrative 
arrangements for project activities. AWPBs showing all activities planned during the given year, 
disaggregated by quarter and by financier, should reach IFAD 6 months before the beginning of each 
fiscal year. The AWPB would be prepared to ensure its inclusion in the budget for the next FY of the 
GoI. 
112.  Counterpart funding. The GoI contribution to project costs would be in the form of tax 
exemption, and in kind contributions (essentially office space and utilities, and salaries for seconded 
staff). The project end-beneficiaries would participate in the project costs in the form of in kind 
contributions.  However, beneficiary contributions would be small and in kind given the extreme levels 
of poverty and fragility in the project area. 
113.  Audit. The annual external audit of the project would be carried out by the Federal Board of 
Supreme Audit, the country’s SAI, in accordance with the International Standards of Auditing and the 
IFAD Guidelines for Project Audits and based on terms of reference subject to IFAD no objection. The 
final audit report and management letter would be required to be submitted to IFAD by the Borrower at 
the latest six months after the end of each fiscal year. In addition, the internal audit unit of MoA would 
include the review of the transactions of IFAD project at the central level audit as legal mandatory 
requirements. The internal Auditor Role in the organisation is correctly structured (independent and 
reporting directly to the Ministerial Cabinet). The internal audit unit expressed its commitment to 
deliver IFAD a quarterly report on their review. 
114.  Procurement: The Government of Iraq has recently undertaken several measures to improve 
its procurement system. However despite these measures the system is still assessed to be 
somewhat cumbersome and inefficient. In accordance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines approved 
by the IFAD Executive Board in September 2010 and the provisions of the General Conditions, 
procurement of goods, works and services conducted by the PMT and financed by IFAD and ASAP 
would be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the borrower’s procurement regulations, to 
the extent consistent with the provisions of IFAD procurement guidelines. For each contract to be 
financed by IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement methods, estimated cost, prior review 
requirements and time-frame would be agreed between the Project and IFAD respectively in the 
Procurement Plan. It is worth mentioning that at the institutional level, the project will contribute to 
build capacity for decentralized project management as Government of Iraq may eventually decide to 
decentralize responsibilities for procurement. Appendix 8 provides more details on the procurement 
procedures.  An 18 month procurement plan would be prepared during the subsequent stages of 
project design.  
115.  Governance: The primary responsibility for detecting fraud and corruption lies with the 
Borrower. IFAD applies a zero tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive 
actions in projects financed through its loans and grants. The dissemination of IFAD’s anti-corruption 
policy amongst project staff and stakeholders, as well as the adoption of IFAD procurement guidelines 
for SARP procurement is expected to reinforce the use of good practices.  
D.  Supervision 
116.  The project would be directly supervised by IFAD. The approach to supervision would be one of 
implementation support and assistance as this is IFAD’s first investment in the country. Given that 
there are very strict security measures in place, and that the movement of UN personnel is severely 
restricted in the field, the project would contract a local firm to undertake supervision of project 
activities in the field.  However, a core team from headquarters would undertake a mission on at least 
an annual basis to assess overall management arrangements and performance including financial 
and procurement aspects and monitoring and evaluation. The local firm providing field supervision 
would undertake a two to three weeks mission in the field prior to the visit of the team from 
headquarters. The field supervision mission would comprise technical specialists as required. Based 
26 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
on field team’s findings, the CPM and his team would make an overall assessment of the progress, 
visit selected governorates and determine the areas requiring implementation support.  The 
participation of Government representatives from the MoA in Baghdad would be encouraged in the 
supervision process. An implementation support mission would be fielded after every six months in 
the initial period and thereafter a supervision mission would be planned every year.  
E.  Risk identification and mitigation 
117.  Given the fragile situation within which the project would be implemented, it would be important 
to be flexible in the manner in which the implementation arrangements of the project are structured 
through the use of service providers given the limited capacity of the government.  There would also 
be flexibility in the manner in which the project is supervised and implementation support is provided.  
There is likely to be much greater coordination and assistance provided by IFAD in helping the PMT 
with its M&E system, the design of the baseline and mid-term impact surveys, developing the PIM and 
putting in place the procurement systems. The MTR of the project would be undertaken at the end of 
the Third year rather than later to enable any adjustments required.  
118.  Some of the key project risks, rating and mitigation measures have been identified and 
reproduced in the table below.  
Table 2: Risk Matrix 
Risk  
The On-going battle in the north of the 
country has contributed to instability and 
insecurity in the country.   
As  result of the security threat in the 
country, the movement of any staff  
member within the purview of the UN 
system is extremely restricted. 
Rating  
High 
Medium  
Delays in loan effectiveness, staffing and 
timely project start up and disbursement 
High 
The Government capacity is extremely 
limited and Government budgets for 
operational purposes are inadequate  
Medium 
Iraq procurement rules and practices are 
not harmonized across institutions and 
changing rapidly.  
High  
Mitigation Measures  
The project would focus in the governorates in 
the south of the country where there is no on-
going conflict. 
Use local contractors and service providers, 
close contact with local authorities. Use the 
support of established partners (FAO, 
ICARDA,UN agencies based in Basra) and 
private sector or civil society as service 
providers  
Use IFAD grant to facilitate start-up, and use 
year one as a preparatory year to orient and 
training key staff in IFAD procedures and 
processes.   
The project will be implemented through service 
providers and Government capacity will be built 
during the initial years and a flexible approach 
would be adopted during implementation and 
supervision.. 
IFAD procurement rules would be applied 
strictly in the country.  
Availability of appropriately experienced 
and qualified non-government service 
providers. 
Medium to High  Use of private sector firms which have been 
used by previously by other UN agencies and 
other donors to undertake the implementation in 
the field in partnership with government and 
NGOs.  
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
119.  The project is estimated to cost USD 31.77 million including the Government in kind 
contribution and the beneficiary contribution.  External financing will contribute USD 27.38 million.  
Component 1: Climate resilient investments is expected to cost USD 12. 1 million. Component 2: 
27 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Food security and livelihood diversification, would cost USD 13.6 million and Project Management and 
Coordination would cost USD 4.6 million. Price and physical contingencies have been estimated as 
per usual IFAD benchmarks. 
A.  Project financing 
120.  The project will be funded by IFAD loan, IFAD grant, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture 
Programme (ASAP), the Adaptation Fund (AF)  the Government of Iraq and beneficiaries.  IFAD has 
confirmed a loan of USD 15.73 million and a grant of USD 500,000 covering 49.5% and 1.5% of the 
total project costs.  ASAP will also extend a grant of USD 2 million towards SARP financing, covering 
6.3% of the project costs. Furthermore, extra funds of USD 9.17 million or about 28.9% of the total 
project cost (net of IFAD management fees) are to be mobilized from the Adaptation Fund. The 
government will finance salaries, any taxes and provide other in kind contributions like office space. 
Beneficiaries will also make in-kind contribution in form of casual labour, some minor inputs and 
equipment. This will be mainly under sub-component 2.1. At design, beneficiary contribution is roughly 
estimated to be USD 1.9 million. All in kind contribution will be determined appropriately during 
implementation and tracked. 
Table 3: Project Financing 
Components by Financiers 
(US$ '000) 
A. Climate Resilient Investments 
1. Irrigation Infrastructure schemes 
2. Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening 
Subtotal 
B. Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification 
1. Crop, Livestock & Off-Farm Development 
2. Skills Development & Capacity Building 
Subtotal 
C. Project management and coordination 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
AF 
IFAD Loan 
IFAD Grant 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
ASAP 
  The Government 
Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount  % 
43.9 
5,301 
- 
0 
- 
- 
11.8 
   101 
41.0 
5,301 
0.8 
   101 
60.4 
7,092 
- 
0 
- 
79.8 
1,879 
- 
- 
63.7 
8,971 
0 
30.8 
1,462 
49.7 
   2,364 
7.8  15,734  49.5 
   2,465 
- 
11.1  5,433  45.0 
- 
88.2 
760 
10.3  6,193  47.9 
- 
1.4  2,083  17.7  1,922 
- 
- 
1.1  2,559  18.2  1,922 
- 
10.7 
6.3  9,170  28.9  1,922 
Local 
(Excl. 
For. 
Exch.  Taxes) 
-  12,068 
649 
212 
212  12,717 
16.4  11,737  36.9  3,235  8,502 
2,355 
7.4 
- 
13.6  14,092  44.4  3,235  10,857 
4,382 
15.0 
- 
6.0  31,772  100.0  3,815  27,957 
-  1,334 
- 
- 
-  1,334 
160 
4.1 
- 
- 
3.4 
160 
507 
- 
1.5  2,000 
-  12,068  38.0 
2.7 
861 
- 
-  12,929  40.7 
- 
- 
- 
481 
- 
481 
- 
481 
2,355 
4,751 
20.2 
8.8 
- 
369 
476 
418 
- 
B.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
121.  Project Benefits. SARP will generate financial and social benefits by promoting investments 
and activities aimed at introducing good agricultural practices, high value crops and rural enterprises 
like dairy farming, milk storage and marketing and milk hawking and rural trading. Financial benefits 
will be in the form of increased financial returns (net incomes) of the households targeted by the 
Project.  
122.  Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates in the areas targeted by the Project. This 
will be the effect of the increased financial returns for HHs consequent to Project intervention. Other 
social benefits include improved HH nutrition through diversification of crop production or increased 
incomes which could be used to improve diets. Drip-irrigation brings the possibility for farmers to 
diversify in vegetable crops in the dry season, having a positive effect on the HH diet composition.  
123.  High value crops would be grown in two season instead of one each year.  With capacity 
building on irrigation efficiency, high producing varieties, post-harvest techniques and soil fertility an 
increase of 50% in production volumes is expected. As such the project area is expected to reach the 
average production levels for similar crops in Iraq. The project proposes to introduce crop varieties 
and use of production technologies that are drought and soil salinity tolerant.  In extreme saline areas, 
the project would introduce fodder varieties that have demonstrated their tolerance to high levels of 
soil salinity.   
124.  The project would also introduce high value vegetable production through provision of 
Horticulture packages, which could support investments in plastic tunnels, expansion of drip irrigation, 
provision of livestock packages, assets for HHs, women and youth that would help them engage more 
effectively in agriculture production or providing the support services to the agriculture and rural 
sector. The project supports with small grants off-farm income generating activities by establishing 
rural enterprises specifically for women and youth, for example milk trading and processing. 
28 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
125.  The project would strengthen the institutional capacity of the Government to monitor and report 
on climate change by improving remote monitoring metrological stations and provide farmers an early 
warning system that could help them to take appropriate mitigation and adaptation measures to deal 
with changes in temperature and precipitation levels. 
126.  Direct Project Beneficiaries. The Project would target approximately 33,250 dunum or 8,322 
hectares to benefit from improved irrigation infrastructure, with a 4 out of 5 year water availability. 
Assuming an average farm size of 5 dunum per HH, about 6,650 households would benefit from the 
project irrigation investments. An additional 9,145 households would benefit from the grant packages 
programme, giving a total of 15,795 beneficiary households. Given an average household size of 6.9 
people, the total number of people benefiting from the project would amount to around 109,000. The 
total number of SARP beneficiary households expected over the years is broken down in table 4. 
Table 4: Direct Project Beneficiaries 
Section 
Grant packages 
  Small grant packages Production 
  Small grant packages Youth and Women 
  Large grant packages Farmer Organisations 
Irrigation modernisation 
  For estimated 33250 dunum 
Total number of HH 
Estimated  number  of 
benefitting HHs 
3145 
3000 
3000 
6650 
15795 
127.  Net Present Value (NPV) and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR). The economic 
analysis includes benefits related to (i) modernization and completion of irrigation infrastructure; (ii) 
crop and livestock production; (iii) off-farm income generating activities; (iv) benefits accruing from 
better adaptation to climate change; (v) increase in water use efficiency; (vi) higher yields through 
better seeds and production techniques; and (vii) reduction of post-harvest losses, etc. The net 
present value of the project over a twenty-year period is calculated to be 120,012 (US 000) and the 
economic internal rate of return is estimated to be 28.4% at a discount rate of 5%.  
128.  Sensitivity analysis: A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the changes in NPV and 
EIRR due to variations in the future benefit stream of costs or delay in project implementation. The 
Project remains profitable and robust under a wide range of project scenarios but remains sensitive 
particular in downward variations of output prices 
C.  Sustainability 
129.  An underlying principle of the design of each component is a clear strategy for sustainability 
and exit in all components. Many of the lessons learnt from previous IFAD investments in the region 
have guided the design in making the investments sustainable. Some key underlying aspects which 
would add significantly to making the investments sustainable include (i) the strengthening of rural 
institutions, human skills and capacity building for improved agriculture productivity, enterprise 
development and employment; (ii) the clear distinction in the Project approach about public, 
community and private goods and services and how these would be managed; (iii) a clear plan for 
ownership, operation and management and training for of all investments implemented under the 
project; (iv) ensuring that project investments are socially, technically and environmentally sustainable 
through incorporating these elements into the selection criterion of all schemes and (v) a clear exit 
strategy for each sub-component from the outset. 
130.  All investments in irrigation infrastructure schemes would be undertaken based on a clear plan 
for their operation and management by the Ministry of Water Resources. All investments expected to 
be managed by the farmers unions or associations or women and youth groups, would be 
implemented after ensuring technical, economic and social feasibility. Any scheme which is beyond 
the capacity of these groups to operate or which does not yield sufficient benefits to persuade the 
communities to maintain it, would not qualify for support. All investments in post-harvest facilities 
29 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
would be those which can be managed by the groups such as collection centres, sorting, grading and 
packing houses or basic processing and storage facilities. The project would in each case assist the 
farmer organizations and other groups develop a plan that shows the management requirements and 
the types of user fees to be levied to run the operation on a sustainable basis. In order to start off with 
a minimum amount for such expenses, a share of the 10 per cent in-kind contributions from 
beneficiaries will be converted into monetary terms and deposited into a dedicated O&M account to 
be opened in the name of the concerned union, association or group. Those operations which are 
complex and beyond the capacity of community organizations to undertake would be left to 
entrepreneurial individuals or the private sector.  
131.  Using modern irrigation techniques could result in significant reduction of water or a significant 
increase in number of irrigation schemes using the same amount of water (Table 5) Investment in  
modern irrigation techniques over 50 % of the landholdings for the 8312,5 ha under SARP would 
result in a total water use reduction of 37 million m3 per winter season and 35 million m3 per summer 
season meaning a total of about 72 m3 million per year. In the case of SARP this would mean about 
830 ha could be put extra in production.  
Table 5: Summary of water reduction due to introduction of modern irrigation techniques 
132.  The sustainability of the farmer unions and women and youth groups would be enhanced 
through a programme of training and by ensuring that the activities they undertake can be sustained 
beyond the support provided by the project. The project’s investment in making these groups small, 
participatory, transparent and accountable to its members and training its leadership would add to 
their longevity. The project with the help of the service provider and technical assistance would assist 
in determining the feasibility of the different activities to ensure their sustainability. While the project 
would provide the initial capital support to establish some of the facilities, the concept of a user fee 
would be introduced from the start and project support would be gradually withdrawn.  
133.  The design of the various vocational and extension training programmes would be tailored in a 
manner which would be relevant for the women, youth and smallholders for employment generation, 
self-employment and enhancing agriculture production. The relevance of the training would ensure 
the use of the skills and adoption of the crop and livestock production practices imparted. The project 
would also ensure that the delivery mechanisms used to impart different types of trainings are 
appropriate for the target group. Thus the timing and location of the training would be carefully 
planned especially for women to ensure their participation. The training content for the youth would be 
discussed with them and the potential for employment and self-employment opportunities available 
would be assessed. The project’s emphasis on building local capacity for services, which the 
community would be willing to pay for, would be made prior to training youth in these vocational skills 
and trades. 
30 
Reduction of water use% modern techniquesNo of schemesReduction per scheme in m3Total reduction under SARP in m3Using modern techniques in winter5057.271.77536.358.875Using modern techniques in summer5056.980.90434.904.520Using modern techniques in summer50500Using modern techniques in summer505166831Using modern techniques in summer5054272.13610 % INCREASE IN AREASAME WATER USEIncrease in number of produced hectares10 % INCREASE IN AREASAME WATER USENo of schemesIncrease per scheme under SARP in haConditionTotal increase in ha under SARP 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Agriculture context: Agriculture is one of the most important sectors in Iraq after oil and gas.  
1. 
The contribution of agriculture sector in the national GDP has been declining over the last 15 years 
and currently stands at around 10 percent. Twenty three percent of the economically active 
populations are working in agriculture.  Crop production is the major source of income for the majority 
(75 percent) of farmers in Iraq, while the rest depend on livestock or mixed crop and livestock 
enterprises. Grains, primarily wheat and barley, are Iraq’s main crops in the north and central rain-fed 
areas. Crop yields are low by any comparative standards as farmers tend to minimize costs 
concerned with land preparation, planting, weeding and harvesting. In central and southern Iraq, 
where agriculture depends mainly on irrigation from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, mixed farming 
systems are predominant. Dates are a major cash and food crop with fruit trees inter-planted in date 
palm orchards. Vegetables, mainly tomatoes and potatoes, are important irrigated crops. Livestock 
raising is extensively practiced and inland fisheries and backyard poultry raising are valuable as a 
source of protein and income for the rural population.  
Agriculture is mostly practiced on small farming units and it is a low input–low output system. 
2. 
Farmers have focused in the past almost entirely on wheat and barley which were described as 
“strategic crops”. The centralized policy to promote these subsistence cereal crops by providing 
subsidized inputs and purchasing them at fixed prices made the farmers ignore other more 
commercially oriented crops. As a result when the Government withdrew from this policy, the farmers 
continue to grow these crops. Cereal production now accounts for 58% of the cultivated area in the 
country. Farmers need to shift to high value crops but need assistance in doing so. The agriculture 
extension services for technology transfer, particularly, for small producers, is weak.  There are 
considerable losses reported due to lack of post-harvest facilities. Low agricultural productivity has 
been a characteristic of Iraq’s agriculture for the last two decades and has made the country 
dependent on imports to meet its domestic food needs. Cheap food imports flood into the country and 
farmers are unable to compete with them due to their lack of organization and inability to make 
strategic crop choices. Iraq imports more than 80 percent of its domestic foods, mainly wheat, wheat 
flour, oils, sugars and dairy products. 
Livestock Sector: Livestock sector contribute about 45% of the agriculture GDP, about 36.% of 
3. 
agriculture labour of which 52% are women Livestock is the major source of income for about 25% of 
farmers in Iraq. The livestock sector in Iraq consists predominantly of small ruminants which consists 
of about 75% of total livestock.  However, the number of animals declined sharply due to 
mismanagement and sale outside the country. About 90% of sheep and goats are raised under 
traditional system, where the animal grazes on natural vegetation, crops supplemented with roughage 
and crop residue.  Awassi is the dominant breed for sheep which has high genetic potential for milk 
and meat production, while the black (native) breed is the dominant one in the country. Livestock 
productivity is low and can be at least doubled.  
The agriculture sector’s low productivity and growth rates are attributable to a variety of issues 
4. 
and to past policies when the government maintained artificially low food prices through price and 
production controls and marketing restrictions. In addition, years of insufficient maintenance and 
funding have degraded agricultural services and physical infrastructure, particularly the irrigation 
network. During the recent conflicts, extensive looting damaged a range of government and private 
agricultural production and service facilities in central and southern Iraq, including research facilities, 
animal health and artificial insemination centres, poultry production industries, and plant quarantine 
units at the borders. Because of the relative isolation of Iraq in recent decades, agribusiness and food 
and agricultural enterprises have not been able to benefit from international markets, modern 
production techniques and global trading standards. There are no incentives to invest in agricultural 
processing industries or value chains because of the complicated and out dated administrative and 
regulatory system, the considerable shortcomings of the public agencies that are in charge of the 
advisory and technical services, erratic price policies, inefficient marketing networks, very little market 
information and complicated and time consuming export/import procedures. 
  31 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Institutional/Capacity Assessment of Farmer Associations (FAs): According to FAO, 
5. 
organizations at producer level exist but they are weak and ineffective. Years of conflict and social 
disruption have disintegrated the social fabric of the Iraqi rural society and the traditional customs of 
social rural life. The rehabilitation and development of the Iraqi agriculture is a medium/long term aim 
which can only be achieved through a coherent, coordinated effort based on two main pillars: policy 
improvements and investment projects including inter alia, rehabilitation of support services and 
capacity building (FAO 2012). The USAID-funded Agriculture Reconstruction and Development 
program for Iraq, ARDI, built the skills of 19 NGOs active in agriculture development; 293 agricultural 
cooperative members through 15 newly formed cooperative associations; 4,300 beekeepers and 
honey producers establishing new associations and restarting others; 233 independent pesticide 
dealers into a national association; and provided 526 extension specialists with participatory service 
delivery training (of the SARP target Governorates only Muthanna was covered). The USAID-Inma 
Agribusiness Program introduced farmer field schools in Iraq in November 2010, providing training in 
adult education, facilitation, plant-animal life cycles, group study and farmer group development (IFAD 
2016). It would however appear that the bulk of these initiatives have proved to be unsustainable, 
either because their direct support or their accompanying measures have not been intensive and 
regular enough, or because support was withdrawn prematurely and/or unexpectedly. 
Institutional and organisational development as a vehicle for more pro-poor, sustainable 
6. 
services in agriculture will need to focus more on capacity building at the grass-roots level. As a 
vehicle for collective empowerment, possibilities for local institutional development appear somewhat 
limited at this point in time. There have been almost no efforts at community-driven development for 
public and collective goods and services and collective and private goods and services through 
structures such as, for example, community development committees and sub-committees dealing 
with agricultural issues. Community-driven or at least community-focused approaches would arguably 
have been a strategic choice to repair the damaged social tissue and depleted social capital 
throughout the country, be it in urban or rural contexts. 
7.  Water User Associations have been promoted by FAO in the southern Provinces and their 
creation and strengthening is still being supported by JICA all over Iraq including in the Governorates 
to be covered by SARP. A 2012 law transfers the control and responsibility of irrigation water in tertiary 
canals to them with a view to foster co-management and participatory governance in natural resource 
management. They are however widely regarded as weak and ineffective, with the most often 
explanation provided being the one related to a lack of incentives due to the fact that water and water 
conveyance are free of charge to farmers, thus providing little incentive for efficient allocation and use 
of water resources upstream in the irrigation schemes as well as on-farm. 
Unions of farmer associations are present in all Governorates. In Thi Qar, for example, union 
8. 
counts some 5 000 members and covers all districts. The roots of the unions go back several decades 
to a law from 1959 and the period of land reform which made it compulsory for those having obtained 
plots in this way to become members. This was changed in 1983 when membership became optional 
and the previously strong connection to the Ministry of Agriculture was dissolved (see also IFAD 
2016). The unions, now liaising with the Directorates of Agriculture at Governorate level, have 
remained key actors in implementing government programmes in the agricultural sector. First and 
foremost among these comes the Public Distribution System (PDS), which highly subsidises 
foodstuffs, especially wheat and barley26. 
SWOT analysis of unions of farmer associations 
Strengths – 
  Outreach  to  a  great  number  of  member 
farmers 
  Experience 
in 
coordination, etc. 
collective 
action, 
  Generally  good  relations  with  Directorates 
Leadership relatively old 
Weaknesses – 
 
  Excessive focus on subsidised crops 
  Have still not completely cut the “umbilical cord” 
with the Ministry of Agriculture 
of Agriculture 
Opportunities – 
Threats – 
26 In many parts of southern Iraq, producers have however not yet been paid, a situation that has been ongoing for two 
to three years. 
32 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
  Could  become  more  service-oriented  and 
  Not  enough  overlap  between  union  members 
play an important role for members 
and IFAD target groups 
  Could  lead  the  way  in  diversifying  away 
from wheat and barley 
  Élite capture 
  Politicisation 
  Can  provide  lead  farmers  as  trainers  of 
trainers 
Notwithstanding their weakness and that of their enabling environment, there are a number of farmer 
associations exist in the four SARP Governorates that are worth highlighting27. One of the largest 
ones is the Poultry Association of Thi Qar, established in 2016 (290 active members). The association 
has an executive committee of five persons and its active members – those with ongoing with capital 
investments – are engaged in semi-industrial projects (6 000 to 25 000 birds). 
27 They are registered under  Law 56/2002 which states that ten farmers or more can establish an association with a 
democratic governance and decision-making structure. 
  33 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
A.  Poverty and Target Groups 
In 2012, the rural poverty rate stood at 31 percent, nearly double the urban poverty rate of 15  
percent, with 19 percent of the total population in Iraq living below the national poverty line of less 
than 2.2 US$ per person per day. Whilst unemployment as measured against the total population of 
Iraq is about 10 percent, this level rises substantially in the case of a number of specific subsets 
(women, youths, IDPs, etc.). About 54 percent of the labour force is rural and the rural population is 
more adversely affected by Illiteracy (25 percent) than the urban population (14 percent). Rural 
poverty in Iraq is a direct consequence of the rapid (3 percent) population growth, internal conflict and 
insecurity, climate change, increasing water scarcity and rapid desertification. The poverty ratio in the 
18 Governorates in Iraq ranged from 35 percent to 52 percent for the five poorest governorates, from 
11 percent and 26 percent for nine governorates and from 2 percent to 10 percent for the remaining 
four governorates. 
Poverty in rural Iraq is not so much a function of food insecurity and low incomes as it is a direct 
consequence of decades of conflict and sectarian violence which has ripped the social fabric of 
communities and many families apart. The psychological effects thereof have only recently become 
more apparent and the subject of further investigation, leading to a range of social initiatives. These 
aim at helping to relieve the severe distress of so many Iraqis, especially of women whose lives have 
been devastated, and of traumatised adolescents and children. The often-unconscious and enduring 
impact of war is makes itself felt on mental health and physical wellbeing. The constant feeling of 
insecurity is further exacerbating perceptions of marginalisation and disenfranchisement in the 
country’s rural areas. 
In the rural areas of the four poorest governorates, small-scale farmers and livestock producers are 
the most marginalised households with unemployed young men and women the most vulnerable. 
Small-scale farmers with a holding size ranging from 2.5 to 7.5 ha account for 35 percent of total 
number of farmers with cereal crops accounting for 58 percent of their cultivated area. Wheat has 
been and still is a heavily subsidised crop and is therefore the preferred choice and main crop of 
many farmers including in the four Governorates making up SARP’s proposed project area. In 
Muthanna – the largest of the four – smallholders account for 60 percent of the total farming 
population. In this Governorate, wheat and barley together account for 37 500 h28 with only 2 000 h 
under other crops such as rice, potato, and okra (Dept. of Planning, Min. of Agric., 2017). 
The Ministry of Agriculture defines a smallholder farmer as someone with 12.5 h or less of rainfed land 
or 4 h or less of irrigated land. The land holding system in Iraq is a mixture of owner operator, lease 
holding and sharecropping arrangements. There is an official cap on maximum land size allowed in 
the northern rainfed areas of  75 ha. In 2001, 67 percent of the land belonged to the state and was 
rented or distributed by the Ministry of Agriculture to private operators whilst about 32 percent was 
privately owned. State-owned land is divided into land that has never been occupied and land 
exploited by individual owners or cooperatives with an official land registration title. Lease holding size 
varies from 7.5 to 17.5 ha depending on the availability of agricultural reform land and population 
density (IFAD 2016). 
The average rural household size is 6.9 persons. In the South/Centre of Iraq, female-headed 
households make up 9.5 percent of the total. Just over quarter (27.6 percent) of all households have 
four or fewer residents, while 15.9 percent have 10 or more. Four out of five heads of households in 
the bottom 40 percent have a primary education or less, and two-fifths are employed in agriculture, 
28 In Iraq, land size is measured in dunum; 4 dunum = 1 hectare. 
35 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
construction, commerce, and transport (predominantly private sector jobs) (World Bank 2017). The 
sex ratio is balanced at the younger age group, however, there is a severe male deficit in the age 
groups 40-54 years, especially in the age group 50-54. Women marry younger than men, but at the 
age 35 and above the proportion of married men is similar to that of women (GoI 2008).  
Overall, Iraqi households receive more than half of their income from labor, 39 percent from capital, 
3.5 percent from land, 6.1 percent from social transfers, and less than 1 percent from remittances. 
Rural households receive a higher share of their income from labor, agricultural capital, and land, 
whereas urban households’ income from non-agricultural capital is higher. Female-headed 
households are generally not very different in terms of income sources. In terms of household 
expenditures, rural households spend a significantly higher share of their income on food than urban 
households (33.3 percent for rural and 19.6 percent for urban) (IFPRI 2014). In the southern 
Governorates, a typical household will spend between 5 000 dinar and 10 000 dinar per day on food 
(including grains, pulses and vegetables and grains, pulses, vegetables and meat or fish, 
respectively)29. 
The socio-economic characteristics of IFAD target groups in the Governorates covered under SARP 
are very heterogeneous and not well documented by quantitative data. Because of this heterogeneity, 
it is not possible to craft a stylised typology of smallholder farmers in the four southern Governorates. 
At least not at this stage – one of the outputs of SARP will be to attempt to fill our information gaps to 
the point where this will become possible. Qualitative data shows that income levels and sources of 
agricultural income vary considerably by geographic location, with reliable access to a source of water 
as one of the main determinants of the presence of farming activities. 
Generally, wherever a source of water (rivers, open canals, inland water bodies, brackish water, 
different types of wells, etc.) is available, smallholder farmers tend to grow mostly wheat or barley, 
and a few summer vegetables (greenhouses, or plastic houses as they are commonly called in Iraq, 
are mostly too costly for poor smallholders). The next determinant of whether or not smallholders 
engage in crop farming relates to soil salinity, which is a huge problem in the southern part of the 
country. In several parts of Muthanna Governorate, smallholders appear to have abandoned crop 
farming altogether30, because of the salinity of their land, and turned to livestock and the processing of 
livestock products as their main source of sustenance and income. 
Typically, the livestock activities of IFAD target groups consist of sheep and goat rearing and backyard 
poultry farming. Households owning a cow can be said to be relatively better off, and will use its milk 
for consumption and processing into cream and cheese for the local market. Date palms are not 
necessarily a feature of relatively better-off households, and are mostly in bad shape in terms of their 
current productivity and prone to pests. Beekeeping is a promising activity but is not very widely 
practised. 
At least for part of the year, a great number of smallholder farmers needs to engage in selling their 
labour on a daily wage basis, with the construction sector often being the most attractive one. The 
going rate for agricultural daily wages varies; in Muthanna, it is the equivalent of USD 15. The main 
sector causing strong demand and competing with agriculture is the construction sector – although 
this phenomenon is stronger in urban and per-urban areas. 
Internally Displaced People 
Iraq today has a population of 4 million IDPs, second only to Syria and Colombia. This represents a 
staggering 11 percent of the population. The addition of refugees, mostly Syrians fleeing the conflict at 
29 Household interview at Al-Bohuwaigen village, Al-Warka Dstrict, Governorate of Muthanna. 
30 In one community visited they did so 10 years ago, in another as far back as 14 years ago. 
36 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
home, brings the total number of displaced persons to 4.3 million. More than three-quarters of the 
displaced population has fled from only two governorates – Anbar and Ninawa. IDPs account for half 
a million of the total number of people who fell into poverty as a consequence of the “twin crises” 
(falling oil prices plus the Daesh insurgency). Unemployment among IDPs is estimated at 27 percent. 
(World Bank 2017). 
According to the IOM tracking website, currently 69712 IDPs are present in the southern 
Governorates. Some of these have become what is referred to as ‘protracted displacements’, and 
individuals and households falling into this category are without doubt part of IFAD’s target group. IOM 
are currently working with about 150 staff who are collecting and updating information on a daily 
basis. Their community stabilisation programme has implemented some, limited, agricultural activities 
such as plastic houses. Their database on communities will be a resource for SARP to draw upon. In 
addition, the project could “refer” humanitarian cases met during implementation, and who are not 
receiving any government support, to IOM. 
The Ministry of Migration and Displacement is present in all Governorates and has figures on 
numbers of IDPs – these figures are collected by registering IDPs with them, and may be out of date 
as there is no process of unregistering them once they decide to return back or move elsewhere. 
Some IDPs do not want to return to where they have originally come from. Most of them are landless, 
but Governorates are willing and able to provide them with some land for productive activities if 
financing becomes available. A certain number of IDPs no papers testifying to their nationality of Iraq 
or any given country in the sub-region. A somewhat separate category of IDPs consists of migrant 
workers who had settled in the northern part of Iraq but have lost all their assets due to conflict and 
had to return to their communities of origin. There, they often find it difficult to integrate themselves 
back into these communities. 
There are a range of initiatives aimed at supporting IDPs in Iraq, but they appear to be far from 
sufficient to cover even their basic needs. Many are very localised micro-projects implemented by 
NGOs registered with the Governorates, under the aegis of the Ministry of Social Affairs, discontinued 
as soon as financing stops, and frequently unsustainable. One of the many challenges of working with 
IDPs is that they are scattered over many localities within any given district. UNHCR is running a cash 
distribution scheme which seeks to satisfy requirements related to food, shelter, and medicines. 
Social security transfers. Iraq’s Social Protection Net (SPN) is a cash transfer program that aims to 
target poor and vulnerable populations. The SPN distributes monthly grants to beneficiaries based on 
household size. In 2012, the SPN covered 4 percent of the population but with minimum targeting 
effectiveness as 71 percent of the beneficiaries were non-poor, while 89 percent of the poor did not 
receive SPN assistance that year. The program is inefficient and fragmented, providing cash transfers 
based on categorical targeting (including households with orphans, married students, widows, 
divorced women, and others), leading to significant leaks (GoI 2012). 
To remedy the problems associated with the SPN, a new poverty targeting initiative was launched in 
April 2016 to introduce proxy means testing (PMT). The initiative is administered by the Social 
Protection Commission, which was created in 2014 (World Bank 2017). Both the Commission and 
PMT are for the time being in their very early stages, and IFAD should try to remain abreast of 
developments as they may have direct implications for our country programme. SARP will need to 
ensure that the income-generating activities to be promoted will be more profitable than the 
approximately USD 40 per month per person the SPN transfers to rural families (a household of eight 
family members receives the equivalent of USD 320 per month, an amount that is above most 
average monthly earnings in the private sector, including in agriculture). 
37 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
WFP have started to provide food aid to eligible households who should have received PDS ration 
cards after 2014 but have not received them as the system is overstretched. This would seem to 
constitute an opportunity to diversify the food rations away from mainly wheat and barley. 
Special population groups 
The project area is home to a number of population groups with special status, be this for historical, 
political, religious or socio-cultural reasons. The most prominent of these are the the Maʻdān 
populating the Mesopotamian Marshlands (al-Ahwar) around the confluence of the Tigris and 
Euphrates rivers – their precise number is unknown and estimates vary widely between “a few 
thousand” and 125,000-150,000 people (see, e.g., Kubba 2011). Having had to abandon rice 
cultivation, they nowadays derive their livelihoods from fishing and handicrafts, whilst a sub-group has 
continued to rear water buffalos. One of SARP’s potential partner NGOs, ‘Nature of Iraq’, is 
specialised in working in the marshlands and has been exploring economic opportunities with the 
different tribes people inhabiting this fragile and unique ecosystem and world heritage site. Poverty is 
severe in the marshlands; population groups in the Hammar Marshes, for example, suffer from a lack 
of clean drinking water, sanitation, health care and education facilities. Urbanisation and the changing 
lifestyle it brings about are affecting even the marshlands, as illustrated by the difficulties of 
repopulating the more centrally located marshland settlements (away from roads and infrastructure 
linking to nearby towns and markets). Perhaps for this reason, women there appear relatively more 
emancipated than women in other rural areas. 
A number of other minority groups are also present in the project area, which will be targeted as per 
their poverty status and income-generating potential. 
Women 
The rural unemployment rate is higher for females than males. Only 15-18 percent of women are 
employed and they take up only 7 percent of employment in non-agricultural sectors. The percentage 
of women in paid employment in the non-agricultural sector has risen from 12.1 percent in 2008 to 
14.7 percent in 2011. The agriculture sector has a particularly high share of women, whose 
participation in the sector has increased from 30 to 50 percent between 1980 and 2010 (World Bank, 
2016). Women in Iraq are represented in the higher levels of the public sector and government. In 
2010, the average rate of parliament seats held by women was 27 percent; there is a quota of 25 per 
cent women on Provincial Councils. Nearly half of workers in the public administration are women, 
although few of them are in senior or decision-making positions (UNDP Iraq 2012). Within rural areas, 
the literacy divide between men and women is wider. There are an estimated 1.6 million widows, an 
increased number of female-headed households, and large numbers of orphans. 
Women in Iraq have been significantly affected by insecurity. Violence against women and girls, 
particularly sexual violence, has been a widely used tactic of terror in the armed conflict. The conflict 
has increased the level of threat, both real and perceived, to women and girls, and families are 
increasingly seeing marriage as a way to protect women and girls and to increase household 
resources. Already high rates of forced and child marriage are increasing, and the once banned 
practice of temporary marriages for dowry is in resurgence. As of 2016, UNICEF monitoring data 
show that around 975,000 girls in Iraq were married before the age of 15, twice as many as in 1990 
(World Bank 2017). In addition to imposing restrictions on movement that reduce access to education, 
health, and jobs, a feature of post-conflict settings with high unemployment and poor overall security 
such as Iraq is often a high incidence of violence, particularly various kinds of gender-based violence 
(UNDP Iraq, 2012). 
38 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Women's marital status (percentage) (GoI 2008 – the most recent data available) 
Single 
Currently married 
Widowed  
Divorced/ Separated 
35.9 
59.9 
2.4 
1.9 
In the more traditional rural communities, women are mostly confined to their residential homestead, 
and feel uncomfortable and are often unwilling to engage in any income-generating activity away from 
their homes. This acts as a powerful limiting factor and constraint to opportunities for off-farm activities 
for women, which are much influenced by traditional gender roles. Whereas in urban and peri-urban 
settings these are evolving, even in unexpected ways and sometimes very rapidly, this is much less 
so in rural areas. There, internet connectivity appears to bear a lot of influence on opening mindsets 
for women and girls to champion new initiatives. As a rule of thumb, however, in the more remote rural 
villages, husbands will consent to their wives earning money away from home, as long as this takes 
place within commuting distance. 
Although no law prevents them from owning land, custom and Islamic norms entail that very few 
women are officially owners of agricultural land. In rural areas, they tend to inherit one portion 
together with all others entitled to so but this will usually be a minute plot (in theory, one eighth). They 
may be owners of residential land, and widows whose husbands have died in conflict, can claim such 
land from the government. Women do have use rights which are reasonably secure, and have no 
problem using the land near their houses, for example for growing vegetables, or for poultry farming 
and the rearing of goats or sheep. As per law 35/1983, they can rent agricultural land – but only few 
women seem to be willing or able to do so. 
Youth 
There is no official definition of the age of who should be considered a ‘youth’ in Iraq – many sources 
indicate a range between 15 and 24 years. The National Youth Survey, however, held in 2009, 
targeted youth aged 10-30 years. The results of this survey will inform the development of a draft Iraqi 
national youth strategy, which has been under preparation for some time. 
Iraq’s population is one of the youngest in the world, with nearly 50 percent of its population being 
younger than 19 years old and approximately one-third between 15 and 29 years old. Youth 
unemployment is high at 34.6 percent, 57.7 percent for females and 30.8 percent for males (World 
Bank 2017). Over 3.4 million Iraqi youths are out of school, and fully 72 percent of women and 18 
percent of men between the ages of 15 and 29 were neither in education nor in employment or 
training. Among youths aged between 15 and 29 years old, 33.4 percent are illiterate or semi-illiterate 
(UNDP 2014). More than 40 percent of those aged between 15 and 24 years old do not enjoy a sense 
of security in their daily lives.30 Increasingly, in many areas affected by recent conflict, geographic 
boundaries tend to coincide with sectarian identities, limiting contact between ethnic and religious 
groups and further reinforcing sectarian divisions (ICG 2016). A 2009 survey found that only 6 percent 
of youths believed that they had the opportunity to voice their opinions and be heard in political 
institutions (GoI 2009). 
Options for livelihood improvements 
Small livestock is arguably the single most promising activity, followed by vegetable gardening and 
fruit orchards as well as dates. On the whole, low input agriculture offers a range of interesting options 
for IFAD target groups. Plastic houses have proven to be successful, if sufficient training on how o use 
and maintain them, is provided. Beekeeping is another activity that should be pursued; it is not new to 
southern Iraq and has been promoted several times before. The key success factor seems to lie 
39 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
mostly in thorough training during which the potential beekeepers are made well aware of the 
implications of what maintaining their beehives entails - many view this activity as ‘too complex’. 
Honey does have an assured internal market as it is widely used by urban and rural households in 
Iraq. 
Women. In the more traditional rural communities, even off-farm income generating opportunities are 
extremely limited for women, with sewing one of the very few possibilities for SARP to invest in. Some 
“cottage industry”-type activities also offer some promise, most notably the processing of dairy 
products (which will also improve household nutrition) such as cream and cheese; both of these 
products enjoy strong and stable local market demand. For women especially, the rearing of goats 
and sheep, and poultry farming, offer very good opportunities for improving household food security, 
for diminishing household expenditure on meat and eggs, and for income generation. Female-headed 
households, divorcees and widows are known to the local authorities and in all southern governorates 
there exist NGOs specifically dedicated to working with them; SARP will work with these same NGOs 
to target them under the project. 
Youth. The Ministry of Agriculture has been compiling ideas for enticing young unemployed and 
underemployed Iraqis into agriculture. On this list feature items such as the maintenance of 
agricultural machinery, nurseries for high value plants, and feed blocks for livestock. There may also 
be a possibility of collaborating with the National Council for Seeds to start private seed out-grower 
operations in high potential agricultural areas. Teaching functional adult literacy/numeracy is another 
profession which appears to be in short supply, particularly women who could teach other women at 
home. 
The landless. This category of individuals and households would seem to consist mostly but not 
exclusively of IDPs and returnees. Official figures on landlessness are unavailable. Bee-keeping and 
off-farm income-generating activities are obvious activities to be proposed for this category, 
depending on their entrepreneurial acumen and willingness to start something new to them. Several 
processing activities can also be supported, especially for women. Governorates may also be willing 
and able to provide landless people with small plots of land, at least on a temporary basis, for small-
scale agricultural activities. 
Vocational training. Off-farm income generating activities of interest to youth are numerous and are 
those found in micro-enterprise development projects, namely concerning trades such as those of 
mobile phone repairer, carpenter, mason, welder, mechanic, small engine repairer, equipment 
operator, plumber, pipefitter, electrician, electrical lineman, sheet metal worker, hairdresser, 
beautician, photographer, petty trader, etc. 
Rural vocational training centres are being rebuilt and build new (such as a large one recently 
inaugurated in Erbil, see http://ettc-iraq.net/index.php/en/) all over the country. The Ministry of Social 
Affairs disposes of vocational training centers in all Governorates. Some NGOs (e.g., Amar 
Foundation, see https://www.amarfoundation.org/) have their own centers which are normally in use 
irregularly when funding and projects are available. The best candidate for SARP to partner with 
(under sub-components 2.3.2, ‘capacity building & skills for women’, and 2.3.3, ‘vocational training for 
young men’) is UNIDO, who have a network of enterprise development centers in southern Iraq. In 
collaboration with UNIDO, it may be possible to also train a few youths in relatively more sophisticated 
trades such as business development services provider, agri-business counselor, business match-
maker/market information provider, etc. NGO service providers will be able to organise vocational 
training sessions and have experience in doing so, on a case-by-case basis with funding from 
different projects. The cost of training courses varies. Outside of these externally-funded initiatives, 
the offer of vocational training courses is very limited, at least in rural areas, where traditional 
apprenticeships are still the only way of acquiring a new skill. There is no government regulation or 
40 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
norms affecting such apprenticeships, the terms of which are negotiated between master craftsmen 
and the (families of the) apprentices. 
B.  Targeting Strategy 
Lessons learned 
No recent lessons appear to be available that would be of direct relevance to IFAD’s mandate. It is 
necessary to look at rural development experiences prior to 2003 to find such lessons, which makes 
them vastly outdated. There are nonetheless a number of recent good practice examples that should 
inspire the targeting strategy under SARP. In as far as recent experiences to draw on are concerned, 
we must turn mostly to the humanitarian sector and to emergency responses, which, however, offers 
only limited insights. In those specific contexts, geographic and direct targeting are arguably relatively 
more straightforward than they are in projects with longer term objectives such as SARP. Few of these 
projects, if any, have set aside time for analysing the real life constraints of Iraqi small farmers and 
assessed their training needs in any detail before starting implementation. A case in point are the 
many plastic houses distributed free of charge and without concern for the marketability of the 
vegetables grown in them. The broader enabling environment for pro-poor agricultural development 
has hardly been analysed at all, at least not in the local contexts in which project activities unfold. 
One of the lessons emerging from the vast numbers of training programmes that mostly humanitarian 
organisations have been rolling out in Iraq since 2003 is that generic training for youths seems to 
have reached a point of diminishing returns. Younger generations are eager to be able discover and 
express their creativity and talents, to be uncovered by more individualistic facilitation and more 
specialised training sessions. 
Targeting under most government-implemented projects and programmes in agriculture has so far 
been done through the public extension service, which, however, seems geared towards serving the 
local élite and has limited outreach in general, and to IFAD target groups in particular. Technical 
advice should “trickle down” from élite farmers and lead farmers, but there appears limited evidence of 
this effect materialising, not least because of the human resource and resource limitations (mobility, 
fuel, materials, etc.) of the Directorates of Agriculture. In Muthanna Governorate, for example, the 
ratio is one of 34 extension agents for 18 000 farmers, with only five female extension agents. The 
ratio of male to female extension agents is much better in Thi Qar Governorate, where 15 male and 
15 female extension workers are present covering the agricultural units. Also, since 2005 there are 
two public extension systems, one under central authority responding to Baghdad, and the other one 
under provincial authorities responding to the Governorates. 
The Ministry of Agriculture of Iraq could benefit from exposure visits and learning exchanges to other 
countries in the sub-region and elsewhere. Its approaches to extension and other services are public 
sector-centric, old-fashioned, and top-down instead of being pluralistic, dynamic and client-oriented. A 
case in point is their continued over-reliance on demonstration plots, supported by decentralised 
agricultural units, rather than more hands-on methods such as FFS. 
When comparing SARP design and implementation to other projects and programmes in the sub-
region and elsewhere, it should be borne in mind that Iraq has almost no experience of participatory 
approaches in any sector - agriculture and rural development are no exception. This is why a higher 
than usual amount of process orientation and process documentation will be necessary, and be part 
of the ToRs of the service provider NGOs. 
41 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
SARP targeting strategy 
At national level, geographic targeting has been defined on the basis of poverty rates at Governorate 
level, with the highest scoring ones being Missan, Muthanna, Qadisiyah and Thi Qar, They form a 
contiguous proposed project area in the southern part of Iraq to the north of Basrah; Muthanna alone 
is almost as large as the other three Governorates combined. Within these Governorates, the project 
will not target communities as such, but enrol eligible individuals and groups through a demand-driven 
process. In the four Governorates that make up the project area, SARP’s targeting strategy will 
involve the following steps: 
Step One: Land use maps overlaid with poverty maps will serve 
to fine-tune the project’s geographic focus; the land use maps1 
are prepared by several units of the Directorates of Agriculture, 
and the poverty maps by the Departments of Planning of these 
Directorates. This will be done by these technical line agencies 
with support from SARP project staff during the start-up phase of 
the project. 
Step Two a: Direct targeting will serve to 
target individuals and their households; this 
will done by NGOs using their database and 
experience of working in their respective 
Governorates. In addition, at the intra-
community level, there will be a certain 
degree of self-targeting of beneficiaries, on 
the one hand because the planning process 
will be demand-driven, and on the other, 
because the scale and scope as well as the 
nature of the bulk of income-generating 
activities being promoted, will not be of 
interest to wealthier individuals and 
households. 
Step Two b: Overlaying these maps with a 
map of farmer associations and women’s 
groups will serve to target groups and 
community-based organisations; the farmer 
associations and women’s group maps will 
be prepared by SARP project staff during the 
start-up phase of the project in collaboration 
with the Departments of Planning. 
Step one and two b above serve to cluster activities in order to achieve a critical mass of interventions 
in any given locality for enhanced impact and decreased transaction costs in project implementation. 
Some of the clusters will be located in areas of high agricultural potential areas (agro-ecological 
potential, reliable availability of good quality water, non-saline soils or soils with limited salinity, decent 
state of infrastructure including farm to market roads, etc.). Since SARP will take longer to achieve 
tangible results working with individuals needing intense and wide-ranging accompanying measures, 
targeting the active rural poor in these areas will allow the project to be able to show some successes 
relatively soon and thus gain more traction. 
The demand-driven nature of the project will ensure that from the identified groups and 
individuals/households those interested will come forward; they will then be further screened against 
the eligibility criteria as well as co-financing arrangements below. 
A final strategic element in implementing the strategy will be the need for flexibility, which, given Iraq’s 
constantly shifting politico-economic landscape, will be of paramount importance. 
42 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
For the sake of simplicity, co-financing arrangements will be 10 percent (in kind or cash, as specified) 
across all activities. Training will be free of charge. This will be reviewed by supervision and 
implementation support missions, and assessed more thoroughly during mid-term review. Eligibility 
criteria will be determined during the start-up phase of the project by the service provider NGOs in 
collaboration with the Directorates of Agriculture. They will be validated with a sample of communities 
in each Governorate, and included in the Project Implementation Manual. 
Gender targeting strategy. The project has developed a very proactive strategy for the participation 
of women in project activities especially recognizing that women have received a significant setback in 
Iraq due to years of conflict and the rise in the power of religious parties which has led to the 
deterioration of women’s rights and confined many of them within the homestead in rural areas. The 
Project would have specific gender dis-aggregated targets and budget allocations, service providers 
with women staff to ensure  outreach to women and integrate gender aspects in all reports. Each of 
the components would have an approach to encourage the inclusion of women and specific targets 
have been identified for them. The identification of assets, skills training and enterprise development 
would be designed to address opportunities of relevance for women.  
Youth targeting strategy. The project would put in place special arrangements to target youth. This 
would be undertaken primarily by linking with youth associations and unions. Given the high 
unemployment rate among youth, opportunities for vocational and enterprise training, apprentice ship 
and job placement would be identified with the private sector especially in ancillary services that are 
critical for the agriculture sector. Those from among the young men and women who demonstrate 
their willingness and commitment to participate in innovative enterprise development would be 
provided technical assistance and access to assets. Exchange visits and learning tours would be 
identified for them where appropriate. The service providers would be given specific targets for 
participation of youth in different project activities. 
Additional notes on targeting. Targeting of women and youth will also be done through the 
Committee for Women and the Committee for Youth of the respective Provincial Councils in the 
Governorates. Women’s representation as elected Councillors on the Provincial Councils is 
increasing. In Muthanna, for example, seven out of 26 Councillors are women and the chairlady of the 
committees for women, youth, and NGOs, is a very active and knowledgeable lady, a true resource 
person for the women of the Governorate. 
It will not be possible for the project to work with the very poorest individuals and households. These 
tend to be unable to carry out any moderate physical activity and suffer from severe psychological 
distress. They are not at this point in time in a position to see any activity through over even a span of 
only several weeks because their perspectives are day-to-day and focused on bare survival. As is the 
case in other countries, IFAD would seek to target the “active poor”, namely, those with a minimum 
degree of motivation and vision of their own future. Such qualitative assessments cannot be carried 
out by referring exclusively to statistics and figures, but will be the one of the main tasks of the NGOs 
that will be recruited under the project. These NGOs will need to prove their track record in the field, 
their empirical knowledge of rural development activities, as well as, most importantly, their relatively 
intimate knowledge of the local population of farmers. They will be trained during the start-up phase of 
the project to enable them to carry out the duties expected from them as described in results-based 
contracts that SARP will sign with them. 
On the other hand, it will be desirable to work with a few newly selected lead farmers as trainers of 
trainers, for example, on vegetable production in plastic houses. This training would be cascaded to 
increase outreach and would be supervised by the NGOs in collaboration with agricultural extension 
officers.  
43 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Innovation. The NGOs recruited under SARP will be provided with performance incentives for any 
innovations they have been able to identify and pilot successfully. The specifics, including an 
acceptable and consensual working definition of what may be regarded as innovative in the rural 
context of southern Iraq, will be worked out during the start-up phase of the project. 
C.  Targeting Risk Mitigation 
There are a number of risks associated with the targeting strategy; the table below outlines these as 
well as proposed mitigating strategies. 
Table 4: Risks and Mitigation Strategies  
Risk 
Mitigation Strategy 
Subsidies and free input culture are a disincentive to 
diversify into high value crops and off-farm activities 
being promoted 
Awareness raising campaign coupled with 
demonstrations by successful farmers and farm 
models showing positive cost-benefit analyses 
Demand is mostly for the same well-known activities 
and either leads to over-supply or lack of impact 
Community facilitation will focus on teasing out project 
ideas for both proven and new activities 
Influential individuals skew targeting in their favour; 
iimplementation benefits better-off farm households 
providing their land to sharecroppers whose benefits 
are disproportionately small 
NGOs will be in the driver’s seat of implementing the 
project targeting strategy; community and technical line 
agency endorsement of targeted individuals, 
households and groups will be sought 
Productivity increases through mechanisation increase 
rural un- and underemployment 
Difficulty in identifying and recruiting NGO service 
providers and in their capacity to implement the SARP 
approach to rural development 
Technology and equipment will be small-scale and only 
decrease labour in the case of labour-saving 
technologies for women 
The start-up phase of the project may be up to 12 
months during which these issues will be addressed 
The security situation destabilises project 
implementation and does not allow for IFAD 
supervision missions to travel to the field 
NGO implementation through people who are known 
and trusted in rural communities as well as by local 
notables should decrease this risk; the project will turn 
to an HR company to hire nationals to carry out 
supervision missions – they will be trained by IFAD 
D.  Gender Strategy 
IFAD’s premise of economic empowerment of women leading to wider positive repercussions with 
respect to intra-household resource allocation, intra-household decision-making power, respect in 
community settings, social status and role in public affairs, etc., seems to hold true for the case of Iraq 
as it does for many other countries. SARP will therefore focus its gender mainstreaming efforts 
primarily at increasing target women’s incomes. Another lesson learned, which is that one of the key 
success factors of an effective gender strategy is the active involvement of men whenever possible 
and appropriate, equally applies. 
The project’s gender strategy includes a number of measures detailed further in Appendix 4. These 
include: 
  Gender targets of at least 40% for the total of project beneficiaries participants; 
  Working with NGOs at Governorate level that either specialise in, or have a proven track record 
of, working with women; 
  A tentative pre-selection of activities that is heavily skewed in favour of women’s direct 
participation (bee-keeping, vegetable farming, small livestock rearing, off-farm activities such as 
sewing, etc.); 
  Gender sensitive selection of interventions to maximise returns to women’s labour and support 
their social and economic empowerment; 
44 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
  The selection of productive infrastructure will need to be endorsed – separately – by women; 
  A gender inclusive programme management and implementation team; and 
  Adherence to best practice in gender sensitive monitoring and evaluation of programme impact.  
Table 5:  Women’s background characteristics (GoI 2008) 
N 
9,803 
4,872 
5,395 
8,680 
348 
191 
61 
3,360 
2,938 
2,345 
2,150 
1,663 
1,394 
825 
Characteristics  
Marital Status 
Single  
Currently married  
Widowed   
Divorced   
Separated   
Age 
15-19  
20-24  
25-29  
30-34  
35-39  
40-44  
45-49   
Place of residence 
Urban  
Rural  
Main region 
South/Centre  
Kurdistan  
Education 
No education  
Primary  
Intermediate  
Secondary  
Higher   
Literacy 
Attended at least intermediate  
Can read a whole sentence  
Can read part of a sentence  
Cannot read at all  
No card with required language   
Blind/visually impaired  
Employment 
12,722 
Currently not working  
652 
Professional/ Technical/ Managerial   
Clerical   
397 
Crafts women/ street sellers/ agriculture    710 
195 
Skilled manual   
Total 
14,675 
5,951 
3,384 
1,739 
3,515 
29 
57 
2,901 
5,823 
2,784 
1,506 
1,661 
12,345 
2,330 
45 
 percent 
35.9 
59.9 
2.4 
1.5 
0.4 
22.2 
19.5 
16.0 
15.0 
11.2 
10.0 
6.1 
66.5 
33.5 
86.2 
13.8 
17.3 
40.1 
20.0 
10.8 
11.7 
42.6 
23.1 
12.0 
22.0 
0.1 
0.3 
86.7 
4.4 
2.7 
4.8 
1.3 
100.0 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
SARP is IFAD’s first investment in Iraq and as such there are no country performance lessons to be 
derived yet. 
IFAD has supported Iraq in a grant financed regional agriculture research project implemented by 
ICARDA. The implementation of that grant in South Mossul faced major constraints because of the 
deteriorating security situation. It has, however, managed to successfully train farmers, staff members 
from other development projects, technical staff, extension staff, decision makers, and local 
administration staff, on community-based development approaches. Through the latter conflicting 
interests and objectives between crop and livestock farmers regarding the use of marginal communal 
land can be more easily managed because any decisions are normally based on broad local 
consensus rather than imposed from above. 
The project also found that Iraq was well ahead of other grant recipients in being able to develop feed 
blocks produced from agro-industrial by-products within a short period of time, and to assist other 
countries in doing the same. By 1999, more than 20 feed block manufacturing plants were established 
by the private sector in Iraq, some of which were family enterprises producing and selling feed blocks. 
The quality of production was monitored by the M & M Project. Total production was around 37,000 
tonnes, distributed among some 9,000 sheep owners. Livestock owners have readily accepted feed 
blocks. 
Demonstrations can be effective channels for transferring technology and knowledge. Results of a 
sample survey of 149 sheep owners in Iraq indicated that 94% of the participants in field 
demonstrations have used feed blocks at least once. Among crop farmers, a farm survey of 250 
barley farmers showed that all farmers who participated in the project demonstrations adopted an 
improved cultivar and/or fertilizer, whereas only 37% of field-day attendees and non-participant 
farmers adopted fertilizers. 
While few donors have worked in the agriculture sector in Iraq and most have concentrated on 
humanitarian interests or large infrastructure projects, there is relevant experience that can be 
gleaned from the experience of IFAD investment projects in NEN countries and from those of a few 
donors who have worked on some aspects of agriculture. Some of the important lessons that emerge 
from this analysis which are critical given the fragility of the country and the neglect of the agriculture 
sector include the following: 
  Recognising the strengths and weaknesses of collective action in developing countries: Assessing 
the capacity of farmer institutions is key for project activities that require collective or group action. 
However, recognizing that the cooperative movement has not been a strong movement in this 
part of the world will help in realistically identifying the limits of group action, avoid elite capture 
and at the same derive some of the benefits of group action such as reducing transactions cost, 
aggregating produce for collective marketing and bargaining and achieving economics of scale. 
 
In fragile, conflict prone situations, community-driven development (CDD) approaches contribute 
to reconstitute much needed social capital and to re-build trust within and between rural 
population groups. Even when development projects do not, strictly speaking, choose a CDD 
approach, they can usefully adopt some of its elements. This ensures that decisions on how to 
allocate project resources are based on participatory methodologies and on strong consensus at 
all levels including primary stakeholders in local communities. Implementation arrangements that 
feature this type of decision-making mechanism lead to increased transparency, stronger 
accountability and they ultimately play a vital role in terms of the longer-term empowerment of 
rural citizens. 
 
In the crop sector emphasis has to be on both production and post-harvest and marketing 
activities: Too many projects have by focusing only on enhancing production and ignoring the 
capacity of the farmer to undertake post-harvest and marketing activities have as a result failed to 
appreciably enhance incomes of farmers.  Farmers everywhere typically have a lagged response 
47 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
to production decisions as they are generally responding to the previous years market condition in 
making cropping decisions.  In this regard it is better to begin from the market backwards in 
guiding farmers on how to assess market demand.  
  Recognizing the risk mitigation strategies of small farmers and designing to encourage their 
participation: Small-scale farmers are willing to adopt improved production technologies, but they 
need to see results first. Given small scale farmers are risk averse, incentives to pay for the first 
year the cost of incremental inputs and services of the new technologies, are essential to help 
taking risk. 
  Capacity building and training in the adoption of new technologies and assets is key for the 
effective use of any investments and needs to be accompanied by a comprehensive course of 
training and skill development. There are many examples of different agencies providing assets to 
the rural communities and introducing new technologies without proper training in the use of those 
technologies.  
 
Importance of including the non-farm rural sector as key for employment generation and poverty 
alleviation in rural areas in Iraq: While the agriculture sector is key in rural areas, many of the 
districts in the south of the country have over the years significantly lost their potential for 
agriculture production due to reduction in water supply and increasing levels of soil salinity. These 
households have limited options within the agriculture sector and need to identify livelihood 
opportunities outside the agriculture sector. Youths in particular may be easier to attract into 
business opportunities downstream or outside of agriculture in the rural non-farm economy, 
particularly in densely populated rural and peri-urban areas. 
  Dedicated resources, well specified targets and staff are key for the participation of any 
marginalised target group such as women, women headed household, youth and other marginal 
groups. 
  To minimize (the risk of) élite capture, project implementation arrangements can set up and draw 
on multi-stakeholder partnership platforms which include civil society and in which government 
plays a prominent but not a dominant role. Iraq’s decades-long culture of top-down planning 
needs to evolve through practical exposure to participatory approaches. As the Iraqi government 
continues to decentralize it is expected that the Governorate, district and sub-district levels will 
constitute a mode conducive enabling environment for pro-poor service delivery. 
  Building a trusted relationship with government and seeking to advance a agriculture sector policy 
dialogue agenda based on implementation evidence should be given top priority (this is a lesson 
derived, e.g., from several UN initiatives); the current security level in Baghdad makes regular 
meetings between international staff and GoI staff very complicated and costly. 
  Value chain finance offers opportunities to provide greater value to clients at minimal costs and 
enhanced social impact. MFIs can introduce innovative approaches to value chain finance to 
serve both micro and small producers, enabling them to leverage relationship with suppliers and 
buyers in urban markets (USAID). 
48 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Project description 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
1. 
The Small Holder Agriculture Revitalization Project (SARP) would be implemented over a 7 
year period and would consist of three main components namely; (i) Climate Resilient Investments; (ii) 
Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification and (iii) Project Management & Coordination. The first year of 
the project would be a preparatory year and would begin by recruitment of staff, identifying service 
providers, preparation of the implementation manual and monitoring and evaluation arrangements. It 
would provide assistance in enhancing the capacity of the different implementing partners for project 
management and procurement. This first year of capacity building and implementation readiness is 
required due to the fact that this is IFAD’s first investment in Iraq and the Government and 
implementing partners are not familiar with project implementation modalities and processes.  
Furthermore, the country is suffering from extreme fragility and conflict and requires a flexible 
approach to project implementation and supervision arrangements. 
Component 1: Climate Resilient Investments 
2. 
This component includes two sub-components; (i) Irrigation Infrastructure schemes and (ii) 
Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening. The component is designed to deal with one 
of the major constraints in the country that centres around the growing scarcity of irrigation water and 
to assist the country with strengthening its capacity at the national level for monitoring climate change 
patterns and providing relevant information to key stakeholders and farmers to enable them to 
undertake adaptation and risk mitigation measures through an early warning system.  This component 
would integrate the funds available from ASAP and the Adaptation Fund (AF). 
Sub-Component 1.1: Modernization and rehabilitation of irrigation Infrastructure: The 
3. 
SARP project is to set examples for other schemes in the Governorates in dealing with reduced water 
availability and climate change. Because of the limited budget, SARP cannot do more than invest in a 
few schemes and hence demonstrate that a new type of agriculture based on new crops and high 
water efficiency is economically sustainable in the southern part of Iraq. One of the important 
approaches therefore is to integrate agricultural development activities of the project with the activities 
of the irrigation development. These activities should therefore be combined on the selected irrigation 
scheme for modernization. In this way new solutions can be found (other cropping patterns) that on 
the one hand lead to increased production, increased income and diversification (i.e. livestock 
development) and, on the other hand, to increased water efficiency and therefore towards a 
sustainable development. 
Based on the above it is concluded that the main emphasis of the subcomponent 1.1 would be 
4. 
to modernize existing schemes and therefore introducing efficient irrigation in small landholder 
irrigation systems with less emphasis on rehabilitation (although it may be so that some rehabilitation 
is required to ensure the water availability in the scheme). The project will support investments  mainly 
in those parts of the irrigation system that are considered tertiary and field level,  will remove the 
bottlenecks hampering the regular access to water in the main and secondary system and promote 
the establishment of village based profitable agri-business.   
It is important to state that Sub-component 1.1 and Sub-component 1.2 (i.e. institutional 
5. 
strengthening) should go hand in hand. Decentralized water management by water users is important 
for sustainable development. A combined approach is therefore promoted in SARP. Training of staff 
and farmers in modern water and irrigation management is provided for. A specific training is 
proposed to engineers from MWR and MoW on the modern irrigation techniques including an 
excursion to a location (or another country) where these techniques are applied. These latter are 
trainings related to the understanding and improvement of the selection process, the scheme 
development process and the facilitation of meetings with farmers.  
The Directorate of Water Resources together with the Ministry of Agriculture at the Governorate 
6. 
level and in consultation with the Ministry of Environment should identify the small scale irrigation 
systems to be rehabilitated.  During the first year of project selection, building up farmers’ organization 
49 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
and technical design including hydrological assessment will be conducted to select schemes.  A 
Water Users Associations law has been published in the official gazette on February 3, 2014. During 
Project Year 1, SARP will make a determination as to the most promising approach to be used to 
address the institutional dimensions of operation and maintenance of the tertiary and in-field irrigation 
systems at local level. Options to be considered relate to WUAs, revival of traditional systems, and/or 
a mixed approach. The final choice will be irrigation site specific and will need to be based on broad 
consensus and buy-in from farmers. Similarly, it will be necessary to ensure representation of 
irrigation farmers on the Advisory Committees at Governorate level, by Project Year 2 at the latest. 
7. 
The projected shift to high value and more labour intensive crops will be one of the key aspects 
to be evaluated in the prioritization of investment proposals as it will not only provide the basis for the 
assessment of the IRR but also of the potential for employment generation. 
Funds for irrigation development are limited under SARP as compared to the need for total 
8. 
modernization and rehabilitation in the Governorates. The SARP will address about 8312,5 ha on a 
total of 145,750 ha in the Governorates for which a budget of $ 11,100,000 is available (including 3 % 
contingencies) . It is important to realize that this budget include the funds from the ASAP that are 
intended to execute climate resilience related measures. On average an investment of $ 1200 per 
hectare is foreseen ($ 300/dunum). Currently rehabilitation is foreseen in 2 Governorates; with an 
estimated investment cost of $ 2,000,000 to $ 2,500,000 per scheme a total of 4 to 5 schemes can be 
implemented with an average size of 1,600 to 2,100 ha.  
Sub-Component 1.2: Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening; Climate 
9. 
Change poses a growing threat to the agriculture sector especially because of its impact on the length 
of the growing season, reduction in precipitation and increasing water scarcity.  The Ministry of 
Environment is interested in developing a climate change adaptation strategy for dealing with the 
agriculture sector The Ministry of Agriculture has established an Agro Meteorological Monitoring 
Network in Baghdad with weather stations installed across the country from which it receives regular 
information on weather patterns. This network includes 40 remote monitoring stations with 
communication via EUMETSAT Satellite. In addition to the remote stations, two receive sites have 
been installed to collect data in the central locations of Baghdad and Erbil. As of 2015 the network has 
expanded to over 100 Agro-Met stations. The system measures wind speed and direction, solar 
radiation and sunshine hours, barometric pressure, etc. Some of the parameters also include dew 
point, precipitation, soil temperature, soil moisture, leaf Wetness and evapotranspiration. The project 
would upgrade the receive system and install an additional six remote monitoring stations needed for 
providing greater resolution in the data.  There is a team of young technical specialists working on 
receiving and analyzing the data.  The team has received initial training regarding the operation, 
maintenance, troubleshooting and installation of the system. The staff needs additional training and 
the project would arrange technical training for the staff to strengthen their programmatic and 
analytical capacity.  
10.  The project would also assist in the dissemination of the information relevant for the extension 
centres, research stations and farmers. The project would assist in information analysis and 
dissemination so that the farmers can benefit from an early warning system.  In developing the early 
warning system, the project would assist the Agro Meteorological Monitoring Network to work closely 
with farmers to understand how they assess and identify changes in weather patterns, growing 
seasons, planting and harvesting dates and other information useful for them. The technical needs for 
developing the system would be identified including identifying the most effective mechanisms to 
disseminate the information including SMS messaging, radio broadcasting, television, lead farmer 
contacts, etc. SARP would provide support to this component through the use of the Adaptation Fund.  
Component 2: Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification 
11.  This component would consist of two subcomponents; (i) Crop, Livestock & Off-Farm 
Development and (ii) Skills Development & Capacity Building. The purpose of this component would 
be to assist poor households enhance their level of food security and diversify their incomes from 
50 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Project description 
agriculture as well as improve their skills and assets to enable them to engage in off-farm income 
generating activities.  
12.  Sub-Component 2.1: Crop, Livestock & Off-Farm Development: For crop production, the 
project interventions would focus on enhancing the productivity of high value crops and vegetables 
and other horticulture crops such as date production.  The project would provide smallholder farmers, 
women and farmer associations and cooperatives, grants for enhancing crop and livestock 
productivity. The packages could include assistance in installing improved irrigation systems, small 
greenhouses for high value vegetable production, apiculture, fisheries and livestock packages for 
women from poor households, etc., identified on a demand driven basis by the smallholder men and 
women farmers and their groups or associations. 
13.  To replenish the depleted stock of livestock, which can be an important source of nutrition, food 
security and income increase, the project would offer 5 heads of sheep/goats, one cow and 100 hens 
as an income and nutrition security package. The targeted families could choose one of these 
package based on their capacity to manage the package.  Ewes or cow delivered to farmers would be 
carefully selected from those at late stage of pregnancy to give birth within 2-3 months. The poultry 
package would include hens, which are at least 15 weeks of age and disease free.  The package of 
support would include simple equipment for animal feeding and milking and training on animal 
management and nutrition. The project would work closely with the Directorate of Livestock to train 
staff in AI and vaccinations.   
14.  The off-farm activities could include a wide range of enterprises based on local demand but 
typically are expected to include for women establishment of small retail stores, bakeries, food 
catering and processing businesses, beauty salons, handicrafts, stitching, etc. For men, it could 
include kits that would assist them in gaining apprenticeships as carpenters, plumbers, electrician or 
mobile outlets or repair, etc. The groups would include at least 5 men or women to undertake 
collection production and marketing activities and could consist of Unions, Cooperatives or informal 
associations or groups.  The beneficiaries would be given an asset and other needed inputs under 
this sub-component.  The value of the asset and inputs would, on average, be around USD 1500 per 
person or USD 10,000 for groups or associations. The upper limit could be relaxed if justified by a 
higher number of beneficiaries. Beyond this limit the beneficiaries would have to contribute their own 
funds in cash or kind. It is expected that the project would benefit around 7400 households to get a 
productive asset that would increase their incomes on a sustainable basis. 
15.  Skills Development & Capacity Building: The project would provide several types of 
trainings; (i) technical and business training associated with the provision of the asset; (ii) training in 
climate resilient approaches and technologies and (iii) vocational training for young men and women; 
(iv) management training for community groups and farmer organizations and (v) Institutional capacity 
building for Government extension staff including learning and exposure visits. It is expected that the 
project would training around 4400 individuals in the project area of which at least 1400 would be 
women. 
16.  Technical & Business Training related to Assets: The first type of training would be provided 
to all those who have been selected to receive an asset for on-farm or off-farm activities.  This would 
include training in technical, managerial and business aspects and would precede all provision of 
assets.  Community groups and associations would also be given training in management and 
business plan development for the operation and maintenance of collectively owned assets such as 
post-harvest facilities, food and dairy processing, apiculture, plastic houses, fisheries, etc. The project 
would provide business development services to individuals, groups and cooperatives interested in 
engaging in livestock enterprises, fodder and feed production, dairy processing or additional 
businesses which can support the livestock sector or related to livestock products.  The training 
programme would include training on basic animal nutrition, health and management, production of 
hygienic milk, fattening, early weaning, Para-Vet skill, and inclusion of by-products in animal feeding, 
dairy processing (cheese, ghee, yogurt), mechanical wool shearing, bee keeping, and poultry raising. 
Women would be trained in poultry management, dairy processing. 
51 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
17. 
In all cases, each beneficiary would be assisted in closely examining the economic and 
technical feasibility of their enterprises and the monitoring of the expenditure and revenue streams. 
There are several NGOs in the project areas which have the capacity to provide these trainings and 
hand holding support on an individual and collective basis. UNIDO has been providing support in one 
of the project governorates in Thi Qar through its Enterprise Development and Investment Promotion 
Programme since 2008. UNIDO has maintained its presence in South Iraq and has indicated its 
willingness to provide support to the project. 
18.  Training in climate resilient approaches and technologies: The second type of trainings the 
project would provide would be for the promotion and adoption of climate resilient approaches and 
technologies that would enhance crop and livestock production. The project would promote crop 
rotations away from monoculture to a shift to high value fruit and vegetable crops.  The training would 
also include improved irrigation practices and on-farm water management to deal with the growing 
water scarcity in the area. The project would provide trainings for the introduction of saline resistant 
wheat, rice and fodder crop varieties, which have been developed in Iraq but have not been widely 
disseminated. Al Hussein wheat variety which is characterized by its tolerance to the salinity. Methods 
of dry cultivation of rice could also be experimented with by use of drought tolerant rice genotypes and 
growing rice under sprinkler irrigation or use of intensive rice systems (IRS) to increase productivity 
and efficient water use. 
19.  The training would also focus on the date palm which is the most common and widely cultivated 
plant in the arid regions of the Middle East and is an important crop for smallholders in Iraq. Pests 
such as Dubas Bug, Borers, and Fungal diseases directly affect the product but others such Red 
Palm Weevil (RPW) Rhynchophorus ferrugineus which have invaded the country, pose a real threat to 
the date palm wealth in Iraq. The project would collaborate with the Food and Agriculture Organization 
to use their experience of Training of Trainers for the surveillance, monitoring and control of the 
disease through using Integrated Pest Management.  
20.  The interventions would also include support to livestock extension and health services 
including training of small ruminant holders in animal nutrition, animal health, integration of livestock 
into farming systems and the valorisation of crop residues in improved livestock feed. In designing the 
training programme, the project would design a full package of technology for the introduction of 
modern animal management. The package would include introduction of Artificial Insemination or 
improved rams for enhancing breeding rates, animal health, selection, early weaning, balanced ration, 
feeding alternative feed resources, increase twinning rates with hormone therapy.  Increase the 
depleted stock of livestock in the irrigated areas to maximize the return from land especially by 
growing forages and grazing animals on crop residues.  The project would focus on training of animal 
nutrition and use of alternative animal feed resources through preparation of feed-blocks, silage and 
improved fodder crops. 
21.  Vocational Training for ancillary services to support on-farm activities: The third type of 
training would support the young men and women in these governorates who have very limited 
opportunities for productive employment within the agriculture sector or are under-employed or 
unemployed but motivated to pursue vocational training or practical training to establish their own 
income-generating activities (IGAs) or enterprises. The types of IGAs would be based on local 
opportunities and demand and could include operation of farm machinery services, rural handicrafts 
and small-scale rural services such as training as para-vets, operators of agriculture machinery, 
operation of drip irrigation systems, generators, hatcheries, or carpentry, electricians and plumbing. 
The Government’s vocational centres could also be used in providing support for the training.  
22.  Strengthening Community Organizations: The project would support the range of small-
farmer unions, associations and cooperatives that exist in the project area. Some of them like the 
Beekeepers Association, Poultry Union and Youth Association have gradually grown in the area but 
have been provided very little support or capacity building. The Poultry Union has in particular been 
assisting small poultry producers with undertaking poultry production. The services that they have 
provided has enabled their members to capitalise on economies of scale and reduce transaction costs 
52 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Project description 
and become much more competitive.  Women’s groups have also organized into small groups in a 
few cases but have had few opportunities to organize and grow.  The management and members of 
these groups would be provided tailor made support under the project. Some small local NGOs which 
have been working closely in providing safety nets to the poor as well as a range of training and social 
sector services would be strengthened to support local communities on a sustainable basis. 
23.  Public Sector institutional Strengthening: The project would provide opportunities for the 
staff from the Directorate of Agriculture in the project governorates to strengthen their capacity to 
deliver extension services especially crop production and livestock services. The staff of the relevant 
Directorates would be provided special training and learning opportunities and exposure visits.  The 
training would include capacity for diagnose crop and animal disease analysis, disease surveillance, 
AI, impact of climate change and communication with farmers. Special TOTs would be conducted to 
ensure that the knowledge is transmitted to famers. The effective use of information on climate 
change to enable farmers to adopt suitable mitigation or adaptation measures would be incorporated 
in the training programmes. The project would also provide support to upgrade one diagnostic animal 
health laboratory in each governorate; these labs would enhance the veterinarian ability in animal 
disease diagnostic. The project would enhance the capacity of the cattle AI lab to introduce AI 
services for sheep and goats as well. To assist farmers on control the external parasites, the project 
would offer 6 mobile dips  for sheep and goats.   
24.  The National Programme Coordinator would develop the training programme for the public 
sector agencies in coordination with the officers of the Directorate from the governorate. It is expected 
that 300 people from different agencies could avail of specific trainings in addition to the learning and 
exposure visits. South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) would be explored as a tool to 
understanding how countries in the region with similar socio-economic profile have resolved some of 
the challenges in agriculture and rural development. These areas could include understanding how 
different countries have dealt with some of the following issues important for Iraq; (i) climate change 
issues and developed early warning systems (Nepal and Bangladesh); (ii) implemented integrated 
pest management approaches especially for the elimination of the Red weavil in date palm (Iran and 
Kuwait); (iii) development of the cooperative movement (Morocco).  
Component 3: Project Management & Coordination 
25.  This component would be designed to support the implementation of project activities. 
Government and IFAD would jointly finance the component with government only providing in-kind 
support. While the Government staff would assume the key responsibility for project implementation at 
the national and Governorate level, IFAD would provide additional support through recruitment of 
dedicated service providers, technical assistance and provide all logistical and operational support for 
the implementation of the project.  This component would pay for all incremental costs of project 
management including operational costs, technical assistance, monitoring and evaluation, financial 
management, gender audit and mainstreaming, and knowledge management. 
53 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 5: 
arrangements 
Institutional aspects and implementation 
A.  Approach 
The context in Iraq warrants a differentiated and flexible operational approach (see 
1. 
Attachment 1) to project management, project roll out and supervision because of its classification as 
one of the most fragile countries. Implementation and supervision procedures would be fine-tuned as 
required and keep in mind the evolving security conditions in consultation with FSU/ UNDSS. The 
project has kept the design simple and has specified procedures that recognize the challenges of 
working in the current context. Recognizing the limited capacity of local public and private sector 
institutions, the project implementation arrangements count on the combined capacity of both public, 
private and community institutions to assist in project implementation.  The supervision arrangements 
also take the local context into account and propose arrangements, which would ensure that the 
teams assigned to undertake supervision can travel to the field given the heightened travel restrictions 
in some of the areas.  
2. 
The  quality of fiduciary management or social, environmental and climate safeguards would 
not be compromised and would strictly comply with IFAD and Government guidelines. The key here 
will be the establishment of a group of Iraqi service providers (individual and/or organisations  that will 
receive capacity development (with regard to IFAD requirements and standards especially for 
fiduciary and M & E matters) and “on-the –job” experience through participating ( as trainees) in IFAD 
Implementation Support and Supervision missions within the region). 
3. 
The project also makes a sharp distinction between development assistance and humanitarian 
assistance and would only intervene in development interventions and would refer all cases qualifying 
for safety net programmes to the Directorate of Social Welfare or to the International Office of 
Migration (IOM) which is working on a community stabilization programme and supports host 
communities as well.  
The approach adopted recognises that GoI is preparing a decentralization policy. In this regard 
4. 
the design of SARP focuses on governorate level institutional capacity this reading relevant 
organisations to take up responsibilities that may be assigned as and when the decentralisation policy 
is implemented. 
Guiding principles for engaging in the most fragile situations: The project design and 
5. 
implementation approach incorporates the guiding principles for engaging in the most fragile 
situations namely maintaining a focus on the following: (a) risk management and resilience; (b) focus 
on root causes (within IFAD's mandate and comparative advantage); (c) gender mainstreaming and 
targeting; (d) institution-building to promote trust and social cohesion; (e) flexible and responsive 
resources, instruments and approaches; (f) strategic and complementary partnerships; and (g) results 
measurement and learning. Programme activities would enhance the resilience of target communities 
and enable them to manage risk and would be resilient to the effects of conflict and other shocks.  
Thus for project management and supervision reliance would be placed on local institutions and 
service providers. In addressing some of the underlying roots causes of the fragile situation, the 
project would foster inclusive community-based organizations and in partnership with public sector 
institutions at the governorate level capitalise on the decentralised structures to encourage effective 
and responsive local government service delivery. The project would with communities on long-term 
development programmes to achieve long-term development outcomes. It is expected that the 
funding to the governorates through the project would serve to highlight their credibility with the 
people and build a relationship of trust so critical for dealing with the root cause of the conflict and 
strife in the country. 
Strategic and complementary partnerships: The project design recognizes that partnerships 
6. 
help IFAD to manage risks and enable it to stay engaged in more challenging contexts because they 
provide the means to address root causes of fragility that lie outside IFAD's areas of comparative 
advantage. The IFAD Partnership Strategy would guide IFAD’s use of partnerships in fragile 
situations. Partnerships with the Rome-based agencies (RBAs), would be prioritized, as would 
partnerships with other development partners with strong implementing capacity, such as trusted civil 
55 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
society organizations.  The project design includes assistance partnership with UNIDO to provide 
support in management of micro-enterprises, with FAO in disseminating the IPM technologies for date 
palm and synergy with UNICEF which is providing complementary social sector services to the people 
of the marshlands.  The project also envisages using the local farmer Unions, Poultry Unions and the 
private sector involved with vegetable marketing, dairy processing and packing and processing of 
dates. Partnerships with humanitarian agencies specially IOM, WHO, UNICEF, WFP, etc.,  and civil 
society are included as a key strategy for bridging the humanitarian-development gap.  
Achieving, measuring and learning from results: The project recognizes that given the 
7. 
hardships suffered by the local communities, it would be critical to design investments that are simple, 
easy to implement and show quick results and demonstrable impact. This is key for the credibility of 
IFAD, local governments which have been recently decentralised  and to justify the incurring higher 
levels of risk and higher cost of implementation. The need to learn from IFAD's engagement would be 
crucial not just for the organization but for Governorates which could replicate the experience over 
time. Given the limited capacity, the project would explore options to develop monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) processes and impact assessment methodologies that are simple and cost-effective 
yet capable of capturing coherent data on results. The outcome and impact level assessment would 
also include indicators on institutional development and women's empowerment, given the centrality 
of these issues to fragility.  
8. 
Preparatory Phase: A sequential approach would be adopted to ensure that implementation 
arrangements are in place prior to the start of the project activities on the ground. For this purpose, 
much of the first year of the project would be used to undertake preparatory activities, prepare 
implementation manual, recruit and second project staff, establish the various steering and advisory 
committees, recruit and brief service providers, guide staff on IFAD procedures and processes, 
prepare work plans, etc. The project would have four stages: Stage 1: Preparatory and Diagnostic 
Phase (See Attachment 2 for further details): This would entail recruitment and training of project staff, 
holding participatory dialogues with local communities to assess constraints, needs and market 
opportunities and coordination with UN agencies based in Basra to identify opportunities for 
collaboration and synergy; Stage 2: Institutional Development: The investments in infrastructure, 
management capacity and feasibility studies and skills would be used as an entry point around which 
individuals and institutions would be strengthened and management and entrepreneurial capacity of 
local people would be built; Stage 3: Production and Livelihood Intensification: This stage would begin 
with providing assets to individual households and groups and guiding them through the process to 
initiate sustainable livelihoods and links with markets; Stage 4: Sustainability and Exit: This phase 
would be expected to be reached when the individuals, institutions and rural enterprises need less 
and less support from the project and start becoming sustainable through profits that accrue. 
9. 
Participatory and Demand Driven Approach: The implementation approach of the project 
would be demand driven and would be follow a process in which individual and group beneficiaries 
would participate in selecting their activities. A diagnostic process would be adopted and implemented 
by the service providers hired especially to discuss individual and group investment opportunities and 
develop plans based on their potential, aspirations and capacities. The project would tailor project 
activities and services to the needs of the target beneficiaries and ensure their capacity to operate 
and manage the services for long-term sustainability. The project would ensure close partnership with 
each of the beneficiaries and rural community institutions to clearly identify the roles and 
responsibilities of each, the terms of partnership agreed by both parties, implementing arrangements, 
roles and responsibilities of each and if required agree on MOUs with Unions, Associations, groups 
and individuals to clarify expectations and agree on targets and monitoring and reporting 
responsibilities.  
B.  Organizational framework 
10.  National Level: The Ministry of Agriculture would be the lead agency responsible for the 
implementation of the project.  The project would have a Project Steering Committee (PSC) the 
composition of which will be: (maximum of 13 people with at least 4 women): 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Chair:  Deputy Minister of Agriculture 
Director General of Environment 
Director General of Water Resources 
56 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
Director General, Ministry of Planning 
Director General of Planning , Ministry of Agriculture 
3 technical resource people (nominated by the Chair) including women 
Technical members as required – including women 
Project Manager (Secretary) 
11.  The PSC would meet at least once twice a year to approve the programme and provide 
guidance on key aspects.  The National Programme Coordinator would be the Secretary of the PSC.   
12.  A Project Management Team (PMT) would be established in Baghdad and be responsible for 
overseeing implementation of the project. The PMT would be led by a National Project Coordinator 
and would be assisted by a Financial Officer, a Procurement Officer, a Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist who would coordinate the reports from the Governorates to present quarterly statistical 
reports and annual progress reports on the project. The PMT would also include a Climate Change 
Adaptation Specialist (CCAS) who would assist in developing an early warning system based on 
discussing with farmers what would be relevant information to provide them.  
13.  Governorate level: The Director of the Directorate of Agriculture would assume the overall 
responsibility for the project, at the governorate level.  At the Governorate level, the structure would 
include an Advisory Committee that would advise the Department of Agriculture in each Governorate 
on key technical, social and institutional aspects of the project during implementation. The 
Governorate level Advisory Committees will comprise: (max 11 people with at least 4 women): 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Chair: Governorate Director of Agriculture 
Governorate Director of Environment 
Governorate Director of Water Resources 
The Governorate Council representative (a woman) 
Business Representatives of 3 key Value chains (including women) 
NGO representatives ( 2) including women 
vii. 
Representative of Agriculture University  
 The Department of Agriculture could co-opt key resource persons as and when required to 
14. 
provide guidance and advice.  
15.  A Governorate Coordination Team (GCT) would implement and coordinate project activities. 
The GCT would have a dedicated Governorate Coordinator who would be responsible for day to day 
implementation in each governorate. The staff of the GCT would include a Training and Community 
Organizer and a Monitoring & Evaluation Officer.  The Directorate of Water Resources would 
implement the irrigation investments. The team would be supported by a competitively recruited 
service provider who would be selected from local NGOs or private sector firms that would be 
responsible for identifying the target group and supporting them in the implementation of the various 
project activities in coordination with the Department of Agriculture Extension.  Short Term Technical 
Assistance would be used for any specific assistance during project implementation.  The 
Government would provide all key staff and IFAD would pay an additional stipend of 30%. However, 
the service provider and technical assistance would be supported by IFAD financing. The project 
would also provide vehicles, office equipment, operation and maintenance and support all field 
activities.   
57 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Attachment 1 SARP Flexibility Matrix 
SARP – Flexibility Matrix – southern Iraq is a fragile project area 
Area 
Scope/Approach 
Project Area 
Rating 
Fixed 
√ 
Firm 
Flexible 
Comments/Discussion 
Institutional  Development 
decentralisation  and  policy 
changes 
Empowerment  of 
groups 
through 
institutional development 
target 
local 
Irrigation Modernisation 
Scheme Governance 
Rural Enterprises 
size 
type 
Market  assessment  /Value 
Chains 
management 
Business 
capacity building 
Schedule 
Time allocated 
Project Year 1 
Remaining 6 years 
Cost 
Project Size 
Unit Costs 
Quality 
Fiduciary Requirements 
Assessing 
Standards 
Fiduciary 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
58 
in 
to 
Need to make provision for studies for future 
projects/up-scaling  
Need  to  focus  on  governorate/scheme  level 
institutions;  need 
to  seize  opportunities 
emerging  from  institutional,  legal  and  policy 
changes  to  promote  bottom-up  participatory 
planning and advocate for rural development 
During  Project  Year  1,  the  Training  and 
Community  Organizer  will  work  with  local 
identify 
the  governorates 
partners 
opportunities  for  investing in  local  institutions 
and elaborate an action plan for empowering 
target groups 
Clear emphasis on modern efficient methods 
– must be selected for individual schemes 
Evidence from fragile states indicates that we 
need  to  work  with  the  each  scheme  in  line 
with local people and conditions but with clear 
criteria/guidelines 
This needs to be implemented with sympathy 
to market and the needs of the target group 
Ceilings established– to be reviewed annually 
to  establish 
Use  VC/market  assessment 
viable options 
Key  models 
first  – 
progressive  coverage  of  potential  irrigation 
based systems 
This  will  be  critical  –  need  to  use  business 
mentors/on the job training etc 
to  be  assessed 
Schedule  established,  IFAD  need  to  support 
and review actively in this first year 
To  be  established  during  year  one  – 
to 
particular 
their 
supporting/reviewing  AWPBs  during 
preparation 
to  be  paid 
  attention 
Focus will be on using funds effectively 
The  PMT  with  IFAD  support  will  need  to 
clearly  establish  “real/actual  “  costs  during 
year 1 and then annually 
IFAD standards to be meet 
Need to i) establish an IFAD fiduciary team in 
country 
ii) use output/milestone based contacts rather 
than input measurement ones 
iii) consider use of GIS/digital evidence 
iv)  recognise  scanned  authorised  documents 
in  case  of  damage  to  project  facilities  – 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Targeting 
√ 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
√ 
M & E Instruments 
√ 
to  social  cohesion  within 
provide for digital back-up 
Standards have been set – need to recognise 
need 
irrigation 
schemes  that  may  mean  “larger”  farmers 
have to be included 
We need to “invest” in capacity building to get 
output/outcome  concepts 
introduced  and 
used 
During  Year  1  need 
to  assess  what 
instruments are practical and useful – can we 
use  satellite  imagery  to  assess  irrigation 
schemes 
Definitions 
Fixed 
Firm 
Flexible 
Clearly established parameter – set in project instruments - changed only through 
amendment to financing agreement 
A  well  founded  parameter  –  able  to  be  changed  during  mid-term  review(s)or 
through formal management letters from IFAD to GoI 
A variable parameter that can be amended as and when required through AWPBs, 
exchange  of  letters  between  the  project  management  unit  and  IFAD    these  may 
need to be confirmed during implementation  support/supervision missions  – with 
regard to fiduciary matters may require prior review by IFAD Finance Department 
59 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Attachment 2: Implementation Plan Preparatory Year - 2018 
No 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
Action 
Project Processing Activities 
GoI  Ratification  of  Project  and  Financing  Agreement  –  legal  opinion,  cabinet 
approval, parliament approval ( may take some time) – likely to take 3 months  
Schedule 
Responsible  Comments 
Dec 2017  
GoI 
needs  good  follow-up  by  MoF  and  MoP 
there is a clear mechanism for grants and 
loans  including  getting  to  negotiations  – 
can a copy be sent to IFAD 
Project Budget Approved by GoI – 2018 AWPB- in the GoI investment budget 
Entry into Force of IFAD Financing Agreement(s) 
IFAD Implementation Support Mission Schedule 
Identification  and  capacity  building  of  IFAD  Iraq  Implementation  Support  and 
Review Team 
Opening of Bank Accounts 
Authorizing Signatories 
Project Management Component 3 
Project Start-Up Workshop 
Joint Project Review and Realignment Workshop 
i) 
ii) 
Key lessons learnt 
Project  reporting  formats  &  guidelines  including  where  English 
versions are needed 
2.3 
Appointment of Project Teams 
1)  National 
2)  Muthanna 
3)  Missan 
4)  Thi Qar 
5)  Qadisiya 
June 2017 
Jan  2018 
Feb,  Jun  and 
Oct 2018 
Feb 18 
MoF & M 
GoI & IFAD 
IFAD 
Develop local team for fiduciary oversight 
Jan 18 
Jan 18 
MoF 
MoF & IFAD 
Feb 2018 
June  18 
PMT 
PMT & IFAD 
for 
June  17 
PMT 
Oct 17 for GCT 
MoA 
Review  2018  AWPB  and  align  if  needed 
project docs 
To meet 2019 GOI AWPB schedule 
2.4 
2.5 
Preparation of detailed AWPB (incl procurement plan) – GoI  
Preparation of PIM ( in Arabic) 
Jun 18 
April 2018 
2.6 
Financial management system 
i) 
ii) 
Selection/procurement/confirmation 
Establishment  of  reporting  systems  for  GoI  and  IFAD  including 
automatic generation of withdrawal applications 
Installed 
operating 
March 18 
and 
by 
60 
with 
from 
PMT & GCT 
PMT 
support 
IFAD 
PMT 
MoA & IFAD 
with 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
2.7 
2.8 
Capacity building for PMT & GCT teams 
iii) 
Preparation 
assessment) Matrix 
of 
Implementation 
organisation 
(capacity 
/responsibility 
Sept 18 
PMT 
1)  Government agencies 
2)  Service organisations 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
IFAD Project Implementation Capacity Building  
Logframe and SARP 
SARP Knowledge Management and M & E 
Capacity  Building  PMT  and  GCT  Learning  Tour 
programme in eg Pakistan 
Building  the  SARP  Project  Implementation  Manual  –  learning  by 
doing 
Carry out market research on potential service providers, suppliers 
training  needs 
and  contractors 
assessment  
tender  procedure 
including 
IFAD 
iv) 
to 
v) 
During 
Implementation 
support 
missions 
IFAD 
PMT 
with 
2.9 
Establish SARP procurement procedures in line with GoI and IFAD 
 June 18 
2.10  Prepare on-line procurement/tendering capacity building ( service providers and 
Sept 18 
contractors to complete to be eligible to submit tenders 
with 
PMT 
IFAD review 
PMT/GCT 
On-going requirement 
2.11  Establish procedures for linking irrigation schemes to grant package processes 
4 
4.1 
Component  1 Climate Resilient Investments 
Establish  and  have  approved  scheme  identification  and  selection  criteria  and 
procedures 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
Focus on optimal use of available water 
Consultation with farmers re cropping patterns wanted 
Review water supply and drainage 
Water permits 
April 18 
October 2017 
PMT 
PMT 
IFAD 
with 
As developed in PDR Workshop 
4.2 
4.3 
etc 
Based on agreed criteria develop shortlist of schemes 
January 2018 
Review/complete/up-date initial feasibility studies of selected schemes including 
consultations with farmers regarding cropping patterns 
Thru 2018 
PMT  &  GCTs 
with IFAD 
GCTs 
4.4 
Build up water users associations  including design matters 
4.5 
4.6 
Tender first round of irrigation works 
Engage with WUAs 
from 
On-going 
June 2018 
asap 
On-going 
PMT 
Support  of  a  experienced 
engineer 
schemes) 
irrigation 
(community  based  modern 
61 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
3 
3.1 
Component 2 Enterprises 
Analysis Rural enterprise economy and farming systems 
3.2 
Market Studies ( I per Gov) 
May 18 
Oct 18 
PMT 
with 
IFAD support 
PMT 
Key  enterprise  to  be  selected  –  but  not 
same for each governorate 
3.3 
Targeting  Guidelines  developed  based  on existing  data  bases  (  as  much  as  is 
possible) 
June 18 
3.4 
3.5 
Grant mechanisms established and approved 
Specifications/ToR for Governorate Service Providers developed 
3.6 
Business plan templates and guidelines developed 
3.7 
Capacity Building Community Mobilisation and enterprise development 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
PMT and GCT 
Implementing partners 
Service providers 
Business management training needs and modules 
3.8 
Finalise Service Provider(s) ToR and tender initiated 
June 18 
December 
2017 
March 2018 
Form  March 
2018 
with 
from 
with 
from 
PMT 
support 
IFAD 
PMT 
PMT 
support 
IFAD 
PMT  &  GCT 
with IFAD 
Implementatio
n 
Support 
missions 
To be taken up by service providers 
September 
2018 
PMT & GCTs 
62 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge 
management 
Overview 
This appendix describes the planning, monitoring, evaluation and knowledge management 
1. 
arrangements for the SARP Project. The Project Design team has taken on board the guidance 
provided by IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) and the revised RIMS 
framework refined in 201731, to prepare the Project Log-frame and identify the monitoring and 
evaluation guidelines. The Log-Frame uses the output, outcome and impact indicators relevant for the 
current project. However, at the goal level the change in asset ownership and changes in child 
nutrition status are still considered the best proxy indicators to measure a households progress out of 
poverty and have been used. 
For SARP, in line with lessons learnt 32 from fragile country development situations the following 
2. 
key principles need to be applied in the development of the IFAD approach outlined below: 
(a) 
The safety of stakeholders, partners and communities need to be fully respected 
(b)  With limited access monitoring trust is essential – without trust no monitoring 
system can be set up 
(c)  We need to be gender sensitive  
(d)  Our methodology needs to be adaptable to the situation recognising that we will 
most likely be dealing with patchy data/information 
(e)  Our accountability systems need to reflect the situation and be sensitive to the 
challenges that society is facing in the four project area governorates.  
Planning 
The first year would be a preparatory year in which the project would after recruitment of staff 
3. 
conduct a Start-up Workshop, with the aim of sensitizing and training the MoA, the Project 
Management Team and the Governorate Management Teams and other potential implementing 
partners to the project objectives and scope. At this workshop, time would be allocated to familiarize 
all participating partners with the planning and annual work plan process as well as the monitoring 
and evaluation system of IFAD. The staff of the project would also be provided an opportunity to learn 
about IFAD’s systems of procurement, financial management, annual work plans and monitoring and 
evaluation. Given that this is IFAD’s first investment in Iraq, the first six months would be spent in 
establishing the project implementation arrangements and hiring the service providers for 
implementation and project supervision. During this initial period, the staff would also be prepared in 
the preparation of the Project Implementation Manual and understanding and making the 
arrangements for the baseline survey and putting in place a monitoring and evaluation system.   
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and corresponding procurement plans would be the 
4. 
project’s principal planning instruments. The AWPB would be used as a tool for specifying 
implementation priorities, identifying the financial and procurement requirements and establishing a 
work plan for the staff. The AWPB would constitute the basis for release of funds and for financial 
management. The National Project Coordinator in the PMT would assume the overall responsibility for 
the preparation of the AWP/B.  He/She would coordinate with the Governorate Coordinators for the 
purpose. The AWPB would be prepared at a time which would enable its inclusion in the Government 
of Iraq’s budget each year and would be submitted six months prior to the start of the next Financial 
Year in June each year. The AWP/B would be submitted to IFAD for its no-objection prior to its 
31 Taking IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) to the Next Level. IFAD. 2017 
32 “ A quick Guide to Monitoring , Evaluation, Accountability and Learning in Fragile Contexts” Oxfam, 2014 and 
“Evaluating in settings of fragility” DAC Network on Development Evaluation- 16th Meeting 12 – 13 February 2014 
63 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and Learning, Knowledge Management  
inclusion in the Government budget. Appendix 6 gives some more details of the planning, monitoring 
and evaluation aspects of the project. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
The Project’s Logical Framework provides indicators for Project implementation along with their 
5. 
corresponding means of verification. The M&E system is expected to generate quantitative and 
qualitative information on the project’s performance in a form that would compare physical progress 
against the planned targets and allow assessment of performance and undertake any remedial action 
if required. The project uses IFAD’s revised RIMS framework to enhance the measurement of IFAD's 
results at the outcome level. The monitoring and evaluation indicators have been disaggregated by 
gender. The project team would fine-tune the progress and performance and impact indicators of the 
project at the Start-Up Workshop with support from IFAD, if required. The Project Management Team 
would define targets and indicators for subsequent years annually as part of the internal planning 
processes and build on the experience gained as the project evolves. 
6. 
The overall responsibility for the M&E activities would be assumed by the National Project 
Coordinator who would be assisted by the Monitoring and Evaluation Officer at the national level and 
the M&E officers at the Governorate level in preparing all progress and monitoring reports. Given the 
limited capacity for monitoring and evaluation overall in the country especially among the NGOs and 
some of the local partners who are expected to partner with the project, the project would select 
strong monitoring and evaluation staff and provide them proper guidance on IFAD’s RIMS and provide 
guidance on the statistical and narrative report formats.  
A Third Party would be contracted to undertake a Baseline Survey that would be conducted 
7. 
during the first year of the Project. IFAD would provide the PMT guidelines in developing the terms of 
reference and the household questionnaire for the baseline survey. Assistance would be sought from 
IFAD’s newly established Strategic Planning and Impact Assessment Division if required.  The LFA 
has Beneficiary Feedback Surveys planned for year 3 and year 6. These are designed to assess 
progress and the initial assumption regarding the intermediate outcomes such as adoption rates and 
the revenue stream that is begging to emerge. The lFA specifies which of the indictors re to be 
collected using these beneficiary surveys. 
8. 
A Mid-Term Review would be carried out towards the end of the Project’s third year. The 
review would cover: (i) physical and financial progress as measured against AWPBs; (ii) progress in 
the implementation and emerging outputs and intermediate outcomes of the irrigation infrastructure 
schemes; (ii) assessment of the efficacy of the institutional development and capacity building 
activities; (iii) progress in crop and livestock productivity through provision of assets, training and 
market linkages; (vi) progress in establishing off farm income generating activities providing ancillary 
services for agriculture growth (vii) implementing of climate change resilient activities; (vii) the 
participation of women and the emerging outcomes reported by them. 
9. 
Final Evaluation: An independent Final Evaluation would take place three months prior to the 
Project completion date, and would assess overall project outreach, outcomes and impact. The final 
evaluation would also review the sustainability of results and the potential for scaling-up. The final 
evaluation would provide recommendations based on lesson learnt that would be taken into 
consideration while designing similar projects in the future in similar contexts.  The Final Impact 
Assessment would be undertaken by a neutral agency with no previous involvement in project 
implementation. The Terms of Reference for this evaluation would be prepared by IFAD. 
Learning and knowledge management 
10.  Given that this is the first IFAD loan financed project in the country, the compilation and 
dissemination of project information, experiences and results on an on-going basis for the country and 
for IFAD headquarters are important. The project would package and disseminate information to the 
respective stakeholders in the appropriate formats (e.g. brochures, studies, articles, newsletter, and 
web). This knowledge-sharing process would be supported by a well-focused series of workshops and 
joint learning events and visits. 
64 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management 
11.  The overall responsibility for Knowledge Management and communication would be shared by 
IFAD and the PMT in Iraq. The PMT would coordinate with the Governorate Coordinators and the 
M&E Officers in identifying specific case studies of interests which illustrate how the project activities 
have had an impact on rural livelihoods.  The PMT would be assisted by the project Service Providers 
in the preparation of special case studies and Learning Notes.  These would be shared more widely 
by IFAD through its various tools for sharing the knowledge gleaned from IFAD-supported projects 
and programmes such as through the use of what is termed as “Learning Routes" with the objectives 
of valuing local knowledge and facilitating the development of platforms in which experiences are 
shared and as a complementary model for knowledge transfer among development partners.  
65 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement 
arrangements 
Inherent risks: country issues, entity risks and project design 
Overall risk assessment. The country risk is rated as High. Transparency International’s 
1. 
Corruption Perception Index ranked Iraq 166st out of 176 countries in 2016 (stable compared to 2015) 
with a score of 17/100 (16/100 in 2015). The analysis of the trend of TI rating, for the period 2012-
2015, had shown a recurrent structural and institutional issues related to country public systems and 
governance capacities (18/100 in 2012 and 16/100 for 2013-2014 and 2015) The most recent PEFA 
dated from June 2008, highlighted large areas of weakness related to public financial management 
systems including budgeting process, central bank organisation and centralisation and sustainability 
of internal and external controls of public expenditures. The lack of recent data related to the country 
public financial management systems and governance could be considered as indicator of the high 
inherent risk.  
Financial management risk assessment: To determine the project specific control risks, a 
2. 
Financial Management (FM) risk assessment of the SARP and its fiduciary arrangements has been 
completed at a first stage. This assessment concluded that the project financial management 
arrangements and internal control systems will satisfy IFAD's minimum requirements to provide 
accurate and timely information on the progress of project implementation and appropriate 
accountability for funds. The residual financial management risk is rated as High, after the 
implementation of appropriate risk mitigation measures to ensure accountability of funds such as 
competitive recruitment of fiduciary staff, training and support in FM and procurement at start-up and 
during PY1, PIM and software as disbursement conditions  
Proposed financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Financial management. The SARP financial management team would be part of the PMT, 
3. 
which will be fully embedded and located within the MoA, and vested with financial and administrative 
autonomy. The financial team would be seconded from MoA staff or hired through a competitive 
process. In both cases, there would be two types of contract for PMT staff: (i) The staff that cannot be 
sourced from MoA would be competitively recruited on contracts that are annually renewable, upon 
satisfactory performance; and (ii) subject to IFAD no-objection on proposed profiles, GoI would 
second competent staff to the PMT ensuring that relevant competencies are identified and that full-
time availability is guaranteed.  
Accounting and financial reporting arrangements: The borrower/recipient would open three 
4. 
(3) USD denominated Designated Accounts (DAs) for the IFAD loan and grant, the ASAP grant and 
the Adaptation Fund grant at Central Bank in order to receive IFAD loan and grant resources. The 
authorized allocation will be equal to approximately 3 months of project expenditure, from both IFAD 
loan and grant (ASAP) resources. Flow of funds. A chart of the proposed flow of funds arrangements 
for the project is shown in Attachment 1 to this Appendix. 
The MoA will open 3 separate bank accounts to manage funds from Central Bank and to pay 
5. 
providers and 3rd parties. The Central Bank under the MoF maintains the accounts of general budget 
public institutions and executes the replenishments of Project’s bank accounts opened at MoA. For 
that purpose, GoI has developed a web-based Public Expenditures and Accounting Information 
System as Integrated Public Financial Management-IPFM system includes budget, procurement and 
contract management, monitoring and evaluation modules, etc. However, the system will not enable 
the PMT to directly generate financial reports, withdrawal applications and statements of expenditure 
as per IFAD reporting requirements, which would lead to the use of an Excel based financial reporting 
mechanism. Within the first six months, the project would (i) acquire and configure a financial, 
accounting and operational software to support all the transactions, budget and cash forecasts 
analysis, operational and financial dashboards; and (ii) prepare a draft Project Implementation Manual 
67 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
(at minimum the fiduciary part), acceptable to IFAD, including financial, accounting, procurement and 
administrative arrangements for project activities. AWPBs showing all activities planned during the 
given year, disaggregated by quarter and by financier, should reach IFAD 6 months before the 
beginning of each fiscal year. 
All accounting policies and procedures related to the project will be clearly documented in the 
6. 
financial, accounting and administrative procedures manual, which will make reference to the MoF 
system manual. The PMT will record eligible expenditures following international accounting 
standards (cash basis). The PMT will submit monthly financial reports analysing cumulative 
disbursements, AWPB execution, treasury position and forecast, implementing partners’ financial 
situation, procurement plan execution and any salient administrative issues. 
7. 
Interim unaudited financial reports for all financing sources (IFRs) will be submitted to IFAD no 
later than 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter during the project implementation period. A 
comprehensive, tabulated review of planned activities and their cost is sufficient. A few pages with 
analytical comments should be added, listing key achievements, major deviations from the AWPB, 
implementation issues, resource constraints, and proposed solutions. The Interim Financial Reports 
should reflect all project activities, financing, and expenditures, including counterpart funds. They 
could also reflect any substantive contributions in kind such as labor and accommodation. 
Annual reports shall be prepared. The nature of annual reports is different from that of quarterly 
8. 
reports. In addition to a simple review of implementation progress, this requires analysis by project 
management. A full picture of project resources, achievements of the past year and since the 
beginning of the project, as well as annual and cumulative expenditure need to be presented. Analysis 
is required of successful approaches and outputs, failures and constraints, performance of 
implementing partners, and whether progress is being made towards achieving project objectives. 
Such analyses should lead to conclusions about the effectiveness of project strategies, the need for 
modification of the logical framework, and planning for the following year. The annual reports should 
also reflect contributions in kind such as salaries and office space. 
Counterpart funding: The GoI contribution to project costs will be in the form of tax exemption, 
9. 
and in kind contributions (essentially office space and utilities, and compensation part of salaries for 
seconded staff). The project end-beneficiaries will participate in the project costs in the form of in kind 
contributions. 
10.  Audit: The annual external audit of the project will be carried out by the Federal Board of 
Supreme Audit, the country’s SAI, in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing and the 
IFAD Guidelines for Project Audits and based on terms of reference subject to IFAD no objection. The 
final audit report and management letter are required to be submitted to IFAD by the Borrower at the 
latest six months after the end of each fiscal year. In addition to external audit activities, In addition, 
the internal audit unit of MoA will include the review of the transactions of IFAD project  at Central 
level audit as legal mandatory requirements. The internal Auditor Role in the organisation is correctly 
structured (independent and reporting directly to the Ministerial Cabinet). The internal audit unit 
expressed its commitment to deliver IFAD a quarterly report on their review. 
Internal controls: All internal control mechanisms will be detailed in the financial volume of the 
11. 
PIM, to be prepared before disbursement. IFAD will be requested to provide no-objection on the PIM. 
12.  Budgeting: All project activities for all components and subcomponents will be included in an 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). The AWPB will indicate which budgeted expenditures are 
intended to be financed from each financing source (IFAD loan, ASAP grant, AF grant, counterpart 
funds and beneficiaries contributions). Budgets will be in a format that includes the quarterly financing 
requirements for each financier separately. The approved budget would be incorporated in State 
Treasury Strategic Planning and Budget Systems in accordance with government budgetary charts of 
accounts.  The AWPB would be prepared in time to ensure its inclusion in the government budget for 
the forthcoming year. 
13.  Anticorruption and good governance framework: The primary responsibility of detecting 
fraud and corruption lies with the Borrower.  However, IFAD applies a Zero Tolerance Policy towards 
fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in projects financed through its loans and grants.  
“Zero Tolerance” means that IFAD would pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this policy 
and that appropriate sanctions will be applied where the allegations are substantiated.  IFAD shall 
68 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
take all possible actions to protect from reprisals individuals who help reveal corrupt practices in its 
project or grant activities and individuals or entities subject to unfair or malicious allegations.  Given 
IFAD’s Zero Tolerance described above, it is important that the staff and all stakeholders of the project 
are familiar with IFAD’s as well as national anticorruption policies and whistleblowing procedures. The 
IFAD anticorruption policy is available on the IFAD website at 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm. The IFAD website also provides instructions 
on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and Oversight 
(http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). 
14.  The dissemination of IFAD’s anti-corruption policy amongst project staff and stakeholders, as 
well as the adoption of IFAD procurement guidelines for SARP procurement, would reinforce the use 
of good practices. In addition, SARP would promote good governance through the involvement of 
Governorate staff and beneficiaries in (i) the preparation of the annual work plans and budgets, (ii) the 
procurement process and (iii) the monitoring and evaluation of project activities. 
69 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Annex 1. Flow of Funds 
IFAD 
Ministry of Finance-Central Bank 
IFAD Loan Designated Account  
ASAP Grant Designated Account 
Adaptation Fund Grant Designated 
Account 
Ministry of Agriculture  
PMT Project accounts at the State 
Treasury 
Goods and services providers 
Infrastructure Contractors
Governorates 
Cash flows 
                   Flows of information, approvals on implementation 
70 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Attachment 2. Project Control Risk – Summary 
Risk Category 
Initial FM Risk 
Rating (H/M/L) 
Proposed Risk Mitigating 
Measures 
Residual FM 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
High 
Medium 
a)  PMT staff will be seconded from 
MoA Staff or selected 
competitively from the local 
market. IFAD will provide 
guidance and assistance 
(particularly in 1st year of 
implementation) on FM and 
procurement 
a)  Finance and Accounting 
supervisor to be recruited. 
b)  Staff ToR to be cleared by IFAD 
before recruitment/secondment. 
c)  All Finance Team of PMT will be 
required to complete FM 
training on IFAD procedures 
and provide certification.  
High 
a)  Budget preparation and 
coordination will remain with 
PMT. 
b)  To ensure that timely inputs are 
received, the Project 
Coordinator will initiate the 
process 3 months before the 
budgets are due. 
c)  To ensure a realistic budget, 
deliverables on previous 
budgets will be reviewed by the 
technical and financial teams; 
significant variances will be 
investigated regularly and 
corrective actions will be 
documented.   
d)  Budgets to include all sources 
of financing separately and to 
show estimates by quarter. 
e)  Interim financial reports showing 
progress against budgets to be 
submitted to IFAD quarterly; 
IFAD will provide the necessary 
support remotely and during 
field visits. 
a)  Budgeting issues will be 
mitigated, thereby facilitating the 
forecast of funds utilization. 
b)  Clearly detailed fund flow 
arrangements and continuous 
follow-up of the same within the 
first year of implementation to 
ensure any needed corrections 
will be made to mitigate risk of 
liquidity problems  and ensure 
Medium 
Medium 
Inherent Risks 
9. 
Country Level 
1.  TI rating have lowered rating, putting 
Iraq at 161/167 countries in 2016.  
High 
Entity and Project design 
(a)  First IFAD project in the country and 
entire unit dedicated to the project in 
the technical ministry. 
Medium 
. 
10.  Project Control Risks 
1.  Organization & Staffing 
A.  Institutional and organizational aspects 
due to change on Public entities budget 
requirements may result in coordination 
problems, flow of information 
bottlenecks, reporting delays and 
disbursement effectiveness. 
High 
2.  Budgeting 
1.  Timely submission and coordination 
with the different implementing 
agencies/partners will be challenging.   
2.  Under spending, absorbing capacities 
and unrealistic budgets. 
3.  Level of decentralisation 
High 
3.  Funds Flow & Disbursements 
1.  IFAD funds flow through Central Bank  
through MoF System monitored by the 
State Treasury 
2.  Implementation delays due to lack of 
knowledge of IFAD procedures and 
limited abilities to align forecast liquidity 
needs with designed categories. 
High 
71 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
4.  Accounting Systems, Policies & 
Procedures 
a)  MOF  Web  based  Public  Expenditures 
system  is  mandatory  for  executing  any 
payment from national budget including 
international  funded  projects.  Manuals 
for  the  system  are  also  available  and 
updated whenever system is upgraded. 
Medium 
5.  Reporting & Monitoring 
a)  The accounting system should be 
designed to implement donor-
funded projects. 
b)  Accounting is on cash basis. 
c)  Adequate procedures are in place 
for accounting. 
d)  Large volume of reports 
requested on quarterly basis by 
the State Treasury 
. 
6.  Internal Audit 
a)  Periodic reporting of internal control 
weaknesses to MoA internal audit. 
High 
7.  Auditing 
a)  The Project will appoint SAI for external 
audit.  
Project Fiduciary Risk at design: 
OVERALL FM RISK 
* H=High, M=Medium, L=Low 
High 
HIGH 
High 
requirement will be detailed 
within PIM.  
High 
smooth flow of funds. 
c)  Financial procedures manual 
will be a condition to 
disbursement and knowledge of 
the same will be mandatory for 
all staff involved in finance. 
a)  Categories of expenditures 
designed in State Treasury 
System are not aligned with 
project categories of 
expenditures and suffer from 
flexibility. The finance team 
should made more efforts to 
customize the expenditures 
categories and detailed 
accounts. 
a)  Training on  the new accounting 
and financial system (Budget 
and Financial Reporting 
Module) will be provided for all 
finance staff involved. 
b)  Reporting and monitoring 
Medium 
c)  Data recorded in Project 
accounting system to be 
reconciled on monthly basis 
with MOF system and ensure 
timely correction for any 
identified discrepancies. 
a)  Internal controllers of MoA to 
report on annually basis on 
effectiveness of Internal Control. 
b)  Internal Audit will be carried 
periodically through inter-
ministerial audit plans. The 
internal audit cover will include 
IFAD projects. 
c)  TOR of external auditors to be 
extended to include review of 
internal controls and field visits. 
a)  External auditors scope should 
be extended to cover all 
contributions in the project 
including those in kind. 
Medium 
Medium 
HIGH 
72 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Summary of Procurement Assessment 
1. 
Public Procurement legal framework. Public Procurement in Iraq was governed by the 
Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) Order No 87 of 2004 and the implementing regulations No. 1 for 
2008 promulgated by Council of Ministers and prepared by the Ministry of Planning (MoP) since 2004. 
However, the Council of Ministers issued a Resolution dated May 16, 2011 to abolish the existing 
procurement framework. A draft Law was developed by an inter-ministerial working force with the 
assistance of the World Bank and reviewed by the Shura Council as an appropriate legal framework 
for the country, but there were calls to discard the draft Law and instead to prepare a new concise By-
Law or Regulation. Consequently, and in the absence of a new legal framework, the Ministry of 
Planning has issued a set of regulations in 2014 to replace the 2008 regulations.  
2. 
Public Procurement, a major component of the Iraqi economy. According to the most 
recent “Iraq Systemic Country Diagnostic” that has been released by the World Bank in February 
2017, Public procurement was roughly estimated to represent 25% of the country’s GDP or over 
US$50 billion in 2013. Doing business with the Iraqi Government presents considerable challenges 
and high fiduciary risks. Issues with corruption and transparency in Iraq, as evidenced by the 
country’s consistently low rankings in international surveys such as ranking 166 out of 176 countries 
under Corruption Perception Index of Transparency International (2017), exacerbate these 
challenges. Existing institutional weaknesses have manifested themselves in particular in the 
governance and performance of the country’s public procurement system. A 2012 World Bank report 
on Oil Revenue Management for Economic Diversification and Public Expenditure Review cited 
unsatisfactory procurement procedures as one of the main bottlenecks in budget execution in Iraq. 
The 2012 Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) for the country confirmed a similar finding.  
Delays in payment. A World Bank report on “Benchmarking Public Procurement” that has been 
3. 
carried out by the World Bank in 2017 to assess public procurement regulatory systems in 180 
economies shows that considerable delays in payment hinder participation by private firms in the 
public procurement process-especially small and medium enterprises (SMEs) that struggle with 
limited cash flow. In fact, suppliers must wait, in Iraq, more than six months to receive payment from 
purchasing entities. Poor procurement processes have been identified as a major cause of 
bottlenecks in budget execution.  Additionally, the Iraq Systemic Country Diagnostic (World Bank, 
2017) has shown that there is a broad consensus among stakeholders that government at the federal, 
regional, and local levels continues to struggle to spend its procurement budget because of a weak 
capacity to implement projects and programs. 
Complaint mechanism. Regulations 1 for 2014 establish the right of bidder to raise a 
4. 
complaint to a centralized committee at each procuring entity. However; bidders do not have adequate 
access to independent administrative review and appeal processes. Although civil courts have 
jurisdiction over civil and commercial matters, access to them is perceived as inadequate by 
participating bidders, and the administrative review and court systems are not operating adequately 
under current circumstances. Although CPA 87 of 2004 stipulated the right to file a protest with the 
Administrative Tribunal; however; the administrative tribunal was not created. It cannot be said that 
the complaint procedure meets the test of independence from the officials that are involved in the 
actions, omissions and decisions that may be the subject of the review. The implementing entity is the 
body to which the complaint is brought, is also the body that approves the key aspects of the 
proceeding under review (in particular the contents of the bidding documents and the award decision). 
In the absence of formal independent complaint mechanism, bidders are appealing to Ministry of 
Planning (MoP)/ Directorate of General Governmental Contracts (DoGGC) or through the applications 
of General Secretariat of Council of Ministers through Citizen E-Government. 
Ongoing reforms. There have been recent positive steps in reforming public procurement 
5. 
system at the federal level namely: i) 18 Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) were developed, 
piloted, and mandated for use in July 2016; ii) a national implementation manual was published on 
the Ministry of Planning (MoP) website; and iii) a training strategy was prepared and collaboration 
with universities have started to build capacity of procurement professionals. The World Bank will 
continue its support to the Iraqi authorities on a multi-year engagement under new Public Financial 
73 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Management (PFM) project by providing implementation support at the Federal and KRG levels to 
use the issued SBDs, create a sustainable capacity building program including online courses, 
establishment of a web-based single portal for procurement information, and strengthen management 
and monitoring of procurement activities. 
6. 
Overall assessment. Despite the recent positive reform efforts, the public procurement system 
in Iraq is still assessed to be too bureaucratic and unnecessarily procedural, lacking transparency and 
accountability. This has left procurement open to abuse, waste, and corruption and resulted in 
inefficient public expenditures and resource management. 
Assessment of the Project Implementing Agency Procurement Capacity. IFAD undertook 
7. 
an assessment of the Project Implementing Agency (Ministry of Agriculture – MoA) procurement 
capacity. According to the assessment’s findings, MoA has no experience with IFAD financed project 
management and related procurement procedures.  The Project Management Team (PMT) would, 
therefore, require  
considerable capacity building in order to be able to provide the necessary management 
8. 
oversight in compliance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. 
9. 
Procurement risks: The SARP project presents the following risks: 
a.  Capacity  constraints  of  PMT  staff  to  carry  out  procurement  and  management  of 
contracts; 
b.  High risk and weak control environment, Iraq’s ability to manage public resources is 
undermined  by  poor  security  and  capacity  constraints.  Moreover,  Iraq  has  a  poor 
ranking in Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index; 
c.  Weak  capacity  of  local  supplying/contracting  companies  and  lack  of  interest  of 
international contracting companies to participate due to security restrictions; 
d.  Lack of experience  in  procurement planning  and expected  delays  in implementation 
because of capacity constraints and security conditions in Iraq; and 
e.  MoA lacking experience of working with IFAD-financed operations. 
10.  Based on the overall assessment of the implementing agency (MoA) capacity and the 
information available on the procurement environment in Iraq, the overall procurement risk is judged 
to be ‘High’. This rating therefore requires the assignment of dedicated and qualified staff to the PMT 
to handle the project and afferent procurement functions, as well as the provision of formal and on-
the-job training to the project team on procurement and project management both before and during 
project implementation. 
11.  Risk mitigating measures. The following measures, corresponding to the risks identified 
above, are expected to be implemented:  
Include in the PIM a well-described procurement process; 
a.  Elaborate a detailed Project Implementation Manual (PIM); 
b. 
c.  Follow IFAD’s procurement guidelines and the PIM;  
d.  Assign  dedicated  and  qualified  staff  to  the  PMT,  including  a  procurement  officer  to 
handle the project and afferent procurement functions;  
e.  Hire, if needed, an international implementation consultant to support the PMT in the 
supervision of the project implementation;  
f.  Carefully package procurement to encourage qualified bidders, including international 
firms, to participate; 
g.  Ensure a close implementation support by IFAD; 
h.  Conduct  frequent  training  and  on-the-job  training  of  the  PMT  on  procurement  and 
project management both before and during implementation;  
i.  Establish  a  procurement  and  contract  management  training  capacity  in  the  NGO 
service  providers  to  support  local  supplying/contracting  companies  in  meeting 
minimum  tender  quality  standards  (  this  service  needs  to  be  distinct  form  the  PMT 
and the GCT; and 
j.  Establish  monitoring  and  record  keeping  tools  for  contracts  and  activities  under 
implementation and establish adequate record keeping (archiving). 
74 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
12.  Arrangements for Procurement under the Project. For each contract to be financed by IFAD 
proceeds, the types of procurement methods, the need for pre or post-qualification, estimated cost, 
prior review requirements and time frame are agreed between the Borrower and IFAD respectively in 
the Procurement Plan. The methods to be used for the procurement under this project, as well as the 
threshold contract values for the use of each method are set in Table below: 
Table 6: Procurement Method Thresholds 
Procurement Method Thresholds 
Procurement Method 
Procurement Method Threshold (US $) 
ICB and LIB (Goods)  
NCB (Goods) 
Shopping (Goods) 
ICB and LIB (Works)  
NCB (Works) 
Shopping (Works) 
› 500,000 
≤ 500,000 
≤ 100,000 
› 1,000,000 
≤ 1,000,000 
≤ 200,000 
b)  Goods estimated to cost more than USD 500 000 equivalent per contract may be 
procured through International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World Bank’s 
applicable Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs). Goods estimated to cost between USD 
100,000 and USD 500,000 equivalent per contract may be procured through National 
Competitive Bidding (NCB). Goods estimated to cost less than USD 100,000 equivalent 
per contract may be procured through the National Shopping method.  
c)  Works estimated to cost more than USD 5,000,000 equivalent may be procured through 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World Bank’s applicable SBDs. 
Works estimated between USD 200,000 and USD 5,000,000 equivalent may be procured 
through the NCB. While works estimated below USD 200,000 may be procured through 
National Shopping.  
d)  Consultancy services generally estimated to cost more than USD 100 000 equivalent for 
firms will be on the basis of Quality and Cost Based Selection method. However, the 
specific nature of the assignment will finally determine the selection method to be 
followed and will be pre-determined in each annual procurement plan. 
e)  Prior Review Thresholds. Given the High procurement risk rating in Iraq, ALL contracts 
under the SARP project shall be submitted to IFAD’s prior review. However, the prior 
review thresholds may be reviewed / modified by IFAD during the course of project 
implementation based on experiences in the field. 
f)  Bidding Documents. Under ICBs, the applicable World Bank SBDs will be used. 
However, for NCBs, the PMU shall use the relevant SBDs that were developed by MoP 
with the World Bank assistance  and mandated for use in July 2016 (available at: 
http://www.mop.gov.iq/mop/index.jsp?sid=1&id=738&pid=580) 
g)  Classification of procurement items:  
a) Procurement of Goods. The goods to be financed under the project include but are not limited 
to the following: (i) small packages related to irrigation productions systems; (ii) small 
ruminant packages, and (iii) off farm packages. 
b) Procurement of Works. The works to be financed under the project include, but are not limited 
to, the following: (i) rehabilitation of  irrigation channels and schemes, (ii) drainage, and (iii) 
construction of post-harvest infrastructure.  
c) Procurement for Consulting Services. The consulting services to be financed under the project 
include but are not limited to the following: (i) four (4) Community Development Officers, (ii) 
four (4) Monitoring & Evaluation Officers and (iii) four (4) Service Providers, (iv) a consulting 
firm to carry out baseline,  mid-term and end-line surveys, and (v) auditor. Depending on the 
nature and cost of the service to be provided, one of the following methods would be 
employed: 
75 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
  Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS), specifically for the marketing advisory services;  
  Selection based on Consultants’ Qualifications (CQ); and 
 
Individual Consultants (IC): For the individual consultants to be hired for more than six months 
duration, the positions would be advertised for expressions of interest in international and/or 
national media depending on the expertise required, and selection would be based on 
comparison of qualifications. 
76 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Project costs: The Smallholder Agriculture Revitalisation Project (SARP) is estimated to cost USD 
1. 
31.77 million with base cost at USD 30.3 million. Component 1: Climate resilient investments is estimated 
to cost USD 12.1 million representing 40% of the total base costs whereas Component 2: Agriculture and 
livelihood diversification component would cost USD 13.6 million, representing 45% of total project base 
costs. Component 3: Project Management and Coordination is estimated at USD 4.6 million representing 
the smallest portion, 15% of the total base costs. 
Assumptions: The following key assumptions below have been used in estimation of project costs. 
2. 
The project will start in 2018 for a seven year period. In Costab the input currency has been the USD. 
However for conversion purposes only, the exchange rate of 1,177.85 (i.e. 1USD=1,177.85 IQD) has 
been used. Price contingencies (inflation) are included at 4%. This is lower than the local inflation 
because the input currency has been set in USD. Physical contingencies have been estimated at 3% on 
works only.  Table 1 below shows the project cost summary by components: 
Table 1: Project costs by component  
3. 
Project financing: The project will be funded by IFAD loan, IFAD grant, the Adaptation for 
Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP), the Government of Iraq and beneficiaries. IFAD has 
confirmed a loan of USD 15.73 million and a grant of USD 500,000 covering 49.5% and 1.5% of the total 
project costs. ASAP will also extend a grant of USD 2 million towards SARP financing, covering 6.3% of 
the project costs. Furthermore, extra funds of USD 9.17 million or about 28.9% of the total project cost 
(net of IFAD management fees) are to be mobilized from the Adaptation Fund.  The government will 
finance salaries, any taxes and provide other in kind contributions like office space. Beneficiaries will also 
make in-kind contribution in form of casual labour, some minor inputs and equipment. This will be mainly 
under sub-component 2.1. At design, beneficiary contribution is roughly estimated to be USD 1.9 million. 
All in kind contribution will be determined appropriately during implementation and tracked. The project-
financing plan is shown in table 2 below:  
77 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project-SARP %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (IQD '000)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Climate Resilient Investments 1. Irrigation Infrastructure schemes 13,300,659.1-13,300,659.111,292.3-11,292.3-372. Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening 735,566.4244,111.8979,678.2624.5207.3831.8253Subtotal 14,036,225.5244,111.814,280,337.311,916.8207.312,124.1240B. Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification 1. Crop, Livestock & Off-Farm Development 9,624,542.13,715,209.813,339,752.08,171.33,154.211,325.528372. Skills Development & Capacity Building 2,667,540.4-2,667,540.42,264.8-2,264.8-7Subtotal 12,292,082.63,715,209.816,007,292.410,436.03,154.213,590.32345C. Project management and coordination 4,962,953.9427,968.95,390,922.74,213.6363.34,576.9815Total BASELINE COSTS 31,291,261.94,387,290.435,678,552.426,566.43,724.830,291.312100Physical Contingencies 370,980.3-370,980.3315.0-315.0-1Price Contingencies 1,266,489.7106,354.51,372,844.21,075.390.31,165.684Total PROJECT COSTS 32,928,732.04,493,644.937,422,376.927,956.63,815.131,771.812105 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Table 2: Project costs by category of expenditures and financiers 
(thousands of US dollars) 
Expenditure 
category 
IFAD loan 
IFAD grant 
ASAP grant 
Financing gap 
Beneficiaries 
Borrower/ 
counterpart 
Total 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
Amount 
% 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
1. Civil works 
4 912 
43.7 
1 334  11.9 
5 001 
44.5 
2. Vehicles 
328 
100 
11 246  35.4 
328 
1.0 
6 471 
54.0 
500 
4.1 
160 
1.3 
2 949 
24.6 
1 922  16.0 
11 983  37.7 
3. Equipment and 
materials 
4. Training and 
workshops 
155 
22.6 
5. Consultancies 
1 969 
82 
6. Technical 
studies 
7. Operating costs 
8. Expenses for 
project teams 
905 
993 
100 
97.5 
530 
77.4 
433 
18 
26 
2.5 
685 
2 402 
905 
1 019 
2.2 
7.6 
2.8 
3.2 
507  15.8 
232 
7.3 
2 465  76.9 
3 204  10.1 
Total 
15 734 
49.5 
500 
1.5 
2 000 
6.3 
9 170 
28.9 
1 922 
6.0 
2 465 
7.8 
31 772  100 
78 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Annex I: Other Summary project cost tables 
Table 3: Project costs by components by years 
79 
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including Contingencies2018201920202021202220232024TotalA. Climate Resilient Investments 1. Irrigation Infrastructure schemes 1,405.51,549.82,000.32,667.03,556.0555.6333.412,067.72. Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening 329.5430.320.220.220.220.220.2861.0Subtotal 1,735.01,980.12,020.52,687.33,576.3575.9353.612,928.7B. Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification 1. Crop, Livestock & Off-Farm Development 3,421.04,770.53,513.021.510.8--11,736.72. Skills Development & Capacity Building 800.0259.2259.2259.2259.2259.2259.22,355.3Subtotal 4,221.05,029.73,772.2280.7270.0259.2259.214,092.1C. Project management and coordination 996.3624.3656.8624.3624.3656.8568.14,751.0Total PROJECT COSTS 6,952.37,634.26,449.53,592.34,470.61,491.91,180.931,771.8 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Table 4: Project costs by Expenditure Categories 
Table 5: Project costs by Disbursement accounts by financier   
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
(US$ '000) 
1. Civil works 
2. Vehicles 
3. Equipment and materials 
5. Training and workshops 
6. Consultancies 
7. Operating costs 
8. Salaries and allowances 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
  The Government 
Amount 
% 
- 
0 
- 
- 
- 
0 
- 
- 
- 
0 
- 
0 
   2,465 
76.9 
7.8 
   2,465 
IFAD Loan 
% 
43.7 
100.0 
54.0 
22.6 
86.9 
97.5 
- 
49.5 
Amount 
4,912 
328 
6,471 
155 
2,874 
993 
- 
15,734 
Amount 
- 
- 
481 
- 
- 
- 
- 
481 
IFAD Grant 
% 
ASAP 
Beneficiaries 
% 
Amount 
1,334 
- 
160 
- 
- 
- 
507 
2,000 
- 
- 
4.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1.5 
% 
11.9 
- 
1.3 
- 
- 
- 
15.8 
6.3 
AF 
Amount 
5,001 
- 
2,949 
530 
433 
26 
232 
9,170 
% 
44.5 
- 
24.6 
77.4 
13.1 
2.5 
7.3 
28.9 
Amount 
- 
- 
1,922 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,922 
Total 
Amount 
11,246 
328 
11,983 
685 
3,307 
1,019 
3,204 
31,772 
For. 
Exch. 
- 
328 
3,486 
- 
1 
- 
- 
3,815 
Local 
(Excl. 
Taxes) 
11,246 
- 
8,497 
685 
3,306 
1,019 
3,204 
27,957 
% 
35.4 
1.0 
37.7 
2.2 
10.4 
3.2 
10.1 
100.0 
- 
- 
16.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6.0 
80 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project-SARP Climate Resilient InvestmentsAgriculture & LivelihoodExpenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs Diversification(US$ '000) KnowledgeCrop,SkillsProjectIrrigationManagement andLivestock &Development &managementPhysicalInfrastructureInstitutionalOff-FarmCapacityandContingenciesschemesstrengtheningDevelopmentBuildingcoordinationTotal%Amount I. Investment Costs A. Civil works 10,374.0-124.8--10,498.83.0315.0B. Vehicles ----323.2323.2--C. Equipment and materials -705.210,732.7-132.511,570.4--D. Consultancies 832.0-468.01,744.8135.23,179.9--E. Training and workshops 86.3--520.052.0658.3--Total Investment Costs 11,292.3705.211,325.52,264.8642.826,230.61.2315.0II. Recurrent Costs A. Operating costs ----979.7979.7--B. Salaries and allowances -126.5--2,954.43,080.9--Total Recurrent Costs -126.5--3,934.14,060.6--Total BASELINE COSTS 11,292.3831.811,325.52,264.84,576.930,291.31.0315.0Physical Contingencies 311.2-3.7--315.0--Price Contingencies 464.129.3407.590.6174.11,165.61.112.6Total PROJECT COSTS 12,067.7861.011,736.72,355.34,751.031,771.81.0327.6 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Table 6: Project costs by Expenditure accounts by financier 
(thousand USD) 
IFAD loan 
IFAD grant 
ASAP grant 
Financing gap 
Beneficiaries 
Borrower/ 
counterpart 
Total 
Expenditure category 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
Amount 
% 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
Amount  % 
1. Civil works 
2. Vehicles 
4 912 
43.7 
328 
100 
1 334 
11.9 
5 001 
44.5 
3. Equipment and materials 
6 471 
54.0 
500 
4.1 
160 
1.3 
2 949 
4. Training and workshops 
155 
22.6 
5. Consultancies 
6. Technical studies 
7. Operating costs 
1 969 
82 
905 
993 
100 
97.5 
8. Expenses for project teams 
507 
15.8 
530 
433 
26 
232 
1 922 
16.0 
24.6 
77.4 
18 
2.5 
7.3 
11 246  35.4 
328 
1.0 
11 983  37.7 
685 
2 402 
905 
1 019 
2.2 
7.6 
2.8 
3.2 
2 465 
76.9 
3 204 
10.1 
Total 
15 734  49.5 
500 
1.5 
2 000 
6.3 
9 170 
28.9 
1 922 
6.0 
2 465 
7.8 
31 772 
100 
81 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Table 7: Project costs by Disbursement semesters 
Disbursements by Semesters and  
Government Cash Flow 
(US$ '000) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Total 
Financing Available 
 AF 
ASAP 
IFAD 
IFAD Loan  Grant 
Amount  Amount  Amount  Amount 
1,098 
1,098 
1,037 
1,037 
772 
772 
620 
620 
820 
820 
145 
145 
94 
94 
9,170 
1,915 
1,915 
1,924 
1,924 
1,676 
1,676 
789 
789 
974 
974 
340 
340 
249 
249 
15,734 
141 
141 
119 
119 
159 
159 
199 
199 
252 
252 
72 
72 
59 
59 
2,000 
224 
224 
8 
8 
8 
8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
481 
Beneficiaries 
Amount 
Total 
- 
- 
541 
541 
420 
420 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,922 
3,377 
3,377 
3,628 
3,628 
3,036 
3,036 
1,607 
1,607 
2,046 
2,046 
557 
557 
402 
402 
29,307 
The Government 
be 
Financed 
Cumulative 
Project 
Costs  Cash Flow  Cash Flow 
-99 
-199 
-387 
-576 
-765 
-954 
-1,143 
-1,332 
-1,521 
-1,709 
-1,898 
-2,087 
-2,276 
-2,465 
-2,465 
3,476 
3,476 
3,817 
3,817 
3,225 
3,225 
1,796 
1,796 
2,235 
2,235 
746 
746 
590 
590 
31,772 
-99 
-99 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-189 
-2,465 
82 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Annex I: Detailed project cost tables 
Table 1: Climate resilient Investments 
83 
Table 1. Climate resilient Investments Detailed Costs (US$) QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies ('000)Unit2018201920202021202220232024TotalUnit Cost2018201920202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Infrastructure schemes 1. Drainage and Irrigation channels Dunum1,9953,9905,9857,98010,6401,662.5997.533,2503006671,3342,0002,6673,55655633311,1132. Feasibility & detailed design studies ls0.50.5-----1400,000216216-----433Subtotal 8831,5502,0002,6673,55655633311,545B. Knowledge management and institutional strengthening 1. Remote monitoring metrological stations stations-6-----664,000-410-----4102. Early Warning System (climate change) Ls1------1300,000319------319Subtotal 319410-----729C. Strategy for climate adaptation for agriculture sector 1. Development of the strategy ls1------183,00090------902. Climate change adaptation training ls1------1400,000433------433Subtotal 522------522Total Investment Costs 1,7251,9602,0002,6673,55655633312,797II. Recurrent Costs A. National level AF Project Coordinator salary month6121212121212781,2008161616161616101AF Project Coordinator allowance month612121212121278360255555530Total Recurrent Costs 10202020202020132Total 1,7351,9802,0212,6873,57657635412,929 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Table 2: Agriculture and livelihood diversification 
84 
Table 2. Agriculture and livelihood diversification Detailed Costs (US$) QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies ('000)Unit2018201920202021202220232024TotalUnit Cost2018201920202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Crop and livestock development 1. Grant packages for individuals & Farmer Groups Small grant package /a beneficiaries-1,8001,345----3,1452,000-3,8442,881----6,725Large grant package /b farmer groups-3030----6015,000-480482----962Subtotal -4,3243,363----7,6872. Livestock development Diagnostic Animal Health lab cost/province-4-----430,000-134-----134Strengthen the AH lab cost/province1111---410,00011111111---43AH lab equipment cost/province-22----410,000-2121----43Sheep dippers cost/province-1111--410,000-11111111--43Rehabilitation Milk collection centers cost/province-22----425,000-5354----107Subtotal 11230962111--3693. Income diversification package Women Ls2,000------2,0001,0002,129------2,129Youth Ls1,000------1,0001,0001,065------1,065Subtotal 3,194------3,1944. Market studies & assessments Market studies study441----950,00021621654----487Subtotal 3,4214,7713,5132111--11,737B. Skills development and capacity building Small holder farmers cost per year216------216Public&Private Agriculture support service providers cost per year216------216Other capacity building and demonstrations /c cost per year108------108Service providers month484848484848483364,5432362362362362362362361,651Techinical assistance months22222221410,80023232323232323164Subtotal 8002592592592592592592,355Total Investment Costs 4,2215,0303,77228127025925914,092II. Recurrent Costs Total 4,2215,0303,77228127025925914,092 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project Cost and Financing 
Table 3: Project management and coordination 
85 
Table 3. Project management Detailed Costs (US$) QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies ('000)Unit2018201920202021202220232024TotalUnit Cost2018201920202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs Baseline survey Ls1------170,00076------76Start-up workshop Ls1------150,00054------54Mid term survey Ls--1----130,000--32----32End line survery Ls-----1-130,000-----32-32Accounting package /a package5------55,00027------27Vehicles /b no8------840,000328------328Computers no32------323,000102------102Printer no5------51,0005------5Digital GPS camera no5------55003------3Total Investment Costs 595-32--32-660II. Recurrent Costs A. Central staff salaries National project coordinator month12121212121212841,50019191919191919136Financial officer month6121212121212781,2008161616161616101Procurement officer month6121212121212781,2008161616161616101Monitoring and evaluation month6121212121212781,2008161616161616101Subtotal 43666666666666440B. Central staff PT allowances /c National project coordinator month1212121212121284450666666641Financial officer month612121212121278360255555530Procurement officer month612121212121278360255555530Monitoring and evaluation month612121212121278360255555530Subtotal 13202020202020132C. Governorate staff salaries Governorate Coordinator month244848484848483121,50039787878787878506Grants & Community dev. officer month244848484848483121,20031626262626262405Accounts assistant month244848484848483121,20031626262626262405Monitoring and evaluation officer month244848484848483121,20031626262626262405Support staff /d month2448484848484831260016313131313131202Subtotal 1482962962962962962961,924D. Governorate staff PT allowances /e Governorate Coordinator month2448484848484831245012232323232323152Grants & Community dev. officer month244848484848483123609191919191919121Accounts assistant month244848484848483123609191919191919121Monitoring and evaluation officer month244848484848483123609191919191919121Support staff /f month24484848484848312180599999961Subtotal 44898989898989577E. Planning and audit Annual workplan and budget workshop Per year1111111740,00043434343434343303External audits per year1111111710,0001111111111111176Subtotal 54545454545454379F. Operating costs Operation and management Ls22222222222222151Car maintenance /g Ls353535353535-208Fuel /h Ls222222222222-130Other Ls22222222222222151Subtotal 10010010010010010043640Total Recurrent Costs 4026246246246246245684,091Total 9966246576246246575684,751 _________________________________\a 5 accounting packages\b 1 vehicle for the PMT\c Project Team allowance is 30% of base salary 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Beneficiaries: SARP is expected to benefit about 25,400 individuals directly but a working figure of 
1. 
20,000 has been used given the effect of (double counting as those who receive assets are also likely to 
receive  some  training  and  skill  development).  This  translates  to  140,000  people  based  on  the  rural 
household size of 7 people.  The cost per beneficiary is calculated to be USD 236. 
2. 
The quantifiable benefits include the following: 
i. 
It is expected that around 9,000 hectares or 36,000 dunums would benefit from improved irrigation 
infrastructure. High value crops would be grown and with capacity building on irrigation efficiency, 
cropping intensity is projected to increase by 15%. An increase in irrigation efficiency from 35% to 
75% has the potential to increase crop intensity from 85% to 130% targeting high value crops and 
vegetables and also provide improved irrigation for date production. Available reports show that for 
water  use  efficiency,  supplemental  irrigation  in  rain-fed  areas  resulted  in  higher  yield,  increased 
water  productivity  from  0.96  kg  to  3.7  kg  of  grain  per  m3  of  water,  prevented  excessive  use  of 
water,  and  modified  the  crop  calendar  considered  as  an  adaptation  measure  to  climate  change. 
Irrigation through mechanized raised bed technology increased wheat productivity while saving on 
water resources - applied water was reduced by 30%, yields increased by 25%, seed rate reduced 
by 50 %, and on-farm water use efficiency increased by 72%.  Taking into all factors, the mission 
has  computed  that  incremental  income  per  ha  would  be  ID  168,000  in  the  first  year  of  irrigation 
increasing to ID 280,000 per the third of irrigation as the efficiency improves. 
Table 7: Irrigation efficiency and crop intensity targets 
Irrigation system (IS) 
Current traditional surface irrigation system 
Improved traditional surface irrigation system*  
Advanced surface sprinkle irrigation system 
Irrigation localized irrigation system 
            *Raised bed technology 
Targets 
Irrigation efficiency 
35% 
45% 
60% 
70% 
Crop intensity 
85% 
100% 
115% 
130% 
ii.  The project proposes to introduce crop varieties and use of production technologies that are better 
adapted  to  climate  change.    In  saline  areas,  the  project  would  introduce  wheat  and  fodder 
varieties that have demonstrated their tolerance to high levels of soil salinity.   
iii.  The  project  would  also  introduce  high  value  vegetable  production  through  providing  support  for 
establishing green houses, apiculture, fisheries, IPM for dates and other crops, provision livestock 
packages for women, assets for men and youth that would help them engage more effectively in 
agriculture production or providing the support services to the agriculture and rural sector.   
iv.  Establishment of post-harvest facilities such as grading packaging, cold storage, etc. 
v.  Off-farm income generating activities;  
vi.  Representative models have been used to estimate the benefits. More models are to be developed 
as  the  design  progresses.  The  representative  modes  currently  used  are  milk  production,  wheat 
crop,  barley,  broad  bean  to  which  would  be  added  high  value  vegetable  crops,  fisheries, 
apiculture, enhanced value added from date production,  
3. 
The  nutrition  status  of  both  rural  and  urban  population  is  increasingly  dependent  on  the  heavily 
subsidized  ‘’food  basket”  provided  by  the  Iraqi  Public  Distribution  system  (TDS)  which  is  an  essential 
policy  measure  to  ensure  food  security  and  avoid  possible  malnutrition.  However,  the  subsidized  food 
rationing on a national scale with imported food has had a negative impact on the local grain market with 
consequent depressing effects on producer prices and on agriculture sector investment. Such subsidies 
are not considered in the economic costs.  
86 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
4. 
The project would strengthen the institutional capacity of the Government to monitor and report on 
climate  change  and  provide  farmers  an  early  warning  system  that  could  help  them  to  take  appropriate 
mitigation and adaptation measures to deal with changes in temperature and precipitation levels.  
5. 
Net Present Value (NPV) and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR). The net present value 
of the project over a ten-year period  is calculated to  be ID 5.9 million and the economic internal rate of 
return is estimated to  be17% at a discount rate of 10%. 
6. 
Sensitivity  analysis:  A  sensitivity  analysis  was  conducted  to  assess  the  changes  in  NPV  and 
EIRR  due  to  variations  in  the  future  benefit  stream  of  costs  or  delay  in  project  implementation.  The 
Project remains profitable under a wide range of project scenarios as shown below: 
87 
∆%IRR (%)NPV (USD M)17%5.33                   -10%17%16.69                 -20%15%12.27                 10%18%19.27                 20%16%10.24                 16%16.49                 14%12.21                 -10%17%16.40                 -20%15%12.10                 10%16%9.80                   20%14%11.50                 Output pricesInput prices Market price fluctuationsInput pricesProject costsUnforeseen factors that increase costsProject costs1 year lag in ben.Risks related to low start-up implementation capacity, staff turn over, many other public instututions involement2 years lag in ben.SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (SA)Link with the risk matrixBase scenarioProject benefitsYield levels declinesProject benefitsOutput pricesOverproduction coupled with the weak  marketing  infrastructure 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Overall computation of the Economic Rate of Return 
89 
A)D) Adoption ratesPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7Total92%Irrigation Investments03,0003,0003,0003,00012,000 Milk production  Wheat Crop  Barley crop Broad bean crop Adjusted (adoption rate)02,7002,7002,7002,7000010,80090%PY1(1,490)(174)(83)(164.1)Crop & Livestock diversification for smallholders07507507507503,000PY23,379262735.3Adjusted (adoption rate)0675675675675002,70090%PY35,257262735.3Productivity Enhancement and skills development/a07507507507503,000PY45,257394048.7Adjusted (adoption rate)0675675675675002,70090%PY55,257394048.7Employment Generation for youth0500500500500002,000PY65,257394048.7Adjusted (adoption rate)0450450450450001,80090%PY75,257394048.7PY85,257394048.790%PY95,257394048.720,000PY10+5,257394048.7100%37,06811721120033.10.10.190.2262%19.3%40.5%26.3%B) E) Cash Flow ('000 lc)Employment Generation for youthProductivity Enhancement and skills Economic Investment Costs                   Economic recurrent Costs           Economic O&M Costs        ('000 lc)Total Incremental CostsEconomic recurrent PY1000.000.0003,207003,207(3,207)PY20300.000.00305,684005,684(5,653)PY31,680610.000.001,7416,872006,872(5,132)PY44,760910.000.004,8518,802008,802(3,951)PY58,680990.000.008,77910,8070010,807(2,027)PY610,360990.000.0010,4592,974002,9747,485PY711,200990.000.0011,2992,374002,3748,925C) PY811,200990.000.0011,2991,45401,4549,845PY911,200990.000.0011,2991,45401,4549,845(ii) Crop & Livestock diversification for smallholdersCost per beneficiary                   236 FINANCIALNET INCREMENTAL COSTSMAIN ASSUMPTIONS & SHADOW PRICES1Climate Resilient Investments12.05Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification12.292%Outcomes and Indicators(i) Cropping intensity accruing from Irrigation schemes8.72Components and Cost (USD million)Output YieldsPrice (in I)Input pricesNET INCREMENTAL BENEFITS FIRR (@10%) ECONOMIC ANALYSISProject Management & Coordination NPV (IQD.) Total Net Inc. Benefits PROJECT COSTS AND INDICATORS FOR LOGFRAMETOTAL PROJECT COSTS (in million USD)32.99Base costs24PMU1 NPV (USD)  USD x person         1,649 USD x HHAdoption ratesBeneficiaries            140,000 people20,000 HouseholdsPRODUCTIONBENEFICIARIES, ADOPTION RATES AND PHASINGFINANCIAL ANALYSISFarm models'net incremental benefits(in '000 of IQD)Price (IQD)PY1011,200990.000.0011,2991,45401,4549,84575080015000FINANCIALBarley crop1260650Improved seedsRural wageOutput YieldsPrice (in I)Input pricesBroad bean13341,000ECONOMICOfficial Exchange rate (OER)Discount rate (opportunity cost of capital)ECONOMIC ANALYSISMilk production43501250FertilizerWheat Crop 1680550112010%11208%1.0011 All prices expressed in Local Currency (LC). See definition and formulas in the INSTRUCTIONS5,969517%EIRRECONOMICOfficial Exchange rate (OER)Discount rate (opportunity cost of capital)Shadow Exchange rate (SER)Social Discount rateStandard Conversion Factor Output conversion factorLabour Conversion factorNPV@ 10 % ('million IQD)NPV@ 10% ('million USD)ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Overall aggregation of benefits and computation of Economic Rate of Return 
90 
ReferenceY1Y2Y3Y4Y5+Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10(i) Cropping intensity accruing from Irrigation schemesBeneficiaries (160,000 dunums serving 40,000 ha)-                      10,000           15,000          15,000           -                    Cascaded and phased benefitsPhased benefitsY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10HH  in their year 1-                       10,000             15,000            15,000             HH  in their year 2-                       -                   10,000            15,000             15,000            -                   HH  in their year 3-                       -                   -                 10,000             15,000            15,000             -                   -                    HH  in their year 4+-                       -                   -                 -                   10,000            15,000             15,000             Progressive benefits- ha-                       168,000          224,000         280,000          280,000         280,000          280,000          280,000           280,000          280,000          Phased benefits- all ha in operationHH  in their year 1-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   -                   -                    -                   -                   HH in their year 2-                       -                   1,680              2,520               2,520              -                   -                   -                    -                   -                   HH  in their year 3-                       -                   -                 2,240               3,360              3,360               -                   -                    -                   -                   HH  in their year 4-                       -                   -                 -                   2,800              4,200               4,200               -                    -                   -                   HHs  in their year 5-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 2,800               4,200               4,200                -                   -                   HHs  in their year 6-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   2,800               4,200                4,200               -                   HHs  in their year 7-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   -                   2,800                4,200               4,200               HHs  in their year 8-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   -                   -                    2,800               4,200               HHs  in their year 9-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   -                   -                    -                   2,800               Total benefits (IQD'Millions)001,6804,7608,68010,36011,20011,20011,20011,200(ii) Crop & Livestock diversification for smallholders    Number of house holds participating (3000 HH)-                      750                750               750                750               Phased benefitsY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10HH  in their year 1-                       750                  750                 750                  750                 HH  in their year 2-                   750                 750                  200                 750                  HH  in their year 3-                 750                  750                 200                  750                  -                    -                   -                   HH  in their year 4+-                   750                 750                  200                  750                   -                   -                   Progressive benefits40,480                  40,480             40,480            40,480             40,480            40,480             40,480             40,480              -                   -                   Phased benefits-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   -                   -                    -                   -                   HH  in their year 1-                       30                    30                   30                    30                   -                   -                   -                    -                   -                   HH in their year 2-                       -                   30                   30                    8                     30                    -                   -                    -                   -                   HH  in their year 3-                       -                   -                 30.36               30.36              8.10                 30.36               -                    -                   -                   HH  in their year 4-                       -                   -                 -                   30.36              30.36               8.10                 30.36                -                   -                   HHs  in their year 5-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 30.36               30.36               8.10                  30.36               -                   HHs  in their year 6-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   30.36               30.36                8.10                 30.36               HHs  in their year 7-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   -                   30.36                30.36               8.10                 HHs  in their year 8-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   -                   -                    30.36               30.36               HHs  in their year 9-                       -                   -                 -                   -                 -                   -                   -                    -                   30.36               Total benefits (IQD'Millions)-                     30.36             60.72            91.08             99.18            99.18             99.18             99.18              99.18             99.18             Total Incremental Economic Benefits-                           30                 1 741            4 851             8 779            10 459           11 299           11 299            11 299           11 299          Programme economic costsProgramme economic costs- IQDmillions3,206.75,683.76,872.38,802.410,806.62,973.92,374.1Recurrent costs after Project closure1,454              1,454             1,454             Total Programme Economic Costs3,206.75,683.76,872.38,802.410,806.62,973.92,374.11,453.91,453.91,453.9Net Incremental Economic Benefits(3,206.7)(5,653.4)(5,131.6)(3,951.3)(2,027.4)7,485.38,925.09,845.29,845.29,845.2ERR17%NPV- Millions of IQD (10%)5,969 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Beneficiary phasing 
Economic Programme Costs (Costab) 
91 
SARP BeneficiariesSub componentProgramme intervention Target Beneficiary (Households)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Irrigation Investments12,00003000300030003000Crop & Livestock diversification for smallholders3,0000750750750750Employment Generation for youth20000500500500500Productivity Enhancement and skills development/a3000075075075075020,000a/ includes only 1000 from skills development to avoid double countingCrop, Livestock & Off-Farm DevelopmentIRAQ Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project-SARP Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies Totals Including Contingencies (IQD '000)Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8TotalY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8TotalA. Climate Resilient Investments 1. Irrigation Infrastructure schemes 656,091      1,744,564   2,603,725   3,768,636   4,608,432     742,211      455,824      14,579,482   557      1,481   2,211   3,200   3,913   630      387      12,378   2. Knowledge Management and Institutional strengthening 35,671        341,422      22,931        22,931        22,931          22,931        22,931        491,750        30        290      19        19        19        19        19        417        Subtotal 691,762      2,085,986   2,626,656   3,791,567   4,631,363     765,142      478,755      15,071,232   587      1,771   2,230   3,219   3,932   650      406      12,796   B. Agriculture & Livelihood Diversification 1. Crop, Livestock & Off-Farm Development 857,377      1,872,215   2,559,391   3,404,028   4,517,471     703,864      422,319      14,336,665   728      1,590   2,173   2,890   3,835   598      359      12,172   2. Skills Development & Capacity Building 38,219        76,438        114,657      152,876      203,834        31,849        19,109        636,981        32        65        97        130      173      27        16        541        Subtotal 895,596      1,948,653   2,674,047   3,556,903   4,721,305     735,713      441,428      14,973,646   760      1,654   2,270   3,020   4,008   625      375      12,713   C. Project management and coordination 1,619,345   1,649,085   1,571,589   1,453,948   1,453,948     1,473,056   1,453,948   10,674,919   1,375   1,400   1,334   1,234   1,234   1,251   1,234   9,063     Total PROJECT COSTS 3,206,702   5,683,725   6,872,293   8,802,419   10,806,617   2,973,911   2,374,131   40,719,797   2,723   4,826   5,835   7,473   9,175   2,525   2,016   34,571    
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Appendix 11: Draft project implementation manual 
Annotated Table of Contents 
Preparation of the Project Implementation Manual ( in Arabic) is scheduled as a key activity for 
year 1( preparatory phase) that needs to be carried out as a learning by doing exercise with the 
Project Management  Team (PMT)  and at  least Heads  of the  Governorate  Coordination  Teams 
(GCTs).  Given  the  newness  of  IFAD  and  its  approaches  –  especially  building  from 
“grassroots”  then  this  engagement  is  considered  critical  for  the  key  project  teams  to  fully 
support  the  project  approach  and  methodology  especially  with  regard  to  upward  budgeting 
and consultative MIS and impact assessment. 
Chapter 1:  Introduction and background (One Page) 
Describe the purpose and objectives of PIM, mention who are going to use this PIM, indicate the 
advantages of using PIM. Please state that PIM is a dynamic document and it should be updated 
as when required by the PMU staff. 
Chapter 2:   Project Summary (about 6-10 pages) 
Briefly describe the background to the project.  
Attach Project Log-frame at the end of this Chapter for clarity. 
Chapter 3:  Project Organisation and Management 
Briefly describe coordination and management arrangements, project steering committees, and their 
roles and functions, coordination arrangements at grassroots levels, organisation structure at national 
and Governorate levels, staffing plan and roles and responsibilities and terms of reference of staff.  
Arrangements for implementation of project interventions, agencies responsible for the 
implementation of various project components and subcomponents, etc. 
Develop and provide a matrix with following columns: project intervention, coverage, implementation 
responsibility, procurement, timeline and schedule of implementation, etc. 
Briefly indicate PMT staff responsibilities or TORs and recruitment of staff and procedures for 
recruitment. Provide an outline of duties and responsibilities of individual staff and also indicate the 
need for gender balance in staff structure etc. 
Chapter 4: Guidelines for Investments in Infrastructure, Training and Grants under the Project  
Purpose and objective of this section would be to identify the criteria for the selection of all types of 
infrastructure and provision of in kind grants to individuals and groups building on the initial criteria 
given in the different components. 
Identify the selection criterion for each of the project components specifying by gender, youth and 
women headed households, landholding size, herd size and other proxy indicators for income and 
asset ownership. 
Chapter 5:  Procurement Procedures 
Describe general conditions of procurement and methods of procurement Regulations;  
Describe the procurement procedures in detail and as applicable to the project; 
Describe approval procedures and appropriate authorities; review mechanisms: prior and ex-post 
review; review of pre-qualification bidders or tenders; describe the procurement committees at 
different level and thresholds for approvals at different level;  
Prepare a 18-month procurement plan and attach it at the end of the chapter;  
93 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11: Draft project implementation manual 
Chapter 6:  Finance Management (to be extracted from LTB) 
Provide a brief introduction regarding purpose of this section. 
One or two paragraphs on project costs and financing arrangements; 
Describe in brief the flow of fund mechanism; 
Describe type of accounts: designated account, project account, subproject account etc and their 
operations; 
Describe the disbursement procedures and withdrawals (to be obtained from the Letter to the 
Borrower and its attachments) 
Include checklist for sending withdrawal application; 
Describe audit procedures and arrangements in place for conducting effective audit for each year and 
also describe arrangement for internal audit and its procedures; 
Identify annual audit statements and indicate how these statements are prepared and forwarded to 
IFAD and other entities; indicate how project completion report will be carried out and required 
financial statements.  
Indicate a list of registers and records to be maintained at PMU and RPMU office such as contract 
record, individual contract monitoring form etc. 
Chapter 7:  Management Information System  
Use the LFA for specifying the Project’s M&E framework: (i) first level output monitoring; (ii) second 
level outcome monitoring and (iii) third level impact evaluation; 
Indicators for output monitoring; 
Indicators for outcome monitoring; 
Indicators for impact evaluation; 
Impact assessment indicators and anchor indicators – which have also been included at the impact 
level of in the Logical Framework Analysis.  
Specific beneficiary surveys and third party baseline and mid-term and completion surveys required 
and their cost estimates 
Reporting and communication: annual reports, RIMS survey reports 
Attachments: RIMS indicators including the use of the Revised RIMS framework (2017) 
Chapter 8:  Guidelines for preparing Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Purpose and objective of this section 
General introduction on the preparation of AWP&B 
AWP and B will be synchronized.  
The result-oriented AWP&B will typically have the following elements: 
  Quarterly targets for implementation (physical) 
  Appraisal Target (physical) 
  AWP&B Target (physical) 
  Unit cost for the proposed activity 
  Achievements by Appraisal estimates and Annual Plan estimates 
  Budget estimates by Appraisal and Annual plan 
  Financing rule 
  Budget Category 
94 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
  Procurement Method etc. 
Key Tools for the preparation of AWP&B are: project Log-frame, detailed cost table, AWP&B 
template, financing plan, financing rules in the procurement methods, Finance Agreement, last project 
progress report. 
KEY ANNEXES 
  Project Log-frame, updated 
  RIMS/RIDE Indicators 
  Template for AWPB  
  TOR for PMT and GMT staff  
  Procurement Plan 
  Sample form for Record of Contracts 
  Sample form for tracking Service providers contracts 
  Staff and community training programme/Calendar 
 
Indicators for output, outcome and impact monitors 
  Any other 
95 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies 
1. 
Adherence to IFAD Policies: IFAD’s fifth Strategic Framework covers the period 2016-2025. It 
serves as an overarching policy guideline to provide direction to IFAD’s work, and as a key instrument 
for consolidating IFAD’s development effectiveness.  The current project is well aligned to meeting its 
overall goal and is well aligned with its five principles of engagement namely that IFAD-supported 
programmes will consistently aim to target and benefit the largest number of poor rural people 
possible, empower them socially and economically, and promote gender equality. IFAD will place a 
premium on innovation, learning and scaling up of successes and, in the process, leverage effective 
and efficient partnerships where comparative advantages are exploited for greater impact. SARP is 
also well aligned to achieving IFAD’s strategic objectives in its key areas of thematic focus.  
2. 
The design of SARP has been informed by both local and regional knowledge, with the 
government and other local partners providing key inputs into the design process. The design has 
been informed by the lessons learnt from other countries in the region with similar or comparable 
contexts and the policies of IFAD.  
Further the innovation for a fragile state of holding a three day PDR review workshop with key 
3. 
government stakeholders has added a new, substantive perspective to building an understanding 
between IFAD and its policies and government stakeholders (Ministries of Finance, Planning, 
Agriculture, and Water).Given that this is the first IFAD investment with Iraq the opportunity to rigorous 
examine the project. Learn in more detail about key aspects of southern Iraq communities, water use 
and associated farming systems and to explain and discuss relevant IFAD policies and approaches 
was invaluable. 
Following commitments made under the Consultations on the Ninth and Tenth Replenishments 
4. 
of IFAD’s Resources, and the corporate-level evaluation on fragility, the project also incorporates 
some of the key elements of IFAD strategy for engagement in countries with fragile situations.  The 
current project has been kept intentionally simple and flexible to accommodate the weak institutional 
structures in the country and the conflict in the North which has its reverberations across the country. 
The strong focus of the project on rehabilitating livelihoods and building capacities and local 
institutions stems from the fragility of the country. 
The design of the current project benefitted from the guidance tools relevant for the current 
5. 
project such as those related to targeting, gender, small farmer organizations, community 
development, climate change and the private sector. IFAD’s poverty targeting and gender sensitive 
design and implementation guidelines updated in January 2013 are annexed. Women and youth are 
given a central role in the project design and dedicated staff, specific targets and separate budget line 
items have been allocated for them.   
6. 
Smallholder Farmers' Organizations (FOs) are considered strategic partners for IFAD, not 
simply as project beneficiaries but as institutions that deliver services to their members, speak on their 
behalf and becoming key actors in social and policy dialogue at the local, national and international 
levels. The project retains this focus on farmer’s organizations and community driven development in 
its approach in the implementation of the project. Given the local social development context, 
separate women’s groups and associations would  be formed which would work with women.  
IFAD’s climate change strategy33 recognizes that the speed and intensity of climate change are 
7. 
outpacing the ability of poor rural people and societies to cope.  The current project takes cognizance 
of the fact that poor rural people are in the front line of climate change impacts; the ecosystems and 
biodiversity on which they rely are increasingly degraded. This is particularly true of the southern 
Governorates of Iraq.  The project incorporates IFAD’s assessment that climate-related risks, and 
potential opportunities, can be addressed more systematically within its projects and policy advice. 
The current project has made use of the ASAP grant to integrate climate change and environmental 
concerns within the project design. Weather stations are being planned for the project area to assist 
vulnerable farmers with timely information on changes in weather, rainfall, temperatures and their use 
in shaping decisions regarding watering, use of adapted crop varieties, animal breeds and other 
33 Climate Change Strategy. IFAD, May 2010. 
97 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
adaptation measures. The investments to be undertaken within the project will promote resilience and 
take into consideration the vulnerability of the target areas in terms of water shortage, salinity and 
post-harvest losses. The project will also promote policy engagement relevant to adaptation of the 
agriculture sector to climate change. A detailed climate change vulnerability assessment was 
undertaken in collaboration with WFP to ensure the identification of the main risks and consequent 
project interventions, in an effort to enhance the resilience of poor rural communities. 
The current design is in full accord with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership 
8. 
Strategy which places strong emphasis on further developing and strengthening the linkages of 
smallholder farmers with the private sector. The Farmers Unions and Associations, the women’s 
groups and Youth Associations and Agriculture Cooperatives will be linked with markets. The project 
would follow an approach that works backwards from the market to ensure that there is a demand for 
the products of the smallholder and that market links are established with private firms prior to 
initiation of any activities.   
9. 
In keeping with the principles established in the IFAD Rural Finance Policy and the IFAD 
Decision Tools for Rural Finance, the project would not include a rural finance component given that 
the guiding principles enshrined in the IFAD policy cannot be implemented in the fragile and weak 
institutional base of the country and that market-based approaches that strengthen rural financial 
markets cannot be implemented in the country at this stage.  
10.  At the corporate level in IFAD, there are several key platforms and policy dialogues that have 
been initiated which would be highly relevant for Iraq. One of these is the Platform for Agricultural Risk 
Management (PARM), an initiative focused on making risk management an integral part of policy 
planning and implementation in the agricultural sector. While Iraq is not currently a country of focus for 
PARM, it could add significant value in assisting the country to deal with the risk in the agriculture 
sector such as that arising from water scarcity and increasing levels of salinity that has forced many of 
the smallholders away from agriculture.  At some point in the future the country should be added 
within the purview of PARM. 
98 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
Appendix 13: SECAP Review Note 
1. Major landscape characteristics and Issues (Social, natural resources, and 
climate)  
1.1 Socio-economic context 
Iraq has a territory of about 435,052 km that extends between latitudes 29 º 5’ and 37 º 22’ north, and 
between longitudes 38 º 45’ and 48 º 45’ east. Iraq is an oil-rich upper middle-income country in the 
region  with  a  population  of  36.0  million  growing  at  3%  per  year  and  of  which  33%  are  rural.  It  is 
estimated that  the  population  will rise to  40.4 million  by 2025. The per capita gross national income 
(GNI)  amounted  to  USD  5,550  in  2015  corresponding  to  a  purchasing  power  price  (PPP)  of  USD 
14,850. The agriculture sector accounts for 8.6% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) including the oil 
sector, and 32% without the oil sector. Economic growth has averaged 7.1% per year over the past 
five years, and it is projected to grow at 7.2% in 2016 and at around 5% in the next few years. This is 
driven  by  the  projected  ramp-up  in  oil  production,  increase  in  oil-related  FDI,  structural  reforms  and 
implementation  of  the  IMF  program.  However,  conflict,  and  excessive  dependence  on  oil  pose 
significant  challenges  to  Iraq’s  socio-economic  development.  Iraq  was  ranked  141  out  of  187 
countries in the 2015 Human Development Index. Unemployment rate is 11% nationally (7% of males 
and 13% of  females).  Around  653,000  people  are  unemployed,  of  which  496,000  are  male  and 
157,000 are female. Youth (15-24 years) unemployment is high at 18% (27% of females and 17% of 
males).  The  renewal  of  civil  unrest  in  2013  has  displaced  some  1.1  million  Iraqis  or  made  them 
refugees, and created a population of concern of 1.5 million. The loss of homes and businesses in the 
conflict is considerable.   
Iraq  has  been  identified  as  a  country  with  extreme fragility  by  IFAD  (included  in  the  list  of  countries 
with most fragile situations), peer organizations and IFIs (World Bank) and international assessments 
(in  the  'high  alert'  category  in  the  Fund  for  Peace  Index,  which  forms  the  basis  for  OECD's 
assessment of fragility). Fragility affects rural development significantly, reducing institutional capacity 
and  service  delivery.  For  Iraq,  this  fragility  is  complex,  subnational  and  multi-dimensional  mainly 
stemming  from  weak  institutional  capacities  and  structures  for  good  governance.  Volatile  and 
transboundary security  with associated risks are not  very  conducive to private sector investment for 
reconstruction, inclusive economic growth and job creation. 
Rural poverty. In 2012, rural poverty rate stood at 31 %, nearly the double of the urban poverty one 
(15 %) with 19% cumulative poor people in Iraq living below the national poverty line of less than 2.2 
US$  per  person  per  day.  About  54%  of  the  labour  force  is  rural  and  the  rural  population  is  more 
adversely affected by Illiteracy (25%) than the urban population (14%). The average rural household 
size is 9.25 persons. Rural poverty in Iraq is a direct consequence of the rapid 3% population growth, 
internal conflict and insecurity, climate change, increasing water scarcity and rapid desertification. The 
combined  effects  resulted  in  reduced  prospects  for  viable  rainfed  and  irrigated  agricultural  and 
livestock production, and lack of sustainable income-generating opportunities for rural communities.   
At  the  regional  level,  and  out  of  the  18  Governorates  in  Iraq,  the  poverty  ratio  ranged  from  35%  to 
52% for the 5 poorest governorates, from 11% and 26% for 9 governorates and from 2% to 10% for 
the  remaining  4  governorates.  In  the  rural  areas  of  the  5  poorest  governorates,  small-scale  farmers 
and  livestock  producers  are  the  most  marginalized  households  with  unemployed  young  men  and 
women members as the most vulnerable. Small-scale farmers with a holding size ranging from 2.5 to 
7.5 ha account for 35% of total number of farmers with subsistence cereal crops accounting for 58 % 
of their cultivated area. Medium size farmers account for 34% with a holding size ranging between 7.6 
and 12.5 ha. 
Livelihoods  and  nutrition.    Given  the  current  low  crop  and  livestock  productivity,  agriculture  is  no 
longer  the  major  source  of  livelihood  for  smallholder  farmers.  The  nutrition  status  of  both  rural  and 
urban  population  is  increasingly  dependent  on  the  heavily  subsidized  ‘’food  basket”  provided  by  the 
99 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
Iraqi  Public  Distribution  system  (TDS)  which  is  an  essential  policy  measure  to  ensure  food  security 
and  avoid  possible  malnutrition.  However,  the  subsidized  food  rationing  on  a  national  scale  with 
imported  food  has  had  a  negative  impact  on  the  local  grain  market  with  consequent  depressing 
effects on producer prices and on agriculture sector investment. 
Gender. Despite steps taken towards gender equality since 1990, traditional societal views of women, 
insecurity and weak performance of state functions are affecting the role of Iraqi women in rebuilding 
the country. However, there are some positive signs of women’s participation in higher levels of the 
public sector and government (e.g. in 2010, the average rate of parliament seats held by women was 
27%).  
The  ratio  of  girls  to  boys  in  primary  school  rose  from  0.88  in  2006  to  0.94  in  2011;  in  secondary 
school, the ratio rose from 0.75 in 2006 to 0.85 in 2011.34 It was estimated that in 2011, 28.2 percent 
of women 12 years or older were illiterate, more than double the male rate of 13 percent.35 Only one 
third of young women - those aged 15 to 24 - living in rural areas are educated. Women’s health has 
seen some gains. The percentage of births attended by skilled personnel has risen significantly in the 
last decade. And the maternal mortality rate - which at 84 per 100,000 births in 2006 was the highest 
in the region - appears to have dropped significantly, to 24 per 100,000 in 2011.36  
There is considerable inequality in the labor force. Only 14 percent of women are working or actively 
seeking  work,  compared  to  73  percent  of men.  Those  who  are  employed  are  mostly  working  in  the 
agricultural  sector.  The  percentage  of  women  in  paid  employment  in  the  non-agricultural  sector  has 
risen from 12.1 percent in 2008 to 14.7 percent in 2011. Women with a diploma have a harder time 
finding jobs: 68 percent of women with a bachelor’s degree are unemployed. The rural unemployment 
rate  is  higher  for  females  than  males.  Due  to  years  of  war  and  political  instability,  10  percent  of 
households are headed by women, most of them widowed, but many of them divorced, separated or 
caring for sick spouses. They represent one of the most vulnerable segments of the population  and 
are generally more exposed to poverty and food insecurity as a result of lower overall income levels.37 
Youth.  Iraq  is  facing  a  ‘youth  bulge’  and  individuals  between  15–24  years  old.    represent  19.6%  of 
Iraq’s population.  The number of young people entering their reproductive years and the labour force 
is  expected  to  increase  significantly  between  2011  and  2015,  creating  both  an  opportunity  and  a 
challenge to Iraq’s society and economy. This segment of the population has been deeply affected by 
the on-going war and conflict that they have witnessed for much of their lives.  The various conflicts 
have significantly limited young people’s educational and employment opportunities in Iraq and deeply 
impacted  their  vision  of  their  future.  The  enrolment  ratio  in  intermediate  education  is  barely  40 
percent;  for  secondary  education  it  is  less  than  30  percent.  The  illiteracy  rate  is  high,  and  the 
unemployment  rate  for  both  sexes  combined  is  estimated  at  about  30  percent. Adolescent  girls  are 
worse off than boys in every respect. There is a high probability that girls will be married before their 
18th  birthday  without  their  consent.  In  terms  of  participation,  only  40  percent  of  youth  perceive  the 
value of taking part in social and political life. A survey38 indicated that only 56.9% felt optimistic about 
the  future,  they  have  little  trust  in  the  current  system  of  governance  and  almost  17%  expressed  a 
strong desire to emigrate.39 Despite several measures taken by the Government recently to deal with 
youth, significant challenges remain. 
1.2 Natural resources and Climate  
Iraq can be divided in four zones: (i) the Mesopotamian alluvial plain that occupies a quarter of the area 
of the country. equivalent to 132,500 km2; (ii) the desert plateau located in the west of Iraq, occupying 
about less than half the size of Iraq or 168,552 km2; (iii) the mountainous region located in the northern 
and north-eastern parts of the country, covering about 92,000 km2; (iv) and the undulating region, a 
34 Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS) conducted by the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Government. March 2013. 
35Iraq Knowledge Network (IKN) survey of 2011. 
36 World Health Organization. 
37 UN Fact Sheet. March 2013. 
38 National Youth Survey by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Government of Iraq. 2009 
39 http://uniraq.org/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=1140:iraqi-youth-key-statistics-and-
resources&Itemid=606&lang=en 
100 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
transition zone between the low-lying Mesopotamian plain in the south and the high mountains in the far 
north and north-eastern areas, that covers 67,000 km2. 
The climate of Iraq is continental and subtropical. Winters are usually cool to cold, with an average daily 
temperature that might reach 16ºC dropping at night to 2ºC. Summers are dry and hot to extremely hot, 
with a shade temperature of over 43ºC during July and August, yet dropping at night to 26ºC. Most of 
the rainfall falls during winter, spring and autumn, and is non-existent in the summer period. Average 
annual rainfall is 154 mm, and it ranges from less than 100 mm over 60 % of the country in the south up 
to 1,200 mm in the north-east mountains40. 
Agricultural  resources.  The  total  agricultural  area  of  variable  quality  and  potential,  amounts  to  11 
million ha of which 6 million are actually cultivated with 2,5 million ha under rainfed in the North and 
3,5  million  ha  under  irrigation  in  the  Centre  and  the  South.  The  production  systems  include  an 
irrigated-based  system  in  the  Centre  and  South  and  a  rainfed-based  system  predominantly  in  the 
North.  In  the  irrigated  system,  in  addition  to  cereals,  winter  and  summer  vegetables,  corn,  rice  and 
fruit trees with predominantly date palm are grown. The rainfed farming system is crop/small ruminant 
based. In both systems the productivity is low. 
About 0.3 million ha are irrigated from surface water and the  rest from underground aquifers. Of the 
total  land  cultivated,  the  cereal  crop  group  is  preponderant  (53.5%,  from  which  31.6%  of  barley, 
19.4%  of  wheat,  and  1.1%  of  maize).  From  these  main  crops  there  is  a  dynamic  upward  trend  for 
wheat  and  maize  crops,  along  with  a  decrease  in  barley41.  Livestock  during  1990-2011  presents  a 
sharp decline from 10.06  LSU/ha in  1990 to 6.05  LSU/ha  in 2011,  when  it represents only 60.10 % 
from the livestock. The main decrease is found in poultry from 8.67 LSU/ha in 1990 to 2.77 LSU/ha in 
2000, to 4.14 LSU in 2010 and to 4.63 LSU in 2011. The main reason is the massive importation of 
poultry, favoured by the political events that took place in Iraq42.  
Table 1. The crop structure in Iraq during the period 1990-201243 
Table 2. The structure of animal load per cultivated hectare in Iraq during 1990-201144 
Agriculture  accounts  for  76%  of  total  water  use.  Irrigation  infrastructure  in  Iraq  includes:  (i)  a  wide 
range of hydraulic dams and water reservoirs for a cumulative  retention capacity of 70 billion m3; (ii) 
40 Zakaria, S. et al (2013) Historical and Future Climate Change Scenarios for Temperature and Rainfall for Iraq. Journal of Civil Engineering 
and Architecture, Vol. 7, Nº 12 (Serial Nº 73). 
41 Yousif, M.D. et al (2015) The agriculture potential development in the Republic of Iraq. Scientific Papers Series Management, Economic 
Engineering in Agriculture and Rural Development, Vol. 15, Issue 4. 
42 Yousif, M.D. et al (2015) The agriculture potential development in the Republic of Iraq. Scientific Papers Series Management, Economic 
Engineering in Agriculture and Rural Development, Vol. 15, Issue 4. 
43 FAO http://faostat3.fao.org 
44 FAO http://faostat3.fao.org 
101 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
45,000 km of water conveyance systems and 85,000 km of drainage canals; and (iii) 38,000 pumping 
and control stations for irrigation and drainage. Most of the conveyance canals is in state of disrepair 
as a result of poor maintenance and most of the drainage canals are non-functional due their lack of 
cleaning. Water use efficiency both at the conveyance level and on farm is low and ranges from 35% 
to 40%. The non-water saving surface irrigation system is practiced in 95% of irrigated areas and crop 
intensity does not exceed 85% of cultivated land. Over 75% of irrigated land is affected by salinity.  
Water resources. The rivers Tigris and Euphrates with their tributaries form the main surface resources 
in Iraq. The catchments area of these rivers is shared by five countries: Iraq, Turkey, Iran, Syria and 
Saudi Arabia.  Generally, the total annual flow of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers greatly fluctuates from 
year to year due to changing metrological conditions. The period extending from October to February is 
referred to as variable flood period where discharges in both rivers fluctuate depending on intensity and 
duration of rainfall at their basins. This period is usually followed by what is known as steady flood 
period extending from March to April. 
Increasing  water  scarcity  and  reduced  water  availability  are  dominant  economic  and  environmental 
challenges in Iraq. Current water use for all purposes far exceeds renewable supplies. The average 
yearly inflow of the Euphrates declined from 30.44 billion m3 for the period 1933-1971 to 12.75 billion 
m3 (42%) for the period 2008-11. For the Tigris, the inflow declined from 49.22 billion m3 for the period 
1933-98 to 33.11 billion m3 (67%) for the period 1999-2011. The decline in the inflow is due to over 
exploitation,  climate  change  and  the  Ataturk  Dam  in  Turkey.  The  annual  share  of  renewable  fresh 
water resources per capita in Iraq declined from 4,587 m3 in 1964 to 998 m3 in 2014. The quality of 
irrigation water is deteriorating in terms of salinity and chemical contaminants. 
1.3 Key Issues 
1.3.1. Main Threats 
Unsustainable Environmental and Natural resource management  
Iraq’s environmental conditions have suffered greatly from the impact of poor policies on pollution and 
resource management. The years of conflict left chemical pollution affecting the livelihoods and safety 
of an estimated 1.6 million Iraqis. The natural resources for agriculture use, namely land, water, forest 
and  pasture  have  been  inefficiently  and  unsustainably  managed  with  underground  water  resources 
overly exploited beyond their recharge capacity. The percentage of dried Mesopotamian marshlands 
is  now  90%.  This  resulted  in  increasing  threats  of  land  degradation,  desertification,  water  shortage, 
increased soil and water salinity, low irrigation efficiency, reduced soil fertility and low forest cover of 
4.0%.  
Iraq  was  considered  rich  in  its  water  resources  compared  with  other  countries  where  the  annual 
allocation per capita reached 6029 m3 in 1995 and 2100 m3 in 201545. Construction of dams on the 
Tigris  and  Euphrates  and  their  tributaries  outside  the  border  of  Iraq, and  the  growing  demand  for 
water in Turkey and Syria will lead to dry the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers in 2040. Furthermore, the 
supply  will  be  43  and 17.61 BCM  in  2015 and  2025 respectively  while current  demand is estimated 
between 66.8 to 77 BCM. These suggest that the Iraqi government needs to take quick, prudent and 
firm action as a high priority. To overcome these problems in Iraq, there is a great need for prudent 
management of water resources and the adaptation of nonconventional techniques to augment water 
resources. 
Decreasing  water  supplies  have  been  exacerbated  by  drought  conditions  between  2005  and  2009, 
which  have  devastated  agriculture  and  caused  drinking  water  shortages,  particularly  in  rural  areas. 
39%  of  cropland  suffered  a  reduction  in  coverage  for  two  years  in  succession  between  2007  and 
2009,  and  livestock  has  been  decimated46.  The  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  Iraq’s  two  major  surface 
water sources, may dry up by 2040 if current conditions prevail. 
45 Al-Ansari, N. et al (2014) Present conditions and future challenges of water resources problems in Iraq. Journal of Water 
Resource and Protection, 2014, 6. 
46 Hameed A. et al (2013) The Challenges of Water Sustainability in Iraq. Eng. & Tech. Journal, Vol. 31, Part (A) Nº5. 
102 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
Diminishing water availability, increased water salinity and low irrigation efficiency. About 75% of the 
irrigated area of Mesopotamian plain (more than 2 million ha) is moderately saline and another 25% 
has  levels  of  salinity  that  have  converted  once  productive  lands  into  salt-affected  wastelands.  Over 
39% of Iraq’s agricultural land suffered a reduction in cropland between 2007 and 2009.  Farmers of 
saline soils are using only 30% of their land for cropping and are achieving only 50% of the expected 
yields. Soil salinity caused cropping systems to move away from high-value crops to lower-value crops. 
One  of  the  most  serious  effects  of  the  excessive  use  of  chemical  fertilizers  is  their  infiltration  into 
underground  waters,  contributing  to  enhance  the  process  of  eutrophication  of  water  courses,  along 
with the existence of a process of salting the soil.  Another phenomenon produced in Iraq due to the 
overuse  of  chemical  fertilizers  is  the  proliferation  of  diseases  and  parasites,  whose  development  is 
more on excessively fattened crops with nitrogen. Effect of applying those fertilizers was looked into 
Iraq's  agriculture  through  knowledge  of  quantities  consumed  of  nitrogen  (N)  and  phosphorus  (P), 
expressed as the total amounts of nutrients active substance (s)47.  
Table 3. Evolution of fertilizers’ quantities in agriculture in Iraq during the period 2004-201148 
Climate change 
The Arab Forum for Environment and Development (AFED) in 2009 reported that the MENA countries 
- which already suffers from aridity, recurrent drought and water scarcity  - are in many ways among 
the  most  vulnerable  in  the  world  to  the  potential  impacts  of  climate  change,  mostly  the  increased 
average  temperatures,  less  and  more  erratic  precipitation  and  sea  level  rise.  Five  MENA  countries 
including Kuwait (52.6ºC), Iraq (52ºC), Saudi Arabia (52ºC), Qatar (50.4ºC) and Sudan (49.7ºC) were 
among  19  countries  that  set  new  record  high  temperatures  in  2010.  Iraq  faced  during  the  past  30 
years frequent non-uniform drought periods in an irregular repetitive manner. The temporal analyses 
of the standardized precipitation index (SPI) indicate the presence in the country of two drought types 
regarding  the  extent  of  the  event:  local  and  National.  National  drought  having  full  dry  extent  at  all 
meteorological stations, occurred more seldom during the historical years of 1983, 1998, 1999, 2000 
and 2008. On the other hand, local drought events occurring at one or two regions were evidenced in 
the  years  1987,  1989,  1990,  2001,  2002,  2003,  2004,  2005,2007  and  200949.  Devastating  drought 
gripped Iraq in the 2007-2008 growing season50, particularly hard-hitting the country’s leading wheat 
producing regions in the north (over 90 percent – between 675,000 and 725,000 ha - of the Nineveh 
governorate’s cropland remained barren throughout the winter, from a combination of aborted planting 
operations and drought-induced crop failure) where wheat production was down 45% from a normal 
harvest. 
IFAD  has  financially  supported  ICARDA  to  undertake  an  assessment  of  climate  change  impacts  in 
Iraq and Jordan51. According to this analysis, for the period 2010-2040, the annual precipitation is set 
to  decline  significantly,  but  here  the  outcomes  from  scenarios  A1b  and  A2  differ  substantially.  A 
decline of 5–20% is expected in > 90% under scenario A1b; the same decline  is anticipated  in only 
18% of Iraq under scenario A2. The climate projections from a more recent study  - “Iraq: A Climate 
47 Yousif, M.D. et al (2015) The agriculture potential development in the Republic of Iraq. Scientific Papers Series Management, 
Economic Engineering in Agriculture and Rural Development, Vol. 15, Issue 4. 
48 FAO http://faostat3.fao.org 
49 Al-Timimi, Y.K. et al (2013) Assessment of spatial and temporal drought in Iraq during the period 1980-2010. International 
Journal of Energy and Environment, Vol. 4, Issue 2. 
50  Trigo,  R.M  et  al  (2010)  The  intense  2007-2009  drought  in  the  Fertile  Crescent:  impacts  and  associated  atmospheric 
circulation. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology. 
51 De Pauw, E. et al (2015) Mapping climate change in Iraq and Jordan. ICARDA Working Paper 27. 
103 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
Vulnerability Analysis” - produced by WFP with IFAD funding in 2017, and based on a largest set of 
25 models examined for the lowest and the highest emission scenarios for 2030-2050-2080, are more 
in line with ICARDA’s results under scenario A2, as they predict the maintenance of rainfall at least at 
current levels,  with the south-west and south-east regions. There are erratic patterns in loss/gain  of 
summer  precipitation,  although  in  the  eastern  part  (scenario  A1b),  there  are  gains  of  >  20%  in 
summer  precipitation,  which  can  be  considered  irrelevant  due  to  the  scarce  average  seasonal 
precipitation. The same trend of increase (> 20%) extends into the autumn.  
Monthly  and annual temperature and change are  very similar between scenarios A1b and A2 in the 
ICARDA  report.  The  changes  in  mean  annual  temperature  between  current  climate  and  those  for 
2010–2040  across  the  study  area  are  in  the  range  1–1.5°C.  For  the  lowest  emission  scenario,  the 
WFP report predicts the maintenance  of temperature at moderately more elevated levels than today 
for  the  lowest  emissions  scenario,  while  very  large  increases  are  expected  for  the  highest  emission 
scenario  for  the  three  assessed  dates.  Seasonal  differences  can  be  expected  in  the  temperature 
increase. The temperature increases in spring and autumn are expected to be higher than in winter: 
about 80% of Iraq in the range of 1.0–1.5°C increase for scenario A1b, and 50% of Iraq even in the 
range  1.5–2°C.  Still  higher  increases  (1.5–2°C)  can  be  expected  in  summer  in  100%  of  Iraq  under 
both  scenario  A1b  and  A2.  For  the  WFP  report,  temperature  increases  will  be  higher  from  late 
summer till early winter. 
Across  Iraq  a  trend  towards  more  arid  conditions  prevails,  being  in  most  cases  the  result  of  higher 
potential evapotranspiration due to higher temperatures under both declining/increasing precipitation 
predictions.  The  region  with  higher  risk  of  aridification  is  in  the  north-western  part  of  the  country 
(Niniveh,  the  northern  extreme  of  Al-Anbar  northwards  of  the  Euphrates  river,  the  western  half  of 
Saleh-ad-Din  and  the  southern  extreme  of  Arbil)  where  the  highest  drought  severity  has  been 
registered  in  the  four  major  droughts  of  the  2007-2014  period.  Changes  in  the  temperature-limited 
growing period are expected to affect small high-altitude areas, with about 6% of the country expected 
to  have  an  increase  in  the  temperature-limited  growing  period  of  1–30  days.  The  net  effect  on  the 
moisture-  and  temperature-limited  growing  period  would  be  a  reduction  of  0–15  days  in  the  vast 
majority of the country (70–90%), with an increase of 0–30 days in a maximum of 8% of Iraq. 
A  shortage  of  water  may  arise  between  2020  and  2030  in  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  rivers  due  to 
growing demand in the riparian countries. An emergency situation might develop already around 2020 
because  the  expected  annual  4  km3  of  water  remaining  as  surplus  in  the  two  rivers  will  not  be 
sufficient52. Since  water shortages are forecast to occur with the  development of irrigation, solutions 
have to be found for an integrated basin-level planning of water resources development. Another main 
issue in water resources management is protection of water quality. The level of salinity especially in 
the Euphrates River is high and is expected to increase with the development of irrigation in the basin 
and, as a consequence, the diminutions of the water flow particularly in the dry season. It is therefore, 
with  excessive  use  of  water  in  irrigation  and  high  evapotranspiration  rate,  urgent  that  adaptive 
management practices such as drip irrigation, conventional residue management should be adopted 
throughout  the  watersheds  in  order  to  secure  long-term  ecosystem  productivity  and  sustainable 
agricultural communities. 
The WFP report considers the Climate Risk for Iraq to be Moderate, except for an area in the north-
western part of the country - (Niniveh, the northern extreme of Al-Anbar northwards of the Euphrates 
river, the western half of Saleh-ad-Din and the southern extreme of Arbil) which is considered to have 
a High Climate Risk. The High Climate Risk region has registered the highest drought severity in the 
four major droughts between 2007-2014, with a long-term tendency for decreasing rainfall in the past 
20  years  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  decreasing  tendency  and  high  inter-annual  variability  in 
vegetation  cover.  The  rest  of  the  country  with  Moderate  Risk  is  undergoing  a  warming  tendency  in 
winter months coupled with increases in rainfall in the early stages of the rainfall season (September-
November). This has led to significant increases in vegetation cover as well as a shift in the timing of 
green  up  towards  earlier  stages  of  the  season.  Current  decreasing  trends  in  rainfall  in  the  south-
eastern  regions  dominated  by  irrigated  agriculture  may  not  have  much  of  an  impact  given  the  very 
small amounts of the current climate and the dependence on irrigation for agricultural production. One 
52 Hameed A. et al (2013) The Challenges of Water Sustainability in Iraq. Eng. & Tech. Journal, Vol. 31, Part (A) Nº5. 
104 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
question that remains unexplored is the effect of the rising temperatures in the extent of snow cover 
and  snow  water  equivalent  and  therefore  on  the  dynamics  of  snowmelt  and  on  the  timing  of  water 
supply. A reduction in snow  water storage  is a very  likely scenario  given the extremely likely further 
rise in temperatures in the highlands of the basin. This needs to  be discussed with  local  experts on 
what might be possible consequences for irrigated agriculture in Iraq. 
Policy, Governance and Institutional drivers 
Iraq is in the middle  of a triple political, security and socio-economic transition. According to a 2014 
report  by  the  Centre  for  Strategic  and  International  Studies  (CSIS)  on  Iraq’s  economic  and 
governance  crisis,  fundamental  political  and  economic  reforms  are  required  to  achieve  any 
meaningful form of unity and stability and to overcome the sectarian and ethnic divisions in the country.  
The overall constraints relate to diminishing productivity for crop and livestock are:  
(i) 
Use  of  traditional  and  low  yielding  production  technologies  including  mono-cropping  and 
cereals-fallow rotation. 
Governance problems. The authority of traditional farmer organizations (WUAs, Cooperatives, 
farmer  associations…)  has  been  eroded  by  the  unrest  of  the  last  two  decades,  and  the 
various  land  reforms  that  fragmented  ownership  including  tenure  reform  associated  with 
irrigation development. Institutional support is needed to ensure that these groups regain their 
role and contribute to the development of the agricultural sector. 
Lack  of  enabling  agriculture  input  and  output  price  policy  -  the  prices  of  seeds,  fertilizers, 
pesticides, veterinary drugs and agriculture machinery and equipment are very high for local 
producers  to  compete,  without  incentives,  with  the  heavily  subsidized  imported  food  items 
available  in  the  local  market.  There  is  a  need  to  identify  policy  gaps  that  need  to  be 
addressed to help increase competitiveness of the sector and enhance its contribution to rural 
development and poverty alleviation. 
Weak agriculture research and extension services for technology transfer particularly to small 
producers: The capacity of the MoA and MoWR and other government institutions to provide 
services to the agriculture sector has drastically deteriorated over the past 20 years. Budget 
cuts  reduced  the  level  of  services  resulting  in  the  departure  of  skilled  human  resources  in 
agriculture  support  services  such  as 
research,  extension,  animal  health,  artificial 
insemination,  plant  quarantine  and  disease  control.  Most  of  agriculture  research  assets 
(buildings, labs and farms) have been damaged, and technicians are insufficient in number or 
quality.  The  sanctions  imposed  on  Iraq  disrupted  for  a  long  time  contacts  with  the  outside 
world except to some extent with ICARDA and FAO. There is a lack of a real extension and 
training  strategy  with  adequate  operating  budget,  involving  effective  decentralization, 
privatization,  gender  empowerment, 
information 
technologies, linkages with research and other institutions such as universities, private sector, 
and support to women and youth. 
Traditional societal views of women, insecurity and weak performance of state functions are 
affecting  the  role  of  Iraqi  women  in  rebuilding  the  country,  with  serious  educational 
constraints, lack of employment opportunities, and gender-based violence.  
Weak  private  sector.  Given  the  absence  of  incentive  policies,  the  private  sector  and  its 
institutions did not invest in agribusiness. Problems include security, unclear requirements for 
registering  and  closing  businesses, 
limited  communication 
license 
infrastructure  and  logistics,  difficult  access  to  finance  and  a  non-competitive  business 
for  rules-based-market 
environment 
competition. 
Limited access to rural financial services. 
farmer  participation,  use  of  modern 
transparent  and  clear 
requirements, 
frameworks 
lacking 
legal 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
1.3.2. Main Opportunities 
A)  Climate Change mitigation and adaptation 
According to the draft FNC document prepared by the Government of Iraq, it is likely that the adverse 
effects  of  climate  change  would  reduce  the  agricultural  production  and  make  the  problem  of  water 
shortage  in  Iraq  worse.  Thus,  several  priority  measures  should  be  taken  for  adaptation  and  be 
105 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
integrated  in  policy  development  at  the  national  and  sub-national  levels  to  enhance  agriculture 
development strategies and increase their advantages. 
The most important and required adaptation actions for the agricultural sector are: 
 
Improve management of rain-fed agriculture by digging water wells and applying complementary 
irrigation. 
  Raise  the  irrigation  efficiency  in  irrigated  agriculture  through  development  of  efficient  irrigation 
technologies (e.g. drip irrigation, sprinkler irrigation). 
  Conduct further research to identify and/or develop crop varieties which are low water demanding, 
and resistant to drought, high temperatures, pests, and/or soil salinity, as well as livestock breeds 
climate-adapted, disease-resistant and highly productive. 
  Use integrated methods for agricultural pest management and reduce reliance on pesticides and 
herbicides in agricultural systems. 
  Establish  an  effective  monitoring  system  of  weather/crop  production  and  natural  pastures 
conditions, including early warning systems for drought, floods, and desertification trend. 
  Strengthen strategic crops storage conditions for crops like wheat and barley to address potential 
drought seasons. 
  Dig water wells for drinking and livestock grazing in desert areas and expand the establishment of 
nature reserves. 
  Use  advanced  systems  to  restore  and  increase  natural  vegetation  cover  in  pastoral  areas, 
especially in the western desert. This should include the production of seeds from grassland plant 
species. 
  Expand projects of soil stabilization to reduce sand dune encroachment making use of innovative 
methods suitable for the Iraq context. 
  Apply and expand water harvesting techniques in desert areas to take advantage of rain floods. 
  Use modern methodologies for an integrated management planning of water resources in Iraq. 
Emerging national agriculture development programs. There are currently several emerging national 
programs being carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture that are piloting new practices and aiming at 
productivity  enhancement  and  efficient  use  of  natural  resources  and  adaptation  to  climate  change. 
These programs include: (i) the national program for the use of on-farm modern irrigation systems; (ii) 
the  national  program  for  the  improvement  of  wheat  production;  (iii)  the  national  program  for  the 
development  of  drought  and  salinity  tolerant  crops;  (iv)  the  rangeland  improvement  and  combatting 
desertification program; (v) the organic agriculture program; (vi) the program for the establishment of 
an  agricultural  meteorology  network;  (vii)  the  program  for  the  genetic  improvement  of  local  animal 
breeds; and (viii) the conservation agriculture project.  
Lessons learnt from IFAD and other donors’ supported projects and programs.   
The  above  national  agriculture  development  programs  have 
the 
effectiveness  of  a  wider  range  of  climate  change  adaptation  approaches  and  advanced  technology 
packages developed  by the National  Agricultural Research System (NARS) and other partners (e.g. 
ICARDA, FAO) through several regional agriculture research for development (R4D) projects (some 
co-financed  by  IFAD  grants  inclusive  of  Iraq).  Among  the  promising  validated  technology  packages 
released by these R4D projects, the following are relevant for being replicated and up-scaled by the 
Climate Resilient Crop and Livestock Production (CRCLP) Project:  
tested  and  demonstrated 
  For  water  use  efficiency,  supplemental  irrigation  in  rain-fed  areas  resulted  in  higher  yield, 
increased water productivity from 0.96 kg to 3.7 kg of grain per m3 of water, prevented excessive 
use  of  water,  and  modified  the  crop  calendar  considered  as  an  adaptation  measure  to  climate 
change. Irrigation through mechanized raised bed technology increased wheat productivity while 
saving on water resources - applied water was reduced by 30%,  yields increased by 25%, seed 
rate reduced by 50 %, and on-farm water use efficiency increased by 72%.  
  Comparison  between  water  use  efficiencies  for  various  irrigation  methods  (drip,  basin  and 
bubbler)  on  date  palms  have  shown  that  the  drip  system  has  the  highest  water  use  efficiency. 
Economic analysis found that the total cost for the subsurface drip irrigation system per hectare 
(including;  investment  management,  operation,  etc..)  can  be  less  than  30%  compared  to  the 
center pivot system.  
106 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
  For  date  palm,  integrated  pest  management  and  organic  fertilization  practices  are  promising.  In 
addition  to  environmental  benefits,  shifting  from  chemicals  to  bio-pesticide  for  the  date  palm 
Dubas Bugs resulted in an incremental return of USD 8440 per ha.  
  For  rainfed  integrated  crop-livestock  production  systems,  diversification  helped  spread  the  risk 
and increase revenues. Diversification included bee-keeping, processing of crop produce such as 
dates,  on-farm  feed  production,  use  of  by-products  for  making  feed  blocks,  barley  production, 
fodder  shrub  plantations,  improved  natural  pasture  and  range  management,  as  well  as  alley 
cropping. 
  For  small  ruminants,  the  application  of  holistic  packages  to  improve  sheep  flocks’  reproductive 
performance resulted in an increase of 55% to 80% of fertility rates and increased twinning rates 
from 5% to 24%. The reduction of winter-feeding gap by increased production of forage during the 
shortage  period,  not  only  released  the  pressure  on  natural  rangelands,  but  also  increased  milk 
production by 15% per ewe and decreased mortality by 47%. 
IFAD support to Iraq has so far been limited to grant  financed regional agriculture research projects 
implemented by ICARDA. The key lessons learnt form IFAD financed regional research grants, IFAD 
investment  projects  in  NEN  countries,  and  work  of  other  partners  and  donors  and  that  can  prove 
relevant to the CRCLP project design are:   
  Small-scale farmers are willing to adopt improved production  technologies, but they need to see 
results first. Given small scale farmers are risk averse, incentives to pay for the first year the cost 
of incremental inputs and services embodied in the new technologies, are essential to help taking 
risk. 
  On-farm  adaptive  research  complemented  by  a  network  of  demonstrations  at  farmer’s  field 
composed of a lead farmer and several satellite farmers, and/or a network of farmer field schools 
(FFS)  are  effective  platforms  for  quick  dissemination  of  technologies.  During  this  process, 
knowledge is shared and interactions among farmers produce a long-term effect. 
  The sustainability of impact generated by IFAD  investment projects beyond the  completion  date 
transfer  activities  and 
require  government  commitment 
beneficiaries’ ownership to operate and maintain the collective assets created by the project. 
to  continue 
technology 
funding 
2. Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks  
2.1 Key potential impacts 
The  project  should  not  generate  negative  social,  environmental,  and  climate  change  impacts, 
provided  it  builds  on,  fully  integrates,  and  facilitates  the  replication  and  upscaling  of  the  climate-
resilient  irrigation  and  agriculture  management  practices  and  technologies  that  are  proposed  as  CC 
adaptation priorities by the emerging national programs of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), and have 
been tested by the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) and other partners (e.g. ICARDA, 
FAO)  through  several  regional  agriculture  research  for  development  (R4D)  projects.  In  fact,  SARP 
fully  integrates  in  the  project  design  the  enhancement  of  environmental  and  social  resilience  in  the 
target  areas,  with  special  focus  to  gender  equity  and  integration  of  youth,  through  climate  resilient 
investments and capacity development - technical and institutional - of key public and private actors 
(Component 1), and through agriculture and livelihood diversification (Component 2). 
In fact, at this stage of the project design process, when the development of the full proposal has not 
yet taken place, it is important that the project design team takes into consideration the wider range of 
climate  change  adaptation  approaches  and  advanced  technology  packages  developed,  tested  and 
validated under IFAD-funded grants.  
3. Environmental and social category  
The project should qualify for category B, provided it fully integrates the approach, measures, lessons 
learned,  and  best  practices  of  NARS,  ICARDA,  and  FAO,  through  several  regional  agriculture 
research for development (R4D) projects (some of them funded with IFAD grants), and is used as a 
vehicle  to  upscale  and  expand  best  practices  in  terms  of  environmentally-sound  technologies  and 
107 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
participatory  and  capacity  development  tools  with  a  gender  focus  at  the  national  level  (institutional 
development and policy improvement) and at the local level.  
In  order  to  meet  the  environment  and  social  objectives,  SECAP  recommends  that  the  project 
considers the upscaling of the most promising validated technology packages released by these R4D 
projects,  such  as:  water  use  efficiency  (e.g.  comparison  between  drip,  basin  and  bubbler  on  date 
palms  have  shown  that  the  drip  system  has  the  highest  water  use  efficiency)  and  rehabilitation  of 
irrigation and drainage  infrastructure; integrated pest  management and organic fertilization  practices 
for date palms; income diversification including apiculture, fisheries and livestock packages for women 
from poor households, processing of crop produce such as dates, small greenhouses for high value 
vegetable  production,  etc.;  post-harvesting  infrastructure  and  equipment  to  reduce  perishability  of 
produce. 
From  the  social  point  of  view,  SARP  should  capture  the  need  to  promote  diversification  of  income 
sources in order to support rural livelihoods and build socio-economic resilience by reducing the risk 
of  income  loss  caused  by  climate  change.  The  strong  role  played  by  NGOs  coming  from  a 
humanitarian  background  and  specializing  in  reaching  out  to  women  (especially  female-headed 
households) in project implementation is expected to ensure attention to gender equality and women’s 
empowerment.  For  farmers’  participation  and  capacity  development,  the  implementation  of  effective 
methodologies successfully applied in Iraq and the region, such as farmer field schools composed of 
a  lead  farmer  and  several  satellite  farmers,  and/or  a  network  of  farmer  field  schools  (FFS)  both  for 
men  and  women  will  become  effective  platforms  for  quick  dissemination  of  technologies  among 
project beneficiaries. 
4. Climate risk category  
Based  on  the  recent  WFP  report  “Iraq,  A  Climate  Analysis”  funded  by  IFAD,  climate  risk  in  Iraq  is 
considered  Moderate,  except  for  a  region  in  the  North-East  which  is  considered  to  have  a  High 
Climate Risk. The four governorates  - Muthanna, Qadisiya,  Missan  and Thi Qar  – that make up the 
project  area  are  located  in  the  Moderate  part  of  the  country,  therefore  the  project  should  qualify  for 
Moderate Risk.  
According to the draft FNC document prepared by the Government of Iraq, it is likely that the adverse 
effects  of  climate  change  would  reduce  the  agricultural  production  and  make  the  problem  of  water 
shortage  in Iraq  worse. Thus, SARP  will support the implementation of priority  adaptation measures 
already tested and validated in the field, and will help integrated in policy development at the national 
and  sub-national  levels  to  enhance  agriculture  development  strategies.  The  most  important  and 
required adaptation actions for the agricultural sector are: 
  Raise the irrigation efficiency in irrigated agriculture through water infrastructure rehabilitation and 
adoption  of  micro-pressurized  efficient  irrigation  technologies  (e.g.  drip  irrigation,  sprinkler 
irrigation). 
Identify and promote crop varieties which are low water demanding, and resistant to drought, high 
temperatures,  pests,  and  soil  salinity,  as  well  as  livestock  breeds  climate-adapted,  disease-
resistant and highly productive. 
 
  Use  integrated  methods  for  agricultural  pest  management  with  special  focus  on  the  date  palm 
disease, and reduce reliance on pesticides and herbicides in agricultural systems. 
  Strengthen  strategic  crops  storage  conditions  for  crops  like  wheat  and  rice  to  address  potential 
drought seasons. 
  Support  income  diversification  opportunities  (e.g.  beekeeping,  processing  and  marketing  of 
agriculture produce especially dates, seed potatoes and high value vegetable crops to reduce the 
risk of climate shocks due to the dependence on just one economic activity,  with especial focus 
on women and youth). 
  Establish  an  effective  monitoring  system  of  weather/crop  production  and  natural  pastures 
conditions, including the upgrading and expansion of the Meteorological Monitoring Network, and 
the  development  of  early  warning  systems  for  drought,  floods,  and  desertification  trend.  Build 
governmental capacity to analyse and disseminate meteorological information and early warning 
to ensure that famers receive this information in a timely and actionable manner.   
108 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
  Support  institutional  and  technical  development  of  governmental  organizations  at  national  and 
local  level  to  mainstream  CC  adaptation  in  policy  development,  and  in  agriculture  practice  by 
extension agents, individual farmers, farmers’ organization and water users’ associations. 
5. Recommended features53 of project design and implementation  
5.1. Mitigation measures 
There  is  no  need  for  additional  information  on  mitigation  measures,  as  climate  change  adaptation, 
poverty reduction and gender inclusion are fully integrated in the project design. 
5.2. Multi-benefit approaches 
SARP  integration  with  the  previous  IFAD-funded  programs  that  tested  and  demonstrated  effective 
adaptation options to address climate change constraints  - such as the growing trend of heatwaves, 
water  scarcity,  soil  erosion,  soil  salinity,  pests,  among  others  –  and  facilitated  farmers’  participation 
and capacity development with special focus on women and youth, will helping upscale at a national 
level the lessons learned in these fields, and allow the overall IFAD intervention to have an impact on 
smallholders’ 
in  general,  and  achieve  economic,  social,  and 
environmental  benefits  in  a  framework  of  sustainability,  by  impacting  this  critical  sector  of  the 
economy.  
income  and  rural 
livelihoods 
5.3. Incentives for good practices 
The  comparative  advantage  of  IFAD  relative  to  this  project  relies  on  its  proven  targeting  and  result-
oriented approaches, its focus on the empowerment of smallholder farmers through the strengthening 
of their grass-root institutions and social capital, development of farmer’s capacities and skills, support 
and dialogue to facilitate the adoption of enabling policies; gender integration; as well as close project 
supervision and implementation support. These provide a good platform and a promising opportunity 
to engage with, build on and scale-up within the IFAD first investment project in Iraq.  
Smallholders dominate agriculture production in Iraq with limited ability to realise economies of scale 
or reduce their transaction costs, or deal with climate-resilient production, post-harvesting, processing 
and  marketing  issues.  Farmers  individually  do  not  have  the  resources  to  invest  in  the  marketing 
infrastructure  and  the  private  sector  has  not  yet  fully  emerged  to  capitalise  on  the  opportunities 
available. While a cooperative framework exists for the establishment of agriculture cooperatives and 
farmer  associations  there  has  been  limited  attention  paid  to  their  development.  The  cooperatives 
established  several  decades  ago  currently  exist  only  on  paper  with  limited  incentives  and  support 
available to encourage their formation and growth.  
The project would attempt to incentivize farming households who were obliged to abandon agriculture 
due to the deterioration of the irrigation infrastructure, which led them to suffer acute food shortages - 
women and children were particularly under-nourished - being forced to rely on daily wage labour or 
depend  upon  Government  food  security  programme.  The  project  will  address  the  potential  in  the 
target  Governorates  to  invest  in  irrigation  infrastructure  that  with  relatively  little  investment  some  of 
these schemes can be completed and others rehabilitated to ensure the supply of water to many  of 
the villages in these extremely fragile districts. The combined project actions supporting investments 
in  water  infrastructure,  grants  for  smallholder  farmers,  women  and  farmer  associations  and 
cooperatives  to  enhance  their  adoption  of  climate-resilient  crop  and  livestock  production  systems, 
post-harvesting  and  processing,  and  the  implementation  of  institutional  and  technical  development 
programmes for building the capacity and demonstrating the benefits of individual and collective group 
action  for  improved  input  supply,  post-harvest  and  marketing  functions,  will  create  the  necessary 
incentives  for  the  adoption  of  good  practices.  Moreover,  in  order  to  capitalize  on  the  opportunities 
created by the Government for the unemployed rural youth, the project would provide opportunities for 
development  of  skills  to  increase  their  marketability  and  assist  many  of  them  to  establish  their  own 
53 Guidelines as to what constitutes ENRM Core Principles and Best-Practice Statement can be found in IFAD ‘Environment 
and Natural Resource Management Policy’ (2011) 
109 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
enterprises  and  income  generating  activities  with  support  from  the  project  in  acquiring  productive 
assets.  The  project  would  in  particular  focus  on  women  and  youth  who  have  been  given  limited 
attention in the past. 
5.4. Participatory processes 
The project has developed a very proactive strategy for the participation of women in project activities 
especially recognizing that women have received a significant setback in Iraq due to years of conflict 
and the rise in the power of religious parties which has led to the deterioration of women’s rights and 
confined many of them within the homestead in rural areas.  
The implementation approach of the project would be demand driven and would follow a process in 
which individual and group beneficiaries would participate in selecting their activities. A diagnostic 
process would be adopted and implemented by the service providers especially hired to discuss 
individual and group investment opportunities and develop plans based on their potential, aspirations 
and capacities. The project would tailor project activities and services to the needs of the target 
beneficiaries and ensure their capacity to operate and manage the services for long-term 
sustainability. The project would ensure close partnership with each of the beneficiaries and rural 
community institutions to clearly identify the roles and responsibilities of each, the terms of partnership 
agreed by both parties, implementing arrangements, roles and responsibilities of each and if required 
agree on MOUs with Unions, Associations, groups and individuals to clarify expectations and agree 
on targets and monitoring and reporting responsibilities. 
The SECAP recommends that the project includes in its inception phase a baseline assessment of: 
(i) the participatory processes promoted through the previous IFAD grant-funded interventions in the 
country (e.g. the FFS approach used in the ICARDA applied research interventions on climate-
resilient agronomic practices supported by IFAD, and by other development agencies in Iraq and the 
region has proven to be a very successful participatory methodology for both women and men); and 
(ii) the successful achievements and the pilot activities tested through previous IFAD projects, and on 
the best practices and lessons learned by other donors engaged in agriculture development in Iraq.  
6. Analysis of alternatives 
Not applicable (social objectives are already included in the project design, and environmental/climate 
change adaptation objectives are part of the SARP interventions. 
7. Institutional analysis.  
7.1. Institutional framework 
At  the  national  level,  The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  would  be  the  lead  agency  responsible  for  the 
implementation of the project.  The project would have a Project Steering Committee (PSC) which 
would be led by the Deputy-Ministry of Agriculture and have as its members the Director General of 
Ministry  of  Environment,  the  Director  General  Ministry  of  Water  Resources,  Director-General  of 
Planning  and  the  Director-General  of  Planning  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture.  The  PSC  would  also 
include  technical  resource  people  to  be  nominated  by  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture.  The  PSC  would 
meet  at  least  once  a  year  to  approve  the  programme  and  provide  guidance  on  key  aspects.  The 
National Programme Coordinator would be the Secretary of the PSC. A Project Management Team 
(PMT)  would  be  established  in  Baghdad  and  be  responsible  for  overseeing  implementation  of  the 
project.  The  PMT  would  be  led  by  a  National  Project  Coordinator  and  would  be  assisted  by  a 
Financial Officer, a Procurement Officer, a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist who would coordinate 
the reports from the Governorates to present quarterly statistical reports and annual progress reports 
on  the  project.  The  PMT  would  also  include  a  Climate  Change  Adaptation  Specialist  (CCAS)  who 
would assist in developing an early warning system based on discussing with farmers what would be 
relevant information to provide them.  
At  the  Governorate  level,  the  Director  of  the  Directorate  of  Agriculture  would  assume  the  overall 
responsibility for the project, at the governorate level.  At the Governorate level, the structure would 
110 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
include  an  Advisory  Committee  that  would  advise  the  Department  of  Agriculture  in  each 
Governorate on key technical, social and institutional aspects of the project during implementation. A 
Governorate  Management  Team  (GMT)  would  implement  and  coordinate  project  activities.  The 
GMT  would  have  a  dedicated  Governorate  Coordinator  who  would  be  responsible  for  day  to  day 
implementation in each governorate. The staff of the GMT would include a Training and Community 
Organizer  and  a  Monitoring  &  Evaluation  Officer.    The  Directorate  of  Water  Resources  would 
implement  the  irrigation  investments.  The  team  would  be  supported  by  a  competitively  recruited 
service  provider  who  would  be  selected  from  local  NGOs  or  private  sector  firms  that  would  be 
responsible for identifying the target group and supporting them in the implementation of the various 
project activities in coordination with the Department of Agriculture Extension.  Short Term Technical 
Assistance  would  be  used  for  any  specific  assistance  during  project  implementation.    The 
Government would provide all key staff and IFAD would pay an additional stipend of 30%. However, 
the  service  provider  and  technical  assistance  would  be  supported  by  IFAD  financing.  The  project 
would  also  provide  vehicles,  office  equipment,  operation  and  maintenance  and  support  all  field 
activities.   
7.2. Capacity building 
SARP  Project  Sub-Component  1.2  “Knowledge  Management  and  Institutional  Strengthening”  will 
build  the  institutional  and  technical  capacity  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment  for  developing  a  climate 
change  adaptation  strategy  for  dealing  with  the  agriculture  sector,  and  will  support  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture  for  upgrading  and  expanding  its  Meteorological  Monitoring  Network,  and  strengthen  the 
programmatic and analytical capacity of the team of young specialists managing and maintaining the 
system,  ensuring  the  dissemination  of  the  information  relevant  for  the  extension  centres,  research 
stations and farmers. The project would also assist in the MoA in developing an early warning system. 
The project would provide opportunities for the staff from the Directorate of Agriculture in the project 
governorates  and  other  relevant  staff  to  avail  of  special  training  opportunities  and  learning  and 
exposure  visits  especially  within  the  region.  It  is  expected  that  300  people  from  different  agencies 
could  avail  of  specific  trainings  in  addition  to  the  learning  and  exposure  visits.  South-South  and 
Triangular  Cooperation  (SSTC)  would  be  explored  as  a  tool  to  understanding  how  countries  in  the 
region  with  similar  socio-economic  profile  have  resolved  some  of  the  challenges  in  agriculture  and 
rural development. These areas could include understanding how different countries have dealt with 
some of the following issues important for Iraq: (i) climate change issues and developed early warning 
systems  (Nepal  and  Bangladesh);  (ii)  implemented  integrated  pest  management  approaches 
especially for the elimination of the Red weavil in date palm (Iran and Kuwait); (iii) development of the 
cooperative  movement  (Morocco).p  Visits  would  be  organized  to  these  countries  which  would  be 
followed by the key resource visiting the project areas. 
On the other hand, SARP Sub-Component 2.2. would provide several types of trainings; (i) technical 
and business training associated with the provision of assets and inputs through grants to smallholder 
farmers,  women  and  farmer  associations  and  cooperatives,  for  adopting  climate-resilient  crop  and 
livestock productivity; (ii) training in climate resilient approaches and technologies, including efficient 
irrigation  technologies,  introduction  of  saline-resistant  wheat,  rice  and  fodder  crop  varieties,  pest 
management of date palm diseases following integrated pest management principles and the training 
of trainers for surveillance, monitoring and control of pests, among others; (iii) vocational training for 
young men and women, including among other operators of climate-resilient machinery, operation of 
drip irrigation systems, income diversification training, including beekeeping and processing of dates, 
seed  potatoes  and  vegetables,  etc.;  (iv)  training  on  institutional  development,  management  and 
business  plan  development,  technical  skills  on  the  management  of  collectively  owned  assets  (e.g. 
post-harvesting facilities and processing facilities for food, dairy, apiculture, plastic houses, fisheries, 
etc.)  for  community  groups,  water  users  associations  and  farmer  organizations;  and  (v)  Institutional 
capacity building for Government extension staff including learning and exposure visits. It is expected 
that the project would training around 4400 individuals in the project area of which at least 1400 would 
be women. 
The project will build on the positive results of the IFAD-funded agriculture applied research projects 
implemented  by  ICARDA  and  other  projects  supported  by  development  institutions  in  Iraq  and  the 
region,  to  help  scale-up  on-farm  application  of  sustainable  land  management  and  climate  resilient 
farming  systems  by  farmers  in  Iraq.  In  this  sense,  the  Farmers  Field  Schools  (FFS)  approach  has 
111 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
proven  successful  in  agriculture  development  projects  supported  by  IFAD  in  Iraq  and  the  region, 
complemented  with  ad-hoc  training  for  producers’  associations,  water  users  organizations  and 
cooperatives,  addressing  all  relevant  institutional  development,  organizational,  management,  and 
technical issues. The project will include horizontal learning involving exchanges between the different 
FFS and other successful experiences in the country. 
7.3. Additional funding 
Through the allocation of ASAP funds (USD 2 million), which channels climate finance to smallholder 
farmers  so  they  can  access  the  information  tools  and  technologies  that  help  build  their  resilience  to 
climate  change,  and  a  funding  contribution  of  USD  9.17  million  from  the  Adaptation  Fund  (AF),  the 
project  will  leverage  financing  to  support  Climate  Resilient  Investments  (infrastructure  to  improve 
infrastructure  and  equipment;  agro-
irrigation  and  drainage;  climate-proof  post-harvesting 
meteorological stations and early warning system) under Component 1, and to build institutional and 
technical  capacity  of  key  public  and  private  actors  climate-resilient  agronomic  systems  and 
technologies and policy improvement. 
8. Monitoring and Evaluation 
The Project’s Logical Framework provides indicators for Project implementation along with their 
corresponding means of verification. The M&E system is expected to generate quantitative and 
qualitative information on the project’s performance in a form that would compare physical progress 
against the planned targets and allow assessment of performance and undertake any remedial action 
if required. The project uses IFAD’s revised RIMS framework to enhance the measurement of IFAD's 
results at the outcome level. The monitoring and evaluation indicators have been disaggregated by 
gender. The project team would fine-tune the progress and performance and impact indicators of the 
project at the Start-Up Workshop with support from IFAD, if required. The Project Management Team 
would define targets and indicators for subsequent years annually as part of the internal planning 
processes and build on the experience gained as the project evolves. 
The overall responsibility for the M&E activities would be assumed by the National Project Coordinator 
who would be assisted by the Monitoring and Evaluation Officer at the national level and the M&E 
officers at the Governorate level in preparing all progress and monitoring reports. Given the limited 
capacity for monitoring and evaluation overall in the country especially among the NGOs and some of 
the local partners who are expected to partner with the project, the project would select strong 
monitoring and evaluation staff and provide them proper guidance on IFAD’s RIMS and provide 
guidance on the statistical and narrative report formats.  
A Third party would be contracted to undertake a Baseline Survey that would be conducted during 
the first year of the Project. IFAD would provide the PMT guidelines in developing the terms of 
reference and the household questionnaire for the baseline survey. Assistance would be sought from 
IFAD’s newly established Strategic Planning and Impact Assessment Division if required. A Mid-Term 
Review would be carried out towards the end of the Project’s third year. The review would cover: 
(i) physical and financial progress as measured against AWPBs; (ii) progress in the implementation 
and emerging outputs and intermediate outcomes of the irrigation infrastructure schemes; (ii) 
assessment of the efficacy of the institutional development and capacity building activities; (iii) 
progress in crop and livestock productivity through provision of assets, training and market linkages; 
(vi) progress in establishing off farm income generating activities providing ancillary services for 
agriculture growth (vii) implementing of climate change resilient activities. 
Final Evaluation: An independent Final Evaluation would take place three months prior to the Project 
completion date, and would assess overall project outreach, outcomes and impact. The final 
evaluation would also review the sustainability of results and the potential for scaling-up. The final 
evaluation would provide recommendations based on lesson learnt that would be taken into 
consideration while designing similar projects in the future in similar contexts. The Final Impact 
Assessment would be undertaken by a neutral agency with no previous involvement in project 
implementation. The Terms of Reference for this evaluation would be prepared by IFAD. 
112 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  SECAP Review 
9. Further information required to complete screening, if any  
There is no need for additional information to complete screening. Ideally, and to complement the 
detailed climate and environment assessments that have been undertaken, a matrix for ESMP would 
ensure that implementation is undertaken following the SECAP recommendations. However, in the 
fragile situation of Iraq, this will not be neither possible nor feasible. However, IFAD will ensure that 
the SECAP guidance and recommendations are followed within supervision mission and throughout 
implementation. 
10. Budgetary resources and schedule 
Not applicable. 
11. Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public, 
etc. 
At this stage of SARP design process, the project formulation team held  meetings  - including a one 
day  workshop  -  with  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Ministry  of  Environment  and 
academicians  to  identify  the  adaptation  measures  that  SARP  should  intervene  in  relevant  to  the 
agricultural  sector  in  Iraq.  The  MoE  requested  IFAD  support  for  developing a  climate  change 
adaptation strategy for the agriculture sector, an activity that has been included in the project design. 
All actions assessed and considered respond to the National Communication of Iraq to the UNFCCC, 
as well as to Government priorities. 
The  Mission  also  met  with  donors  engaged  in  development,  but  IFAD  is  currently  the  only 
organization working on smallholder agriculture in Southern Iraq.  
In the field the mission met with representatives of the World Bank, USAID, JICA and several NGOs 
in the country, as well as with several UN agencies including UNDP, UN Women, UNICEF, UNIDO, 
IOM, WFP, FAO and WHO, among others. 
113 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project 
Final project design report 
Appendix 14:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Appendix 14: Contents of the Project Life File 
1. Iraq Background Documents Policy and UN Country Assessments: 
  Dept. of Planning, Min. of Agric., 2017. Pers. comm. to the mission. 
  FAO 2012. Investment Centre Iraq Agriculture Sector Note. Rome. 
  GoI 2008. Iraq Family Health Survey Report, IFHS 2006/7. 
  GoI 2009. Iraq National Youth and Adolescents Survey. 
  GoI 2012. Iraq - Household Socio-Economic Survey. 
 
ICG 2016. International Crisis Group. Fight or Flight: Iraq Youth’s Desperate Plight. Middle East 
Report. No. 169. August. 
 
IFPRI 2014. Discussion Paper 01349. Washington. 
  Kubba 2011. Sam Kubba. The Iraqi Marshlands and the Marsh Arabs: The Ma'dan, Their Culture 
and the Environment. 
  UNDP Iraq 2012. Women’s Economic Empowerment: Integrating Women into the Iraqi Economy. 
  UNDP 2014. Iraq Human Development Report: Iraqi Youth: Challenges and Opportunities. 
  World Bank 2009. Iraq Poverty Assessment. 
  World Bank 2016. Iraq Risk and Resilience Assessment, quoted in World Bank 2017. 
  World Bank 2017. Systematic Country Diagnostic, Report No. 112333-IQ, February. 
1.  IFAD Background Documents:  
IFAD 2016. Iraq Smallholder Agricultural Policy Analysis. PTA. December 
 
  Grant Agreement IFAD/ICARDA: Improved Livelihoods of small farmers in Iraq through integrated 
pest management and organic fertilization, 17 November 2008 
Agreement on Settlement of Iraq dues to IFAD, July 2016 
IFAD Country Strategy Note, February 2017 
IFAD Concept Note for the Smallholder Revitalization Project (SARP), January 2017 
OSC Minutes of 23 January 2017 for SARP Concept Note 
WFP Vulnerability Assessment for Iraq, December 2016 
SARP CPMT Meeting Minutes, 4 April 2017 
SARP CPMT Meeting Minutes, 15 December 2016 
SARP Quality Enhancement (QE) Panel Report, May 2017 
SARP QE Memo, 26 April 2017 
SARP QA Panel Report June 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Annex 1: Scaling up Framework 
Annex 1: Scaling-up Framework 
SARP is IFAD’s first loan to Iraq and as such will be an important laboratory for piloting approaches 
and joint learning, building trust with government, testing effective and sustainable support to farming 
communities and engaging with service providers. The comparative advantage of IFAD relative to this 
project lies in its proven targeting and result-oriented approaches, its focus on the empowerment of 
smallholder farmers through the strengthening of their grass-root institutions and social capital, the 
development of farmer’s capacities and skills, support and dialogue to facilitate the adoption of 
enabling policies, as well as gender mainstreaming in all activities.  These provide a good platform 
and a promising opportunity to engage with, build on and scale-up within and beyond IFAD’s first 
investment project in Iraq. 
The project’s implementation arrangements are geared towards multi-stakeholder collaboration 
bridging the lines between the farming communities and groups, public sector, the NGO community 
and private sector businesses. While adopted by other partners in the country (UNDP, WB), this is 
relatively new in the agricultural sector, and particularly in the more marginalised southern 
governorates that SARP will be targeting. In the fragile context prevalent in the country, where private 
sector has been discouraged and Government has in the past, assumed all types of endeavours itself, 
this may be considered  a first innovation and once the model proves successful, could be scaled up 
to other Governorates. A second innovation that could be scaled up is SARP’s work with youth and 
UNIDO through its network of enterprise development centers in southern Iraq. The win-win 
dimension of this partnership relates to the fact that the project would finance young entrepreneurs in 
agriculture once they have graduated through the entire sequence of business development training, 
learning and counselling offered by the project supported networks. The innovation is twofold: (a) 
UNIDO has so far neither explicitly tackled agriculture in general nor young smallholder farmers in 
particular, and (b) because of the fact that SARP would provide an enterprise start-up grant, rather 
than a loan, entry barriers are lowered considerably in favour of IFAD’s target groups. The clustering 
strategy of the project should lead to a critical mass in terms of demand for private sector advisory 
services downstream from agricultural production, which could be met by training youth against a fee. 
IFAD has similar experience in other countries and would be able to support the scaling up of 
community-based provision of business development services to youth. A third and last pre-identified 
innovation for scaling-up consists of the “conversion” of mature farmer organisations with 
infrastructure and assets in good condition to “value chain service providers”.  SARP would work, for 
example, with the Poultry Association of Thi Qar to play this role effectively; amongst other things, 
they would, for example, provide veterinary services and sell space in their cold storage facilities to 
members of other, smaller farmer associations. Moreover, farmers who  benefit from ‘’poultry 
packages’’ would become members of this Association, thus also benefitting from their marketing 
support. 
The table on the next page illustrates some elements in the scaling-up pathways for these 
innovations. 
116 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Annex 1: 
Scaling up Framework 
Project feature to be scaled-up: decentralised multi-stakeholder collaborative platform 
Drivers 
The  driver  of  this  element  in  SARP’s  scaling-up  strategy  will  be  the  implementation 
partnership  at    Thi  Qar,  which  is  where  the  enabling  conditions  for  its  effectiveness  are 
believed to be the most conducive 
Political space 
Institutional space  The  institutional  space  for  scaling  up  the  implementation  partnership  exist,  as  with  the 
implementation of the new laws on decentralization, Governorates are firmly in the driver’s 
seat for agricultural rural development 
Linked to the unfolding of decentralisation, the political space for scaling-up is expected to 
increase gradually over time as Directorates of Agriculture become more responsive to the 
local  citizenry.  SARP  will  contribute  to  activate  and  strengthen  existing  accountability 
mechanisms  for  this  to  occur,  amongst  other  things,  by  actively  involving  the  different 
committees for women, youth, and NGOs, on the Provincial Councils 
The cultural space for successful scaling up will be carved out over time as implementation 
progresses and the partnership will show to stakeholders the many benefits of participatory 
methods,  including  the  building  up  of  much  needed  social  capital.  The  ‘’early’’  mid-term 
review will be the opportunity of an in-depth assessment of the performance of this element 
in  SARP’s  implementation  arrangements,  and  in  case  further  fine-tune  its  scaling-up 
pathway 
Cultural space 
Project feature to be scaled-up: young agricultural entrepreneurs 
Drivers 
The driver of this element in SARP’s scaling-up strategy will be the strong market demand 
once  the  dynamic  of  high  value  crops  plays  itself  out  in  underserved  high  agricultural 
potential areas 
Political space 
Institutional space  The institutional space for scaling up this innovation will be through enterprise development 
centers which enjoy a close and fruitful collaboration with Iraq’s business community as well 
as the Chambers of Trade, Commerce and Industry 
The political space for scaling-up is given by the increasing pressure on elected government 
representatives  in  the  Governorates  to  engage  in  meaningful  action  to  combat  youth 
unemployment 
The  cultural  space  for  successful  scaling  up  is  being  supplied  by  a  rapidly  changing  rural 
landscape  and  evolving  lifestyles  eager  to  tighten  rural-urban  linkages  and  diversify  its 
economic activities 
Cultural space 
Project feature to be scaled-up: farmer organisations as value chain service providers 
Drivers 
The driver of this element in SARP’s scaling-up strategy will be the strong demand for more 
sophisticated value chain services which are not widely available, not least because of the 
bad shape of so much rural productive infrastructure 
Political space 
Institutional space  The institutional space for scaling up this innovation will be given by strong support from the 
Directorates of Agriculture and business development services providers working with larger 
farmer associations 
The political space for scaling-up will be given by increasingly strong incentives to produce 
locally as GoI continues to tighten its controls and tariffs on imported products 
The cultural space for successful scaling up of this innovation will continue to expand with 
the  growing  recognition  that  the  government  will  not  be  able  to  return  to  providing  most 
services  to  smallholder  farmers,  and  that  for  the  latter  to  become  competitive  it  is 
indispensable that they get more sophisticated in their organisations and partnerships 
Cultural space 
117 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Final project design report 
Annex 2: Gender Checklist 
Annex 2: Gender-sensitive design and implementation 
Updated February2013 
1. The project design report contains – and project 
implementation is based on - gender-disaggregated 
poverty data and an analysis of gender differences in the 
activities or sectors concerned, as well as an analysis of 
each project activity from the gender perspective to 
address any unintentional barriers to women’s 
participation.  
2. The project design report articulates – or the project 
implements – actions with aim to: 
  Expand women’s economic empowerment through 
access to and control over productive and household 
assets; 
  Strengthen women’s decision-making role in the 
household and community, and their representation in 
membership and leadership of local institutions;  
  Achieve a reduced workload and an equitable 
workload balance between women and men.    
3.  The project design report includes one paragraph in the 
targeting section that explains what the project will deliver 
from a gender perspective. 
4. The project design report describes the key elements for 
operationalizing the gender strategy, with respect to the 
relevant project components. 
5. The design document describes - and the project 
implements - operational measures to ensure gender- 
equitable participation in, and benefit from, project 
activities. These will generally include: 
5.1  Allocating adequate human and financial resources to 
implement the gender strategy 
5.2 Ensuring and supporting  women’s active participation 
in project-related activities, decision-making bodies and 
committees, including setting specific targets for 
participation 
5.3 Ensuring that project/programme management 
arrangements (composition of the project management 
unit/programme coordination unit, project terms of 
reference for staff and implementing partners, etc.) 
reflect attention to gender equality and women’s 
empowerment concerns 
in 
to  productive  assets 
Design  
The  design  is  based  on  a  succinct  analysis  of  gender 
the  sectors  concerned,  and  on  gender-
issues 
disaggregated  poverty  data  available  at  the  time  (from 
government,  development  agencies,  and 
research 
institutions).  Notwithstanding  severe  constraints,  some 
attempts  have  been  made  to  analyze  gender  differences 
through  a  few  semi-structured  interviews  conducted  in 
rural  communities.  NGOs  will  be  recruited  with  ToRs  that 
specify  that  they  are  expected  to  fine-tune  this  type  of 
analysis on a continuous basis; they will be asked to keep 
field  diaries  to  capture  their  learning  as  implementation 
experience  accumulates  and  to  highlight  unintentional 
barriers to women’s participation and possible solutions. 
The  main  livelihood  supporting  activity  under  SARP  is  to 
facilitate  access 
to  project 
beneficiaries  of  whom  40  percent  will  be  women.  At  least 
in agriculture, control over these assets by women will be 
to  achieve  given  heavy  socio-cultural 
more  difficult 
constrictions.  This  situation 
less 
is  expected 
pronounced (more empowering for women) in the case of 
small livestock, and off-farm activities. 
The  economic  empowerment  of  women  will  gradually 
increase  both  their  weight  in  intra-household  decision-
making  as  well  as  their  social  status  and  prominence  in 
community affairs. 
The extent to which workload reduction for women can be 
promoted  explicitly  in  the  project  area  will  need  to  be 
assessed during the MTR. 
There  is  such  a  paragraph  and  it  explains  the  SARP’s 
gender  perspective  on  a  range  of 
including 
awareness  raising  and  men’s  evolving  perceptions  of 
gender roles in Iraq as a whole, and in the project area in 
particular. 
It  does.  Under  Component  1,  the  selection  of  productive 
infrastructure  will  need  to  be  endorsed  –  separately  –  by 
women. Component 2 is the main vehicle of implementing 
the SARP gender strategy as it is focused on the economic 
empowerment of women. 
issues 
to  be 
The  budget  earmarks  resources  for  activities  specifically 
targeted at women. 
The specific target for women’s participation is 40 percent. 
Most  of  the  NGOs  that  will  be  recruited  under  SARP  are 
likely  to  be  coming  from  a  humanitarian  background  and 
specializing  in  reaching  out  to  women  (especially  female-
headed households). 
The strong role played by NGOs in project implementation 
is  expected  to  ensure  attention  to  gender  equality  and 
women’s  empowerment.  These  will  also  feature  in  the 
ToRs of all other staff hired by the project. 
118 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Appendix 2:  Gender Checklist 
5.4 Ensuring direct project/programme outreach to women 
(for example through appropriate numbers and 
qualification of field staff), especially where women’s 
mobility is limited 
5.5 Identifying opportunities to support strategic 
partnerships with government and others development 
organizations for networking and policy dialogue 
6.  The project’s logical framework, M&E, MIS and learning 
systems specify in design – and project M&E unit collects, 
analyses and interprets sex- and age-disaggregated 
performance and impact data, including specific indicators 
on gender equality and women’s empowerment.  
In  some  Governorates  female  public  extension  workers 
constitute  half  of  the  total  number  of  public  extension 
workers;  female  NGO  staff  vastly  outnumber  male  NGO 
staff. 
Elected female Provincial Councilors may sit on the project 
committee.  Both  directorate  of  agriculture  staff  and  NGO 
staff involved in the implementation of SARP will liaise with 
the  Committee  for  Women  of  the  Provincial  Councils. 
UNIDO  targets  women  entrepreneurs  and  the  project  will 
partner with these activities. 
It  does.  Sex-  and  age-disaggregated  performance  and 
impact  data  will  be  collected,  analysed  and  interpreted; 
indicators  on  gender  equality  and  women’s 
specific 
empowerment will be developed before the MTR. 
NB. This checklist should be completed and included in Annex XII of PDR.
119 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Design completion report 
Annex 3: Poverty Checklist 
Annex 3: Targeting policy - checklist for design 
Updated January 2013 
1.   Does the main target group - those expected to 
benefit most- correspond to IFAD’s target group as 
defined by the Targeting Policy (poorer households and 
food insecure)? 
2. Have target sub-groups been identified and described 
according to their different socio-economic 
characteristics, assets and livelihoods - with attention to 
gender and youth differences? (matrix on target group 
characteristics completed?) 
3. Is evidence provided of interest in and likely uptake of 
the proposed activities by the identified target sub-
groups? What is the evidence? (matrix on analysis of 
project components and activities by principal 
beneficiary groups completed?) 
4. Does the design document describe a feasible and 
operational targeting strategy in line with the Targeting 
Policy, involving some or all of the following measures 
and methods: 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on poverty data or 
proxy indicators to identify, for area-based projects or 
programmes, geographic areas (and within these, 
communities) with high concentrations of poor people 
4.2 Direct targeting - when services or resources are to 
be channelled to specific individuals or households 
4.3 Self targeting – when goods and services respond 
to the priority needs, resource endowments and 
livelihood strategies of target groups 
4.4 Empowering measures - including information and 
communication, focused capacity- and confidence-
building measures, organisational support, in order to 
empower and encourage the more active participation 
and inclusion in planning and decision making of people 
who traditionally have less voice and power 
4.5  Enabling measures –to strengthen stakeholders’ 
and partners’ attitude and commitment to poverty 
targeting, gender equality and women’s empowerment, 
including policy dialogue, awareness-raising and 
capacity-building 
4.6 Attention to procedural measures - that could 
militate against participation by the intended target 
groups 
4.7 Operational measures - appropriate 
project/programme management arrangements, 
staffing, selection of implementation partners and 
Design 
It does. The vast majority of households targeted by the project 
correspond to IFAD’s definition. Rather, given the dismal situation 
of so many, the challenge will be to not target those who are too 
poor and should be supported with humanitarian support.  
Yes, this has been done to the extent that information and data 
was available. Gender and youth are treated separately, not least 
because they face very different constraints. Both are affected by 
insecurity, but women are more affected by lack of physical 
mobility. Female-headed households are briefly described. 
Evidence has been collected from other donors’ interventions 
(which have sometimes failed not because they were not targeted 
well or unprofitable, but because support measure were too thin 
and brief), and from interviews with IFAD target groups in the field.  
Poverty data was used to select target Governorates; intra-
Governorate targeting is based on overlaying land use/comparative 
advantage maps with poverty maps for clustering and targeting 
poor individuals and groups within these clusters. 
This will be done by NGOs which will draw on their experience and 
knowledge of the rural poor. 
The activities being promoted will for the most part only attract 
‘active rural poor’ individuals and groups because they are too 
small-scale to be attractive to those who are relatively wealthier; 
also, the latter are expected to be unwilling to commit time and 
energy to the rather intense training will be a prerequisite for 
support from the project. 
Local facilitators will take the necessary time to discuss options for 
support with the potential beneficiaries themselves by following an 
iterative approach. This is usually in itself an empowering process 
as target groups become more sharply aware of their constraints 
and opportunities, and – especially – their own (often “dormant”) 
potential as farmers or entrepreneurs. Once agreement on how to 
proceed is reached, beneficiaries will need to undergo there will be 
extensive capacity building before any equipment is provided. 
SARP will not reach out to target groups with a pre-determined 
“menu” of livelihood activities but use participatory methodologies 
to enable stakeholders to become aware of and seize the  
livelihood opportunities being promoted. NGOs partnering with the 
project will sign performance-based contracts that will include 
expected results with respect to poverty targeting, gender equality 
and women’s empowerment. 
The implementation arrangements outlined in sections 4.2 – 4.5 
should allow the project to avoid élite capture and/or “political 
targeting”. Although the partner directorates of agriculture are 
rather used to working in top-down fashion it is expected that their 
exposure to “doing things differently” will convince them of the 
merits of participatory approaches to agricultural development. 
“Pro-poor” NGOs will form small consortia at governorate level, will 
be trained by IFAD and possibly mentored by international NGOs, 
and will work in collaboration with the departments of planning of 
120 
The Republic of Iraq 
Smallholder Agriculture Revitalization Project Final Design Report 
Project Design Report 
Appendix 3:  Poverty Targeting Checklist 
service providers  
the directorates of agriculture. This arrangement seems the most 
appropriate for ensuring that targeting conforms to IFAD standards. 
5. Monitoring targeting performance. Does the design 
document specify that targeting performance will be 
monitored using participatory M&E, and also be 
assessed at mid-term review? Does the M&E 
framework allow for the collection/analysis of sex-
disaggregated data and are there gender-sensitive 
indicators against which to monitor/evaluate outputs, 
outcomes and impacts? 
It does. See M&E section of the PDR, which specifies gender-
sensitive indicators against which to monitor/evaluate outputs, 
outcomes and impacts, and that sex-disaggregated data will be 
collected.  
NB. This checklist should be completed and included in Annex XII of PDR and ideally should be accompanied by key file 
on target group characteristics. 
121 
