Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ABDP
AfDB
AGRA
ASTGS
ASALs
AWPB
BPS
BDS
CA
CBK
CC
CGC
CGS
CI
COSOP
COVID-19
CSA
DFS
DT-SACCO
EIB
EoI
ESMS
EU
GALS
GDP
GFF
GNI
GCF
GoK
GRM
FM
ha
HDI
ILO
IFAD
IMF
IPRM
KCEP-CRAL
KeLCoP
KES
KM
LE
LoC
MFB
M&I
MoITED
MNO
Aquaculture Business Development Programme
African Development Bank
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa
Agriculture Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy
Arid And Semi-Arid Lands
Annual Work Plan and Budget
World Bank Business Pulse Survey
Business Development Services
Conservation Agriculture
Central Bank of Kenya
Climate Change
Credit Guarantee Company
Credit Guarantee Scheme
IFAD’s Core Indicator
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
Coronavirus Disease 2019
Climate Smart Agriculture
Digital Financial Service
Deposit Taking SACCO
European Investment Bank
Expressions of Interest
Environment and Social Management Systems
European Union
Gender Action Learning System
Gross Domestic Product
Green Financing Facility
Gross Domestic Income
Green Climate Fund
Government of Kenya
Grievance Redress Mechanism
Financial Management
hectare
Human Development Index
International Labour Organisation
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Monetary Fund
Integrated Project Risk Matrix
Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme-Climate Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Kenya Shilling
Knowledge Management
Lead Enterprise
Line of Credit
Microfinance Bank
Monitoring and Evaluation
Ministry of Industrialization, Trade and Enterprise Development
Mobile Network Operator
MSF
MSME
MTR
NDC
NPL
NT
PCR
PDO
PDR
PFI
PIM
PMU
PS
PSC
PWC
RF
PROFIT
R-CGS
RK-FINFA
SA
SACCO
SAFER
SASRA
SDG
SECAP
SME
SO
SoE
TA
TOC
TSIS
US$
MSME Stabilisation Facility
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
Mid-Term Review
Nationally Determined Contributions
Non-Performing Loan
National Treasury
Project Completion Report
Programme Development Objective
Project Design Report
Participating Financial Institution
Project Implementation Manual
Project Management Unit
Principal Secretary
Project Steering Committee
Persons Living with Disabilities
Rural Finance
Programme for Rural Outreach of Financial Innovations and Technologies
Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Special Account
Savings and Credit Cooperative Society
Supporting Access to Finance and Enterprise Recovery
Sacco Societies Regulatory Authority
Sustainable Development Goal
Social Environment and Climate Assessment
Small and Medium Enterprise
Strategic Objective
Statement of Expenditure
Technical Assistance
Theory of Change
Technical Support and Innovation Service
United States Dollar
UTaNRMP
Upper Tana Catchment Natural Resource Management Project
VC
WB
WFP
Value Chain
World Bank
World Food Programme
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☐ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/32
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$12,772,000
$0
$12,772,000
Economic and social context. Over the past 10 years, Kenya’s economy has grown rapidly. The average GDP growth in 2010 –
2019 was 5.85 per cent, supported especially by a friendly business climate, strong public infrastructure spending and increased
regional trade. However, to sustain the achieved growth levels (even without COVID-19) will be a challenge in Kenya. Indeed, while
the economy has performed generally well with strong government contributions, the public debt has rapidly increased and currently
surpasses the standard risk levels. Since early 2020, Kenya’s economy has been hit hard by COVID-19, as the containment
measures and behavioural responses have dampened economic activity. The fact that a significant proportion of the population is
planned to be vaccinated only in 2024 suggests a scenario, according to which the economic and social impacts of COVID-19 will
continue over the medium term and possible even the long term, covering much of the planned RK-FINFA implementation period.
Agricultural Sector and Policy. Over the past two decades, the performance of smallholder agriculture in Kenya has been modest.
Yields for most staple crops and livestock have stagnated. The principal barriers to smallholder agricultural productivity in Kenya can
be clustered in six main areas: (a) land and population pressures, with average farm size rapidly declining; (b) poor soil fertility and
land degradation; (c) limited agricultural research, development and extension; (d) reduced overall government spending on
agriculture; (e) climate change and limited application of smart agriculture technologies; and (f) limited access to quality inputs,
appropriate financial services and effective markets.
The Government's strategy to improve agricultural performance and productivity is presented in the Agriculture Sector Transformation
and Growth Strategy (ASTGS 2019-2029). This strategy is anchored in three outcomes: (i) increasing small-scale farmer, pastoralist,
and fisher incomes; (ii) increasing agricultural output and value addition; and (iii) boosting household food resilience. To be
successful, the Government acknowledges that the ASTGS 2019-2029 needs to be implemented as much as possible through the
private sector. Kenya’s vibrant agribusiness sector would be a powerful engine in this agricultural transformation process. The
ASTGS will be implemented in line with Kenya’s Green Economy Strategy and Implementation Plan 2016-2030, which firmly embeds
the principles of sustainable development in the overall national growth strategy. It identifies enabling conditions such as sustainable
financing and creation of green, decent jobs.
Financial Sector and Rural Finance (RF). Kenya has a stable and diversified financial sector, which is the third largest in Sub-
Saharan Africa in terms of total assets, and a significant contributor to the economic growth in the country in the past decades.
Kenya’s financial inclusion landscape has undergone a major transformation since 2006, with formal financial inclusion reaching
82.9 per cent in 2019 from 26.7 per cent in 2006. However, this major transformation is predominantly driven by information and
communications technology, particularly the fast growth of mobile money services, and has yet to result into improved livelihoods,
particularly for the rural poor. The increased access to finance has mainly focused on use of mobile payments and money transfer
services, while in credit services for productive purposes, which in most cases still require direct contact to FIs, similar positive trends
have not emerged.
COVID-19 has adversely affected especially the operations of largely member-based SACCOs, microfinance banks and other small
financial operators, especially those working on sub-sectors such as service industries and export-oriented agriculture. As members’
income streams have declined and become more irregular, savings levels by low-income households have declined and loan
repayments have been delayed after rescheduling. Furthermore, many banks are shying away from lending to SACCOs and MFIs
because of the perceived and real heightened risks. Therefore today, many SACCOs and most MFIs are facing serious liquidity
constraints, which significantly limits their ability to issue new credits to support the recovery efforts of their members/clients.
Overall, demand for Rural and Agriculture Finance is insufficiently met in Kenya. Against the government target of 10 per cent, the
agriculture sector investments represent only 4 per cent of overall financial sector portfolio despite the agriculture industries large
share of GDP. During the RK-FINFA design process, consultations with IFAD-supported value chain project stakeholders validated
the strong unmet demand for agricultural and through formal financial institutions, concerning both seasonal working capital and
investment lending. Instead of formal lending, household data shows that the primary sources of households’ financing to agriculture
investments comprise savings, sales of assets, support from family and friends, as well as the widespread informal financial services
such as the expensive loans from moneylenders and shopkeepers.
Within the context of building back better and contributing to the green economic growth in Kenya there is also scope for increasing
the green financing provided FIs. The demand for these services is evident in the portfolios of the Banks and their expressed ambition
to expand these portfolios. Evidently a taxonomy for green lending will have to be developed including adequate capacities and
monitoring systems in the FIs. 
Lessons learned. The key lessons from past and ongoing IFAD-supported operations for the RK-FINFA design can be summarised
as: (a) the provision of technical support services to PFIs should start immediately after the PFI selection; (b) appropriate eligibility
criteria for both PFIs and final borrowers and the operational guidelines in the RK-FINFA financed operations should be carefully
designed at the project start-up; (c) particular emphasis would be required on progress monitoring and reporting, using as much as
possible IT-based MIS solutions, supported by systematic field verification visits; (d) RF Project Management Unit and the
implementing partners must have adequate capacity and assigned institutional roles for the designed RF instruments; and (e)
appropriate flexibility should be allowed to different types of PFIs.
2/32
Project rationale. IFAD’s main rationale for its involvement and investment in RK-FINFA derives from the increasing unmet demand
for rural and agriculture finance and the core development objectives that IFAD and the GoK share on rural and agricultural
development in Kenya. IFAD and the GoK agree that the effective transformation of the rural sector could be achieved particularly
through (i) a substantially increased private sector focus in the development and investments of the sector; and (ii) improvements in
the productivity of smallholder operations through modern cultivation methods and climate smart technologies, linking farmers to well-
operating value chains and building farmer capacity to increase their readiness for innovation and diversification.
In both the GoK and IFAD visions, to develop the rural sector successfully and in a sustainable manner, private sector financial
institutions (particularly commercial banks, SACCOs and MFIs) would need to play a central role in the financing of the rural
transformation process. Development funding would be used to pro-actively stimulate the interest of the FIs to expand the volumes
and outreach of their agricultural and rural operations. The proposed RK-FINFA would be one of the instruments aiming to ensure that
appropriate and adequate financial services would be available for the planned transformation and growth of the rural economy in
Kenya. In the wake of COVID-19, the need for this strategic development support is even greater, to initially improve the chances of
fast rural recovery and then later boost the sustained growth of the sector, building back better. At the same time, to respond to
Government’s and IFAD’s agendas on climate change adaptation/mitigation and to improve environmental management and
efficiencies in the use of natural resources, RK-FINFA would pro-actively encourage the mainstreaming of green finance activities
when sustainably transforming the rural sector in Kenya.
Goal and development objective. The project goal of the proposed RK-FINFA is: “poverty reduction, climate change resilience and
improved livelihoods in rural areas”. The Project Development Objective is: “increased rural financial inclusion and green investments
by agriculture value chain stakeholders, leading to equitable employment opportunities, innovative and resilient production systems,
and increased incomes for smallholders, poor and marginalised rural households, women and youth”.
Project area. The geographic coverage of RK-FINFA, once fully operational, will be nationwide. However, for an effective project
start-up, the entry point for the RK-FINFA outreach will be the 14 counties in which at least two IFAD-supported projects operate with
agricultural value chains. With this approach, RK-FINFA and its Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) will benefit from synergies
with earlier IFAD-supported value chain development activities, and the financing can be focused on diversified value chains. After
the RK-FINFA capacity building and initial financing cycle, the PFIs can expand their targeted area of investments with RK-FINFA
resources to any rural county in Kenya. The PFIs will identify these expansion areas, based on their market opportunities and
capabilities, while continuing to apply the agreed targeting principles of the project. This scaling up phase can start after the second
year of the RK-FINFA implementation, and for each PFI only after their full development of the lending products and monitoring
systems as required by RK-FINFA.
Target group and focus. The project will benefit 190,000 rural Kenyan households, including both direct and indirect clients. This
includes direct financial and technical services to 68,000 households/MSMEs, covering: (i) an estimated 66,000 economically active
smallholder households; and (ii) 2,000 rural MSMEs engaged in smallholder-inclusive VCs. Indirect outreach of the project includes:
(i) estimated 32,000 persons through employment in the RK-FINFA supported agribusinesses and farms; and (ii) 90,000 smallholder
households through participation in the VCs strengthened by the supported agribusinesses. The targeting focus is on low-income,
economically active rural households, with specific targets on 50 per cent of women and 30 per cent of youth participation in both
capacity building and financing activities. The RK-FINFA design provides comprehensive strategies/guidelines for poverty, gender
and youth targeting.
Components and Activities. To achieve the RK-FINFA Project Goal and Development Objective, the project activities are structured
into three mutually reinforcing components: Component 1:Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS); Component 2: Rural
Investment Instruments; and Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination.
Component 1: Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS). Through two fully inter-linked sub-components, Component 1 will
(i) strengthen Participating Financial Institution (PFI) capacities for innovation, rural outreach and green finance services in Kenya,
and (ii) build MSME and smallholder sustainable investment capacities and financial literacy skills particularly tailored to reach
women, youth and marginalized groups. Both aspects of the TSIS, supply and demand side, will be embedded into the rural growth
strategies of PFIs to foster sustainability and scalability and support the effective use of the resources provided through the project’s
Investment Instruments component. A co-financing partner organization/organizations will be engaged to coordinate the TSIS
component.
Sub-component 1.1: PFI Capacity Building for Rural Outreach and Innovation. The expected outputs of this sub-component are: (i) the
capacity of five participating commercial banks, six MFBs and 30 DT-SACCOs improved to provide rural and agriculture financial
services including products tailored to reach 30 per cent youth and 50 per cent women; (ii) the capacity of all 41 PFIs built to
implement and monitor green investment portfolios; and (iii) Environmental and Social Management Systems
operationalized/strengthened by 41 PFIs.
Sub-component 1.2: Business Development Services for Agribusinesses and Smallholders. The expected outputs of this sub-
component are: (i) 1,500 small and microenterprises receive Business Development Services (BDS) and are able to submit bankable
business plans; and (ii) 50,000 male and female smallholder producers receive financial literacy training including for preparation of
simple business plans appropriate for SACCO/MFB loan applications. The BDS is a key tool for social inclusion targeting of RK-
FINFA: minimum of 50 per cent women and 30 per cent youth are included among all BDS clients.
Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments. The RK-FINFA will operate with two Rural Investment Instruments: (i) a Rural Credit
Guarantee Scheme (R-CGS), and (ii) a Green Financing Facility (GFF). Both the R-CGS and the GFF will be designed as sustainable
financing vehicles, which can utilize resources from the GoK and from interested international financiers to unlock private investment
into Kenya’s agricultural and agribusiness sector at attractive market terms through Kenyan financial institutions. The Technical
Support and Innovation Services packages under Component 1 will support the PFIs in the implementation of the rural investment
instruments, in line with each PFI’s respective rural and agriculture finance strategy. Identification and referral of agribusiness and
smallholder candidates into the PFI funding pipelines are supported as described above in Component 1.2 (BDS and Financial
Literacy services).
3/32
Sub-component 2.1: Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme (R-CGS). The strategy of the R-CGS is to provide risk sharing to promote rural
outreach innovations and catalyze funding from Kenyan mainstream financial institutions into the rural and agriculture sector. The
expected results of the R-CGS are: (i) supported by the R-CGS guarantee amount of US$ 20 million, PFIs lend US$ 80 million to rural
MSMEs and agriculture value chains; (ii) 2,000 rural MSMEs have improved access to finance; (iii) 15,000 microenterprises and
farmers have improved access to finance, including women and youth-owned enterprises, (iv) 30,000 smallholder farmers have
improved access to finance with targeted products for women and youth, and (v) in overall the target of 30 per cent women and youth
among end-client groups is achieved.
Sub-component 2.2: Green Financing Facility. Sub-component 2.2 supports the target of the innovative and sustainable
transformation of Kenyan rural economy through the operations and services of the Green Financing Facility (GFF), to be established
with the RK-FINFA support. The GFF will contribute to the sustainable rural transformation, growth, and income generation through
two fully interlinked methods: (a) alleviating the liquidity constraints of non-bank financial institutions that are the main financial service
providers to smallholders and rural micro-enterprises, and (b) encouraging small-scale farmers and micro-firms to invest in climate-
smart and environmentally friendly activities while promoting gender-equitable access to finance. The GFF initial investment by RK-
FINFA is US$ 20 million and it is expected to reach out to about 30,000 rural households through micro and small-scale loans. The
GFF will be established as a permanent facility at a selected Host Financial Institution to provide wholesale capital to rurally oriented
SACCOs and MFBs/MFIs, for on-lending to the smallholder sub-sector and rural micro-enterprises, targeting 50 per cent women and
30 per cent youth.
Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination. This component is divided into two sub-components:
3.1. Enabling Rural Finance Environment and 3.2. Project Coordination.
Sub-component 3.1. Enabling Rural Finance Environment. The aim of Sub-component 3.1 activities is to promote policies and
institutional arrangements that support the medium and longer-term development of a more conducive operational environment for
the Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme and the Green Financing Facility, therefore, fostering their capacity to improve rural financial
intermediation through their increased rural outreach and impact to IFAD target groups including smallholders, women and youth.
Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination. The Lead Implementing Agency of RK-FINFA will be the Directorate of Budget, Fiscal and
Economic Affairs in the National Treasury and Planning (NT&P). The Directorate is headed by a Director General who is answerable
to the Principal Secretary of the NT&P. The Project Management Unit (PMU) of RK-FINFA will be established at the NT&P, housed in
the Financial and Sectoral Affairs Department. The key technical service and investment components of the project are planned to be
implemented through intermediaries or co-financing partner institutions with proven capacity and appropriate institutional mandate.
Social, Environment and Climate Assessment. The environment and social categorization of the RK-FINFA is B according to
IFAD's Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). This categorization recognises the environmental risks
that may result from the project activities, particularly the end line investments by smallholders and rural MSMEs, will be in non-
sensitive areas and can be avoided and/or minimized with appropriate actions. The ESMF, prepared for RK-FINFA, provides
screening guidance to ensure that interventions supported by the Project retain this categorization.  Thus, any activities/interventions
that are likely to have high risk will be screened out at early stage, prior to any approval for financing. The climate risk classification of
RK-FINFA is “Moderate” given that the target end beneficiaries, their livelihoods and their economic activities are exposed to climate-
related risks such as floods, droughts and incidence of pests and diseases. Green financing initiatives will be financed through the
GFF to promote climate change adaptation and resilience.
Project costs and financing. Of the projected US$ 134 million total RK-FINFA budget, the IFAD loan is projected to finance US$ 22
million, from IFAD11 PBAS allocation, accounting for 17 per cent of the total project costs. Co-financing from participating financial
institutions is estimated at US$ 85.75 million, covering 64 per cent of the total project costs, mainly due to the leverage in loan
guarantee operations. The GoK contribution is budgeted to cover US$ 24 million in cash and kind, covering 18 per cent of the total
project costs, with over half of it financed with the PROFIT reflows. The share of co-financing from non-government sector
implementing partners is US$ 2.3 million, or two per cent of the project costs. RK-FINFA climate finance is estimated as US$ 12.77
million, which is 58% of total IFAD project costs and only includes adaptation finance. For women and youth, dedicated amounts of 50
per cent of  and 30 per cent of GFF financing and R-CGS financing are earmarked respectively. This equals to US$ 40 million of
investments. The cost of implementation of the ESMF is estimated to be approximately US$ 466,000, for which provisions are already
made in the RK-FINFA budget.
Financial and economic analysis. Nineteen illustrative farm/enterprise models have been developed to examine the potential actors
to benefit from improved financial outreach and the related efficiencies. All models were found financially viable and able to seek
additional RK-FINFA supported funds. Incremental returns to labour provide a sound incentive to households to increase production
and/or productivity. The overall RK-FINFA economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 23 percent. The BCR of 2.2 indicates a return of
US$ 2.2 for every dollar invested. These results indicate that the project is a sound investment yielding a positive rate of return as the
EIRR is greater than the hurdle rate (13 per cent) and the ENPV is greater than zero.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans. A draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) has been prepared as a part of the
RK-FINFA design process. In addition, a draft Annual Work Plan and Budget and a draft procurement plan have been prepared for
the first 18 months of project implementation. These documents aim to ensure that the project implementation starts without
unnecessary delays during the first year of the project. Various pre-project activities, including the preparations for the documentation
of the partnership agreements and for the tendering of the technical service providers, are planned to start immediately after the
project approval by IFAD and GoK, to support a fast and smooth start of the RK-FINFA implementation immediately after the project
effectiveness. 
1. Context
4/32
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Political, Economic and Social Context. The Republic of Kenya(hereafter referred to as ‘Kenya’) covers a land area of
569,259 square kilometres. Its population was 47.5 million in 2019[1], which is projected to grow to around 85 million by 2050.[2]
Kenya is classified as lower middle-income country, with an estimated GDP/capita at around US$2,000 at the end of 2020.
Significant political, structural and economic reforms have largely driven sustained economic growth, and social development,
over the past decade. These include a new Constitution in 2010, and devolution of the government system. It is to be recalled
that the next general elections are scheduled in 2022.
Over the last decade, Kenya’s economy has grown rapidly. Average annual GDP growth, from 2010 to 2019 was 5.85 per cent,
supported notably by a friendly business climate, strong public infrastructure spending and increased regional trade.[3] However,
to sustain the achieved growth levels is challenging. Indeed, while the economy has performed generally well, public debt has
rapidly increased and currently surpasses the standard risk levels. In September 2020, public debt to GDP ratio reached an all-
time high at 68.6 per cent, after a continuous increase from the 2012 level of 38.2 per cent.[4] Given the need for fiscal
consolidation and lower public spending, the Government of Kenya’s (GoK) policy objective is to proactively encourage private
sector investment, including in agriculture.
The relatively fast growth, since 2000, has translated into gains to reduce poverty. Indeed, between 2005/6 and 2015/16.[5],
poverty, measured as people under the national poverty line, declined from 46.8 per cent to 36.1 per cent of the population.
Poverty declined in rural areas, from about 50 per cent in 2005-06 to 38.8 per cent in 2015-16, largely accounting for the
reduction at the national level. This was due to the increasing importance of non-agricultural income (particularly commerce) to
supplement agricultural income for rural households, which has been supported by the expansion of mobile money and the
telecommunication revolution. This notwithstanding, corruption remains a serious challenge for sustained growth and effective
policy implementation and according to Transparency International estimates, Kenya is losing about 7.8 per cent of GDP,
annually, to corruption, despite some improvements in recent years in corruption prevention actions. According to the UNDP’s
2020 Human Development Index, Kenya scored 0.601, ranking it 143rdout of the 189 surveyed countries.[6]
Impact of COVID-19. Kenya’s economy has been hit hard by COVID-19, as the containment measures and behavioural
responses have significantly dampened domestic activity with trade, travel, tourism, and export-oriented agriculture being
severely disrupted. Real GDP contracted by 0.4 percent in the first half (H1) of 2020 year-on-year, compared to growth of 5.4
percent in H1 2019. Household incomes in the worst affected sectors declined sharply and it is estimated that over two million
people in Kenya have fallen back into poverty as a result of COVID-19.[7] Most baseline projections assume that the major
economic impacts of the pandemic in Kenya will largely wane by mid-2021, with a strong rebound in real GDP, particularly with
weather conditions expected to support agricultural output. However, this outlook remains highly uncertain. The fact that a
significant proportion of the population is foreseen to be vaccinated only by 2024[8] suggests a scenario that the socio-economic
impacts of COVID-19 will continue over the medium term and possibly even the long term, covering much of the planned RK-
FINFA implementation period.
Agricultural Performance, Policy and Transformation. Agriculture continues to play a vital role in the Kenyan economy,
contributing 26 per cent of the GDP and another 27 per cent of GDP indirectly, through its linkages with other sectors. This sector
employs more than 40 per cent of the total population and more than 70 per cent of Kenya's rural population. Agriculture
accounts for 65 per cent of the export earnings.[9] The sector also plays an important role in food security. Farming is
predominantly rain-fed, with only 2 per cent of agricultural land under irrigation. Kenyan agriculture is dominated by smallholder
production of farms between 0.2 and 3 hectares. Nearly 70 per cent of farmers operate on less than one hectare of cultivated
land.[10]
Over the past two decades, the performance of smallholder agriculture in Kenya has been modest. Yields for most crops and
livestock have stagnated and total factor productivity for agriculture dropped by 10 per cent between 2006 and 2015. Value
addition within the sector remains low, with only 16 per cent of exports currently being processed.[11] The GoK’s efforts to
strengthen agricultural performance are presented in the Agriculture Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy (ASTGS 2019-
2029), anchored in three outcomes: (i) increasing small-scale farmer, pastoralist, and fisher incomes; (ii) increasing agricultural
output and value addition; and (iii) boosting household food resilience.[12]
The GoK acknowledges that the ASTGS 2019-2029 needs to be implemented as much as possible through the private sector for
sustainability.[13] Kenya’s vibrant agribusiness sector would be a powerful engine in this agricultural transformation process.
Private-sector FIs, including commercial banks, SACCOs and MFIs, would provide the bulk of resources to finance the process at
all levels of the value chains (VC). Development funding would be used to pro-actively stimulate the interest of the FIs to expand
their agricultural and rural operations. The proposed RK-FINFA would be one of the instruments aiming to ensure that
appropriate and adequate financial services would be available for the planned transformation and growth of the rural economy in
Kenya. RK-FINFA would also contribute to Kenya’s Green Economy Strategy and Implementation Plan (GESIP 2016-2030),
which firmly embeds the principles of sustainable development in the overall national growth strategy. The identified enabling
conditions in the strategy include sustainable financing and creation of green, decent jobs with a recognition of the key role of the
private sector and FIs in provision of innovative products and services to support the green economy.
5/32
8.
Financial Sector and Rural Finance (RF). The Kenyan financial inclusion landscape has undergone a major transformation,
with formal financial inclusion reaching 82.9 per cent in 2019 from 26.7 per cent in 2006.[14] However, this transformation is
driven by information and communications technology, (ICT), particularly the fast growth of mobile money services, and not by an
increase in deeper financial inclusion. The increased access to finance has mainly focused on use of mobile payments and
money transfer services. At end of 2020, the number of mobile banking accounts reached 66 million, surpassing the total
population. In credit services for productive purposes, however, similar trends have not emerged. The introduction of policies
such as the interest rate cap on loans in 2016 led to credit misallocation, with commercial banks shifting from lending to the
private sector, especially to MSMEs, to investing in government securities. This decline is further confirmed by the World Bank
(WB) Enterprise Surveys, where the proportion of small firms identifying access to finance as a major constraint jumped from
15.1 percent in 2013 to 32.3 per cent in 2018.
9.
Kenya has a number of policies and strategies to guide its financial sector (re. Table 1)
Table 1. Key Strategies/Policies/Regulations
Strategies/Policies/ Regulations
Relevance to RF
SACCO Societies Act (2008)
Regulates rural SACCO operations
DT-MFI Regulations (2008)
Regulates DT-MFI operations and established the category of Microfinance Banks
Kenya’s Vision 2030
Promote an innovative, commercially-oriented and modern agricultural sector, including
through improved rural financial services
Sector Plan for Financial Services
(2013–2017)
Developed to establish a clear strategy for development of the financial services sector as
part of the Vision 2030 Economic Pillar
Draft National Treasury and
Planning Strategic Plans
Supports a well functioning digital finance market
The SACCO Societies (NDT)
Regulations (2020)
Public Finance Management
(Credit Guarantee Scheme)
Regulations (2020)
Establishes regulations and guidelines for non-deposit taking SACCO operations
Establishes the management structure and regulatory framework of the national Credit
Guarantee Scheme for Micro-, Small and Medium Enterprises
Credit Information Sharing System
(CIS) Regulations (April 2020)
The Interest Rates Capping Law was repealed in November 2019 and replaced by the CIS
enabling: (i) market-determined credit pricing, and (ii) improved consumer protection within a
market-driven framework.
10.
Key actors for the provision of working capital and investment loans to the agricultural sector and rural MSMEs are: (a)
commercial banks, (b) savings and credit cooperative societies (SACCOs), and (c) microfinance institutions (MFIs).
11.
The commercial banking sector, consisting of 41 institutions, accounts for 65 per cent of the total financial sector assets. The
Kenyan banking sector remains stable, well-capitalized and posted an average annual growth of eight per cent in asset base and
deposits in the period 2014-2019.[15] Despite their strong liquidity, lending by commercial banks to agriculture remains low at
around four per cent of their total portfolio and focuses mainly on large production and processing units. Provision of commercial
credit towards agriculture is constrained primarily by[16]: (a) real and perceived risk, (b) limited collaterals, (c) high service costs,
(d) small deal sizes, (e) lack of credit history data, (f) low FI capacity in agricultural lending, and (g) limited market attractiveness
relative to perceived higher returns outside of the agriculture sector. Increased stresses on the banks due to COVID-19 have
further reduced the interest and capacity of banks to lend to agriculture and rural MSMEs.
12.
The Savings and Credit Cooperative  sector is one of the largest in Africa and critically important in smallholder and rural
MSME financing. SACCOs are further classified into non-deposit-taking SACCOs (non-DT-SACCOs) and deposit-taking
SACCOs (DT-SACCOs). Non-DT-SACCOs accept long-term deposits from their membership which cannot be withdrawn unless
a member leaves the SACCO membership. They do not take deposit from the general public. The number of non-DT-SACCOs
exceeds 3,000 and they report on their activities to the Commissioner for Co-operative Development. DT-SACCOs, in contrast,
perform bank-like functions, accept deposits through their front offices, and provide loans to their clients as standard banking
institutions. DT-SACCOs are prudentially regulated by the SACCO Societies Regulatory Authority (SASRA). At the end of 2019,
there were 172 DT-SACCOs operating in Kenya. DT-SACCOs hold a high 13 per cent share of Kenya’s total financial sector
portfolio. Particularly important for RF operations are the 49 farmer-based DT-SACCOs, with the membership of 2.25 million
farming households. This represents 52 per cent of the total DT-SACCO membership, while their deposit share is only 13 per
cent of the total DT-SACCO deposit, clearly indicating a liquidity constraint for their portfolio expansion.
6/32
13.
14.
15.
The microfinance sub-sector consists of two parts: (a) 14 Microfinance Banks (MFBs), which are regulated by the Central Bank
of Kenya (CBK); and (b) about 60 non-deposit taking, credit-only MFIs. The MFBs are deposit-taking MFIs regulated by the CBK,
with the two largest ones (KWMFB and Faulu MFB) sharing about 76 per cent of the MFB market. The largest one, KWMFB has
over 800,000 women clients, a large predominantly group-based rural low-income clientele and a diversified and growing
agricultural portfolio, using targeted approaches and products to reach women clients. The credit-only MFIs operate outside the
CBK and SASRA-type of prudential regulations. They raise their lending capital from grants and through wholesale loans from
development lenders. Some of them have substantial rural portfolios and smallholder clienteles, with pro-active outreach plans
for rural lending.
Overall, there is adequate liquidity in the financial system, but this masks significant liquidity concentration and the uneven
distribution of liquidity among different types of FIs. In a weak position are the SACCOs and MFIs/MFBs serving the smallholders
and rural MSMEs. In addition to limited deposit bases, their capacity to borrow on-lending funds from liquid commercial banks
remains weak, as the banks actively seek safer investment opportunities. COVID-19 has further affected their operations: as
members’ income streams have declined and become more irregular, savings levels by low-income households have declined
and loan repayments delayed. In this context, the use of development finance to stimulate short-term recovery funding and
longer-term investment funding is important for the effective recovery and sustained longer term economic growth.
Demand for Rural and Agriculture Finance is insufficiently met in Kenya. Against the government target of 10 per cent, the
agriculture sector investments represent only 4 per cent of overall financial sector portfolio.[17] Only about 3.2 per cent of Kenyan
farmers secure loans through formal FIs to finance their agriculture activities, although 29 per cent of rural households in general
access bank/MFB broader range of services. The primary sources of households’ financing to agriculture investments comprise
savings, sales of assets, support from family and friends, as well as the widespread informal financial services such as the
expensive loans from moneylenders and shopkeepers. Key obstacles to accessing formal FI lending include: (i) limited
understanding of the application processes, (ii) existing debt, (iii) lack of guarantors or collateral, (iv) limited or bad credit history
and accounting records, and (v) insufficiently demonstrated income or savings.[18]The November 2020 World Bank Kenya
Economic Update[19] confirms the accelerating unmet demand for MSME, rural and agriculture finance in the aftermath of
COVID-19. It proposes interventions to support financial institutions to maintain and expand their productive investment portfolios.
The proposed instruments include targeted liquidity support and credit guarantee facilities.
16.
During the RK-FINFA design process, a dedicated RF institution survey (see PIM Appendix 2) and consultations with IFAD-
supported value chain (VC) project stakeholders validated the strong unmet demand for agricultural and RF. IFAD’s ongoing
Kenya portfolio of value chain projects[20], amounting to US$ 241 million of IFAD financing, focuses on overall agricultural
technology and market development, while the specific element of access to finance was confirmed as a remaining key
constraint. The RK-FINFA geographic targeting is aligned with this demonstrated demand among the supported VC
stakeholders.
17.
In particular for green finance instruments and portfolios, FIs and VC stakeholders indicated a high potential and interest for their
development and expansion. Banks, SACCOs and MFBs have already initiated green lending products within their mainstream
portfolios and have a demonstrated demand as well as ambition for scaling-up this activity. However, they do not yet have
adequate resources, internal capacities nor the tools to monitor and demonstrate details of their progress in this financing area.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
18.
19.
Environment and Natural Resources. Rural livelihoods are dependent on natural resources and the environment. Halting and
reversing the degradation trends requires investments in environmentally friendly technologies and increased resource use
efficiency across economic sectors, as articulated in Kenya’s GESIP (2016-2030). GESIP highlights the need for valuation of the
natural asset base and scaled-up mechanisms of payment for ecosystem services as contributors to the transition to a green
economy, which also fosters fewer harmful emissions and less waste generation. The adoption of the technologies and efficiency
gains requires policy level interventions, adequate financial resources and bridging of traditional and scientific knowledge. The
GoK has started a drive to improve adoption of renewable energy technologies, including in the agriculture sector. As part of
GESIP, FIs are expected to develop and provide innovative products and services, which support green economy entrepreneurs
and enterprises.
Climate Change (CC). Climate shocks, such as floods and droughts, projected to become more frequent and intense with CC,
adversely impact rural livelihoods and economic activities. Climate shocks may also affect the ability to repay loans, particularly
those linked to the agricultural sector. Financial services (insurance, savings, emergency relief, lines of credit) offered at
reasonable prices and fair terms can help vulnerable households prepare for and improve ability to manage and recover from
climate shocks (CGAP, 2019).[21] The financial resources required for managing and recovering from shocks are significant.
Kenya’s updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC, 2020) estimates that US$62 billion is required to address the priority
mitigation and adaptation needs by 2030. The priorities include promoting green investments and nature-based solutions and
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
enterprises, climate smart agriculture (CSA), as well as clean and efficient livelihood strategies, which enhance climate resilience
of communities, through investments in locally led climate adaptation actions. The role of the private sector in climate actions is
recognized in the Climate Change Act (2016), which provides incentives and obligations for the actors to contribute towards
achieving the 2030 Vision, through a low carbon, climate resilient development resilient pathway.
7/32
Gender equality and women’s empowerment (GEWE). Kenya’s progress in the advancement of GEWE includes the 2010
Constitution, Vision 2030 and national gender policies that clearly support increased gender equality. The Public Procurement
Act (2015) reserves 30 per cent of public procurement opportunities for women, youth and persons with disabilities. The public
Credit Guarantee Scheme Regulations for MSMEs require a minimum of 30 per cent of the covered loans to be issued to the
same disadvantaged target group. The World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index 2020 ranked Kenya at 109th out of
153 countries with a score of 0.671[22]. Nevertheless, socio-cultural norms and attitudes continue to disadvantage female
farmers and entrepreneurs in the rural sector. Unequitable intra-household power relations and control over resources limit their
decision-making power.
In particular, access to finance for rural women is negatively impacted by unequal access to land and other collateral, and by the
perception of lacking management skills among women especially in rural areas. Women typically receive less than 10 per cent
of formal credit to smallholders and only 1 per cent of formal credit to agriculture, and instead rely on informal sources. This limits
women’s economic development and is one of the root causes of poverty. See more details in the SECAP and PIM documents.
Youth. Kenya’s population is largely young, with 35.7 million Kenyans (75.1 per cent) below the age of 35 years. This potential
demographic dividend is yet to be fully harnessed with youth unemployment rate exceeding the overall unemployment rate in
Kenya. Youth employment is negatively impacted by limited working experience, life-skills, vocational skills, leadership skills,
entrepreneurial and management skills; and lack of productive resources including land or capital to start own ventures. The
Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy (2017) positions youth at its forefront.[23] It has been observed that improved access to
finance leads to increased participation of young people in the agriculture value chains, especially as off-farm entrepreneurs,
intermediaries, brokers and market-information agents. However, youth are 33 per cent less likely to have a savings account than
adults and 44 per cent less likely to save in a formal institution[24]. Challenges affecting youth access to finance include limited
financial literacy skills, limited income, lack of a savings culture, lack of access to land and assets, negative perceptions by
financial institutions, and lack of suitable products. See more details in the SECAP and PIM documents.
Nutrition. In Kenya, the national prevalence of under-five stunting is 26.2 per cent, compared to developing country average of
25 per cent. The most direct causes are inadequate nutrition (not eating enough or eating foods that lack growth-promoting
nutrients), traditional dietary practices particularly in pastoral communities and recurrent infections or chronic or diseases which
cause poor nutrient intake, absorption or utilization. Malnutrition is more likely in families headed by women, among pregnant
women, among women with children under five, and people with vulnerabilities such as HIV/AIDS. Kenya is committed to
meeting the global targets for nutrition, as articulated in the ASTGS 2019-2029. For progress in this area, investing in agriculture
is key factor, as food insecure families who typically live in rural areas, depend on subsistence farming for food and incomes.
Indigenous and marginalised groups. The peoples who identify with the indigenous groups in Kenya are estimated to number
approximately 79,000 and are found among the pastoralist communities mainly living in the ASALs. They experience land and
resource tenure insecurity, poor service delivery, weak political representation, as well as general discrimination and
exclusion.[25] Marginalised groups also include Persons Living with HIV and AIDS and Persons with Disabilities (PWDs), who
are estimated to represent around 4.6 per cent of the whole population in Kenya. More PWDs live in rural than in urban areas. A
quarter of PWDs work on family farms or MSMEs, but about one-third are unemployed.[26] As the other marginalised people,
PWDs often face challenges in accessing education, health care and financial services and are vulnerable to food insecurity and
hunger.
Table 2. Mainstreaming theme eligibility criteria
☐ Gender transformational
☐ Nutrition sensitive
☒ Youth sensitive
Situation
analysis
☐ National gender policies,
strategies and actors
☐ Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
☐ Key livelihood problems and
opportunities, by gender
☐ Use(pro-WEAI)[1]
assessment for M&E baseline
☐ National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
☐ Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
☐ Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
☒ National youth policies,
strategies and actors
☒ Main youth groups
☒ Challenges and
opportunities by youth group
☒ ENR and Climate
focused
☒ National
environmental and
climate change policies,
strategies and actors
☒ Key issues and
underlying causes of
environmental impacts
and climate stress
☒ Challenges and
opportunities to improve
ENR sustainability and
CC resilience
☐ Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
8/32
☐ Nutrition pathways
Theory of
change
☐ Gender transformative
pathways
☐ Policy engagement on
GEWE[2]
☐ Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
☒ Pathways to youth
socioeconomic empowerment
☒ Youth inclusion in project
objectives/activities
☒ ENR and CC policy
objectives
☒ ENR and CC
transformative pathways
☒ Linkages between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
☐ Outreach disaggregated by
gender
Logframe
indicators
☐ Women are >40% of
outreach beneficiaries
☐ Pro-WEAI indicator[3]
☐ Outreach disaggregated
by gender, youth,
indigenous peoples
☐ Women reporting
improved diets AND/OR
Persons reporting improved
nutrition knowledge
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
age
☒ 100% financed
institutions have
established ESMS
Human
and
financial
resources
☐ Staff with gender TORs
☐ Funds for gender activities
☐ Funds for Pro-WEIA surveys
in M&E budget
☐ Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
☐ Funds for nutrition
activities
☒ Staff with youth-specific
TORs
☒ Funds for youth activities
☒ Staff with ESC TORs
☒ Funds to implement
ESMS
25.
[1] Project level Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
26.
[2] Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
27.
[3] To be provided by ECG.
28.
[1] Project level Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
29.
[2] Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
30.
[3] To be provided by ECG.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
31.
32.
33.
34.
IFAD’s main rationale for its involvement and investment in RK-FINFA derives from the increasing unmet demand for rural and
agriculture finance and the core development objectives that IFAD and the GoK share on rural and agricultural development in
Kenya. The COSOP for Kenya 2020-2025, anchored on the same premises as ASTGS 2019-2029, focuses notably on
developing the rural sector in a sustainable manner, through private sector FIs. Development funding would be used to pro-
actively stimulate the interest of the FIs to expand the volumes and outreach of their agricultural and rural operations.
The RK-FINFA would be one of the instruments to support appropriate and adequate financial services made available for
Kenya’s rural transformation and growth. In the wake of COVID-19, the need for this strategic development support is even
greater, to initially improve the chances of fast rural recovery and then later boost the sustained growth of the sector and building
back better. At the same time, to respond to GoK’s and IFAD’s agendas on climate change adaptation/mitigation and improve
environmental management and efficiencies in the use of natural resources, RK-FINFA would pro-active encourage the
mainstreaming of green finance activities when sustainably transforming the rural sector in Kenya.   
IFAD is strongly positioned to provide solutions to the obstacles for rural finance market development in Kenya, due to its: (i) long
experience in supporting Kenya’s RF sector; (ii) strong global capacity of acting as a broker between the financial sector
operators, smallholder farmers and MSMEs; (iii) track record in supporting the development of innovative financial instruments;
(iv) growing experience in green finance innovative solutions; and (v) the opportunity to build synergies with the four on-going
IFAD-supported VC programmes  in Kenya: KeLCoP, ABDP, UTaNRMP and KCEP-CRAL.   
RK-FINFA is designed, based on a longer-term programming approach and the development of financing facilities, which can
operate on a sustained basis, beyond the duration of the planned project period. It is a framework through which international and
bilateral development partners, beyond IFAD, can invest into market-led equitable and green rural development without spending
additional funds on design, implementation, and management costs. Based on experience in other countries, this feature can
significantly increase the returns from the now proposed initial RK-FINFA investment.
B. Lessons learned
35.
The RK-FINFA design process has been informed by lessons learned and best practices from: (a) previous IFAD experiences in
Kenya; (b) results from IFAD projects in other countries of the region; and (c) similar projects financed by the GoK or other
develop partners in the country. Particularly relevant have been the experiences from the implementation of the IFAD-supported
and recently closed Programme for Rural Outreach of Financial Innovations and Technologies (PROFIT[30]). The key lessons
can be summarised as:
9/32
The provision of technical support services (TSS) to PFIs should start immediately after the PFI selection and the TA functions
need to be aligned and well targeted so that TA to PFIs, MSMEs and farmers are provided in synergy.[31]
RF Project Management Unit (PMU) and the implementing partners must have adequate capacity and assigned institutional
roles for the designed RF instruments.[32]
The key investment instruments should be implemented through specialized intermediaries based on operational
guidelines.[33]
Appropriate eligibility criteria for both PFIs and final borrowers in the RK-FINFA financed operations should be included in the
design.[34]
Targeting framework including geographical targeting and outreach to smallholders, women and youth should be drafted and
agreed upon at the design stage of the project and confirmed through subsidiary agreements with the PFIs.[35]
PFI reporting should be based on indicators that the financial institutions collect as a part of their standard operations, focusing
on detailed transaction and portfolio data.[36]
To ensure an effective exit strategy for the project and a long-term impact of its investments, the project design and loan
negotiations should cover in detail the longer-term sustainability aspects of the supported facilities.[37]
For procurement, a dedicated specialist as part of PMU should closely monitor, review and approve the procurement
processes for implementing partners to ensure conformity and consistency with IFAD’s/GoK’s procurement procedures.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
36.
The project goal  of the proposed RK-FINFA is: “poverty reduction, climate change resilience and improved livelihoods in rural
areas”.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of RK-FINFA is: “increased rural financial inclusion and green investments by
agriculture value chain stakeholders, leading to equitable employment opportunities, innovative and resilient production systems,
and increased incomes for smallholders, poor and marginalised rural households, women and youth”.
Geographic area of intervention. The geographic coverage of RK-FINFA, once fully operational, will be nationwide. However,
for an effective project start-up, the entry point for the RK-FINFA outreach will be the 14 counties in which at least two IFAD-
financed projects support agricultural value chains[38]. The RK-FINFA capacity building will target these counties, and the first
round of investment instrument roll out will take place in this target area. With this approach, RK-FINFA and its Participating
Financial Institutions (PFIs) will benefit from synergies with earlier IFAD-supported value chain development activities, and the
financing can be focused on diversified value chains.
After the RK-FINFA capacity building and initial financing cycle, starting from Project Year 3, the PFIs will be able to expand their
targeted area of investments, with RK-FINFA resources, to any other rural county in Kenya. The PFIs will identify these
expansion areas based on their market opportunities and capabilities, while continuing to apply the agreed targeting principles of
the project. This geographical roll-out for each PFI will only start after their full development of the lending products and
monitoring systems, as required by RK-FINFA.
Outreach. The project will benefit 190,000 rural Kenyan households, including both direct and indirect clients. This includes direct
financial and technical services to 68,000 households/MSMEs, covering: (i) an estimated 66,000 economically active smallholder
households; and (ii) 2,000 rural MSMEs engaged in smallholder-inclusive VCs. Considering the average household size of 4.7
persons in rural Kenya, this corresponds to 319,600 total household members. In addition, the project will engage with an
estimated five commercial banks, five MFBs and 30 SACCOs, which are not included in the estimated number of programme
beneficiaries.
Indirect outreach of the project includes: (i) estimated 32,000 persons through employment in the RK-FINFA supported
agribusinesses and farms; and (ii) 90,000 smallholder households through participation in the VCs strengthened by the supported
agribusinesses.
Targeting Strategy and Beneficiary Profiles. The RK-FINFA targeting strategy is based on the beneficiary profiles applied in
the on-going IFAD-supported VC projects. The focus is on low-income, economically active rural households, with specific
targets on women and youth. The PIM of RK-FINFA includes comprehensive strategies for gender and youth targeting, as well
as nutrition linkages of RK-FINFA. The RK-FINFA target counties are exposed to environmental degradation and climatic shocks
such as droughts and floods, which impact the livelihoods of the communities and economic activity in these areas. Therefore,
improved environmental management and climate change resilience-related objectives will be integral parts of the project
strategy. The RK-FINFA beneficiary profiles include:
10/32
Smallholders[39] and rural microenterprises[40] in the project target areas with limited access to financial services and
products due to lack of adequate business skills, limited access to markets and lack of collateral assets. The composition of
this core target group is specified by demand for the RK-FINFA micro- and small financing packages, including willingness to
implement the green finance products to increase rural climate change resilience. This category of beneficiaries represents
about 90 per cent of the total number of beneficiaries, and will include 50 per cent women and 30 per cent youth.
Under-employed rural men, women and youth with no access to land or assets beyond their skills and time. The project will
support them to seek employment in the VCs as seasonal workers in the farms and full time workers in the supported SMEs,
including service providers, input material suppliers, processers, logistics and sales. This group represents about 10 per cent
of RK-FINFA beneficiaries.
Agribusiness-SMEs[41] that have viable market-oriented business models with potential to create jobs and opportunities for
smallholders.[42] Due to risks inherent in the agriculture sector, as well as insufficient business planning capacities, they have
limited access to finance to expand their operations and employment creation in the VCs. All RK-FINFA supported SMEs are
involved in and promote smallholder-inclusive value chains and provide employment in the RK-FINFA’s targeted rural areas.
43.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment (GEWE). RK-FINFA will support the development of technical support services
and financial products that target female farmers and micro-entrepreneurs informed by a gender assessment to understand
barriers to women’s access to financial services and recommend solutions through the gender strategy. 50 per cent of RK-FINFA
supported financial services will target women. This will be achieved through three RK-FINFA gender mainstreaming  pathways
and strategies which are described in detail in the PIM section for Gender Strategy, and in summary entail support to:
Women economic empowerment. Through the TSIS services, Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme (R-CGS) and the Green
Financing Facility (GFF), RK-FINFA will offer targeted technical support services and investment instruments targeting
women-owned MSMEs.
Increase women’s decision-making power and leadership at household and community level by improved skills,
knowledge and control over resources. RK-FINFA will in particular support trainings in gender-sensitive financial literacy and
business planning to reduce inequalities between men and women over financial decision making.
Balanced and reducing workloads of women. Through TSIS and GFF, women will be supported to prepare investment
plans for adoption of new smart technologies and labour saving solutions such as renewable energy kits and water
harvesting.
44.
Youth empowerment. The RK-FINFA targeting strategy ensures that youth represent at least 30 per cent of overall project
beneficiaries. A detailed youth needs assessment will be incorporated into the project baseline study. Youth Targeting Guidelines
for the detailed project activities, is presented in the PIM, including aspects of: (i) development of youth friendly products and
strategies by PFIs, (ii) scaling up digital solutions to positively impact rural young women and men access to finance, (iii) youth-
focused capacity building on financial literacy and business development training, (iv) identification and selection of PFIs and
Technical Service Providers (TSPs), which have youth focussed lending and training products, as well as use of youth as agents
and educators in project activities.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
45.
To achieve the RK-FINFA Project Goal and Development Objective, the project activities are structured into three mutually
reinforcing components: (a) Component 1:Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS); (b) Component 2: Rural Investment
Instruments; and Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination. The TSIS operations of the first
component will start with each PFI, prior to allocation of investment resources through the second component. Diagram 1
presents the overall structure, the relationship between the different activities and stakeholders, and the expected results.
Diagram 1: RK-FINFA Technical Components and Expected Results
11/32
Component 1: Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS)
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
Through two fully inter-linked sub-components, the RK-FINFA TSIS will: (i) strengthen Participating Financial Institution (PFI)
capacities for innovation, rural outreach and green finance services in Kenya, and (ii) build MSME and smallholder sustainable
investment capacities and financial literacy skills. Both aspects of the TSIS, supply and demand side, will be embedded into the
rural growth strategies of the PFIs to foster sustainability and scalability and support the effective use of the resources provided
through the project’s Investment Instruments component. The viability of the approach has been vetted through interviews of
potential PFIs including six banks[43], five MFBs[44] and a number of SACCOs.[45]
Co-financing partner organization(s) are sought to coordinate the TSIS component on behalf of the National Treasury (NT) as
“the TSIS Coordinator”[46], and co-finance the coordination cost. In addition to this additional budget, the selected partners will
bring to the project a comparative advantage in coordination of technical services and promotion of innovations in the RF sector.
The partners will work under the supervision and oversight of the RK-FINFA PMU. The RK-FINFA’s Project Implementation
Manual (PIM) provides a description for the TSIS Coordinator selection, onboarding, tasks and responsibilities.
The TSIS thematic areas will vary for each PFI. The supply side technical service packages depend on the PFI type (bank, MFB,
SACCO), the level of PFI development, specific needs in its rural growth strategy, and the types of innovations the PFIs wish to
pursue to increase their rural outreach. The demand side package is specified based on each PFI’s identified target value chains
and geographic areas.
As the first step at RK-FINFA start-up, the project’s implementing partners will advertise its offered support instruments broadly
among Kenyan financial institutions. The communication will include direct contacting of FIs and utilization of platforms such as
the SACCO associations, the MFI association, the bankers’ associations, the UN SDG platform, and other forums in Kenya.
Interested financial institutions are requested to submit their Expressions of Interest (EoI) to partner in the RK-FINFA
implementation including the technical services and investment instruments.
The EoIs will follow a pre-defined RK-FINFA template, through which candidate PFIs will have to detail their proposals including:
(i) overall FI rural and green finance strategy, (ii) proposed use of RK-FINFA support resources including innovations for rural
outreach, (iii) target geographic areas, VCs, investment types and products, (iv) projected utilization volume of RK-FINFA
financial instruments, (v) details of proposed TSIS utilization including topics, preferred TSPs and level of co-financing, (vi)
statement of the FI financial performance, commitment, capacity to sustainably absorb and manage the RK-FINFA instruments,
MIS capability and MIS development requirements, and finally (vii) the PFIs’ Environment and Social Management Systems
(ESMS) including designated staffing in the PMU to oversee ESC aspects (Social Inclusion Officer and Environment and Climate
Change Officer), monitoring systems, incident reporting templates and channels.
The RK-FINFA TSIS Coordinator will conduct an assessment of the received EoIs. The results of the assessment and
recommendations for PFI selection to the TSIS pipeline will be submitted to the PMU for approval, and subsequently shared with
IFAD for no-objection. Upon approval and admission of the PFIs into the TSIS pipeline, the TSIS services will be launched by
mobilization of a local specialized TSP, jointly identified with the PFI. Subsequently the PFI will apply for financial resources
through RK-FINFA Sub-components 2.1 and 2.2 for implementation of the proposed rural and agriculture finance strategy and
innovation. If the application to financial instruments is not successful, the TSIS package implementation will be discontinued.
The project will repeat its call for EoI bi-annually until the completion of the pipeline for RK-FINFA TSIS implementation.
52.
The PFIs will co-finance the TSIS costs in cash at a minimum level of 20 per cent for the commercial banks, 15 per cent for the
MFBs and 10 per cent for SACCOs, to ensure ownership. The TSIS will need to be operational with a selected PFI prior to its
application to implement the Component 2 Investment Instruments.
12/32
53.
Sub-component 1.1: PFI Capacity Building for Rural Outreach and Innovation.
54.
The PFIs will be provided with a demand-driven package of technical support and innovation services (TSIS) aimed at helping the
PFIs to develop and offer appropriate financial services, manage risk of lending to the rural/agriculture sector and reduce
transaction costs, with particular focus on women, youth and green financing. The expected outputs include: (i) the capacity of
five participating commercial banks, six MFBs and 30 DT-SACCOs improved to provide rural and agriculture financial services; (ii)
the capacity of all 41 PFIs built to implement and monitor green investment portfolios; and (iii) Environmental, Social and
Governance (ESG) systems operationalized/ strengthened by 41 PFIs.
55.
Through the EoIs, the PFIs will have identified and proposed key technical support areas to expand their rural outreach and
agriculture finance. The RK-FINFA technical support packages will be tailored for the needs of each PFI. Potential PFI capacity
building technical support areas will include:
Green Finance strategy, products and toolkits developed for each PFI participating in the GFF, including a taxonomy and
monitoring framework.
Introduction of smallholder and VC digital platforms present in Kenya, to enable data driven, affordable and effective risk
management of agriculture loans.
Agriculture VC finance strategy supported and specific products developed including for alternative collaterals, contract
farming finance, warehouse receipt systems and cash flow lending. Opportunities and risk assessments of VC stakeholders
carried out.
Women, youth and social inclusion strategies and lending products supported with focus on equipping rural finance institutions
with adequate skills and tools.
Upgrading of Management Information Systems (MIS) of smaller PFIs based on their demand, especially with the objective to
integrate seamless mobile banking. The PFIs will cover a more substantial share of the relatively high cost of this intervention.
Remittances technical advisory services, delivered to PFIs, with support by the ongoing IFAD’s Platform for Remittances,
Investments and Migrants’ Entrepreneurship (PRiME).
Effective agriculture and climate insurance products and solutions such as bundled packages introduced to PFIs with support
by IFAD’s PARM and INSURED initiatives.
ESG standards and management systems strengthened or introduced to the PFIs, including CC risk management.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
In addition, the PFI technical support package will include assistance by the TSIS Coordinator and the recruited Technical
Service Providers at each PFI to monitor and evaluate the social and environmental targeting and impact of the RK-FINFA
resources.
A particular aspect of this sub-component will be to develop a permanent culture in the PFIs for long term pro-active rural product
innovation while at the same time, with improved technical skills, to help the financial institutions to immediately reduce the risks
associated with designing, piloting, and launching of new products. Success in this area will be especially important for the
successful implementation and ensured sustainability of RK-FINFA financial instruments.
Sub-component 1.2: Business Development Services for Agribusinesses and Smallholders. The expected outputs of this
sub-component are: (i) 1,500 small and microenterprises receive Business Development Services (BDS) and are able to submit
bankable business plans; and (ii) 50,000 male and female smallholder producers receive financial literacy training including for
preparation of simple business plans. The BDS is the key tool for social inclusion targeting of RK-FINFA: minimum of 50 per cent
women, 30 per cent youth and 5 per cent vulnerable groups are included among all BDS clients.
Pipeline generation of agribusinesses and smallholders for the TSIS. The agribusiness and smallholder candidates for RK-
FINFA’s TSIS programme will be identified through the geographical targeting of the project and its PFIs, and supported by the
four ongoing IFAD-financed VC projects in Kenya. Within this targeting framework, the TSIS pipeline will be developed based on
expressed demand from agribusinesses and smallholders, following the defined beneficiary profiles of RK-FINFA, presented in
the above described targeting strategy and with more details in the PIM. A dedicated specialist will be recruited in the PMU to
support coordination with ongoing VC projects and pipeline generation.
Agribusiness BDS. The aim of the BDS is to strengthen the bankability, business planning capacity, investment start-up and
financial management skills of the MSMEs, and thereby lower the investment risk for the PFIs. Furthermore, a standard
bankability assessment will be completed for each agribusiness, helping to inform the PFIs of the real investment risks and
opportunities. The BDS services will be demand-driven and a mandatory element prior to lending through RK-FINFA investment
resources. The aim of the BDS is to ensure that all RK-FINFA financing will target well planned productive and screened
investments in the rural agricultural sectors, thereby reducing the risks of overindebtedness of the MSMEs as well as the NPL
rates of the PFIs.
61.
Savings Promotion and Smallholder Financial Literacy services. The aim of this activity is to increase savings levels of the
supported households, leading to sustainable investments, and to support SACCOs and MFBs long term capital mobilization.
Training topics will include: basic banking skills; “Saving for a Purpose”; managing resources; borrowing; interest rates; collateral;
bank transactions and payments; and the use of mobile and digital banking. Furthermore, a targeted module for women and
youth empowerment in the use of financial services will be developed and rolled out.
62.
Demand side TSIS delivery mechanism. The PFIs can either utilize their own internal service units with RK-FINFA support,
and/or recruit external TSPs, for the delivery of the Agribusiness BDS and Smallholder Financial Literacy services. The pipeline
generated through the demand side TSIS is linked to the outreach mechanisms of the PFIs, which are strengthened through the
supply side technical support to PFIs, leading eventually to the actual investments and effective utilisation of the RK-FINFA
Component 2 financial resources.
63.
Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments
13/32
64.
The RK-FINFA will operate with two Rural Investment Instruments: (i) a Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme (R-CGS), and (ii) a
Green Financing Facility (GFF). Both the R-CGS and the GFF will be designed as sustainable financing vehicles, which can
utilize resources from the GoK and from interested international financiers to unlock private investment into Kenya’s agricultural
and agribusiness sector at attractive market terms through Kenyan financial institutions. The TSIS packages under Component 1
will support the PFIs in the implementation of the rural investment instruments, in line with each PFI’s respective rural and
agriculture finance strategy. Identification and referral of agribusiness and smallholder candidates into the PFI funding pipelines
are supported as described above in Component 1.2. Table 2 presents the key features of the two RK-FINFA financing
instruments, followed by summary descriptions of these financing instruments. See PIM for implementation guidelines.
Table 3: RK FINFA – Proposed Rural Investment Instruments
Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme
Green Financing Facility
(R-CGS)
(GFF)
RK-FINFA budget
allocation and
sources
Total US$ 20 million
- US$ 5 million IFAD PoL[47]
- US$ 15 million GoK
Total US$ 15 million
- US$ 10 million IFAD PoL
- US$ 5 million GoK
Leveraged PFI
contributions
Objectives
US$ 80 million by the PFIs[48]
US$ 5 million by the PFIs
Mitigate real and perceived risk to unlock
commercial bank capital flows into the
agribusiness and food sector SMEs.
Provide dedicated liquidity to accelerate green
agricultural and rural investment products of
Microfinance Banks and SACCOs, who face liquidity
challenges.
Managing partner
Hosted by National Treasury; managed by a
dedicated unit in NT
Hosted and managed by a financial institution
Participating FIs
Directly: Commercial banks and MFBs
Indirectly: MFBs and SACCOs
4 MFBs and 20 SACCOs
Investment targets
- 2,000 MSME medium loans 
- 15,000 small loans
- 30,000 microloans
- 7,500 small loans
- 15,000 microloans
Range of loan sizes
- US$ 5,000 – 45,000 for MSMEs
- US$ 1,000 – 7,500 for small loans
- US$ 70 – 1,000 for microloans
- US$ 1,000 – 7,500 for small loans
- US$ 70 – 1,000 for microloans
Number of HHs
benefit from farm and
off-farm employment
opportunities
Total 160,000 rural HHs
- 100,000 HHs via MSME loans
- 30,000 HHs via small loans
- 30,000 HHs via microloans
Total 30,000 rural HHs
- 15,000 HHs via small loans
- 15,000 HHs via microloans
Gender and youth
inclusion targets
- 30% of investment targeting youth and women
(this is the only subcomponent with less than 50%
expected gender outreach, due to the instrument
focus on challenge of mobilizing commercial
finance to agriculture)
- 50% of investment targeting women
- 30% of investment targeting youth
Environment, Social
and Governance
PFIs and Agribusinesses follow agreed
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG)
standards framework and CC risk management
systems
PFIs follow agreed Environmental, Social and
Governance standards framework. The MSMEs and
smallholders implement environmental management
measures and climate smart solutions.
Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme
14/32
Green Financing Facility
(R-CGS)
(GFF)
Sub-component 2.1:Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme (R-CGS)
65.
66.
67.
The expected results of the R-CGS are: (i) PFIs lend US$ 80 million to rural MSMEs and agriculture VCs, supported by the R-
CGS guarantee amount of US$20 million; (ii) 2,000 rural MSMEs have improved access to finance; (iii) 15,000 microenterprises
and farmers have improved access to finance, (iv) 30,000 smallholder farmers have improved access to finance with targeted
products for women and youth, and (v) in overall the target of 30 per cent women and youth among end-client groups is
achieved.
The RK-FINFA R-CGS’s strategy is to provide risk sharing to promote rural outreach innovations and catalyze funding into the
rural and agriculture sector from the portfolios of Kenyan mainstream financial institutions such as Cooperative Bank, National
Bank, ABSA Bank, Kenya Commercial Bank and Equity Bank. The target institutions have a significant liquid resource base and
overall strong capacity to deliver banking services, but they have limited risk appetite or internal risk capital constraints.
The R-CGS will build on PROFIT’s Risk Sharing Scheme experiences and institution building at the National Treasury (NT). In
particular, based on PROFIT lessons, in 2020, the NT institutionalized its guarantee tool by establishing the public MSME Credit
Guarantee Scheme (MSME-CGS), which was recorded as success for PROFIT. The MSME-CGS is now an integral part of the
GoK’s strategic COVID-19 response framework and receives concerted technical and financial support from the World Bank,
Financial Sector Deepening Kenya (FSDK), United States Agency for international development (USAID), as well as from IFAD
on rural aspects. The MSME-CGS is established and regulated through the GoK’s Public Finance Management Regulations for
the Credit Guarantee Scheme, 2020.[49] A feasibility study and demand assessment has been carried out by the FDSK as well
as the World Bank, pointing to large unaddressed demand for financing of MSMEs and the feasibility of the CGS tool.
68.
The MSME-CGS received an initial 14 applications from commercial banks interested to participate in the scheme. To date,
seven banks have been approved to participate[50]. The GoK invested KES 3 billion (US$ 27.6 million) in the scheme in 2021
and has confirmed to invest another KES 2 billion (US$ 18.4 million) over the coming two years.
69.
The MSME-CGS has an appropriate overall operation framework, suitable for the RK-FINFA R-CGS. The detailed guidelines are
available in Appendix 1 to the PIM, with key features being as follows:
50 per cent pari-passu coverage of potential losses in qualifying MSME loans.
Four-fold required investment amount by the PFIs against their received allocation.
The PFIs use their own credit appraisal systems and criteria, together with CGS eligibility criteria, to select the final borrowers
to the scheme.
The targeting of loans includes minimum of 30 percent youth and women.
Transparent information and access by all eligible financial institutions.
The guarantee resources invested are deposited and ring-fenced at CBK, accessible to PFIs only after possible losses
materialise and have been reported and approved.
In short term, due to the COVID-19 response nature of the scheme, participating banks are not charged any guarantee fees.
In the medium term, the GoK goal will establish a Credit Guarantee Company (CGC), to which all MSME-CGS operations and
available funds will be transferred.
70.
The RK-FINFA R-CGS will be established as a special rural window of the GoK’s MSME-CGS, with investment resources from
the IFAD RK-FINFA loan (US$5 million) and GoK’s PROFIT reflows (US$7.5 million) and by earmarking a rural allocation from
the GoK MSME-CGS overall budget (US$7.5 million). The R-CGS investment of US$20 million, with the aligned TSIS, is
expected to leverage US$80 million of commercial financing to rural clients including smallholder communities and micro-
agribusinesses, as well as SME agribusinesses that lead, sustain, and develop smallholder-inclusive VCs, and that provide
employment for rural people including women and youth.
71.
To enable this, it has been agreed with the NT that selected aspects of the MSME-CGS will be adjusted to allow efficient
functioning of the special rural window. The adjustments will be established and regulated by “The R-CGS Addendum of the
MSME-CGS Operational Manual”, a draft of which is annexed to the PIM. The key aspects of the addendum include:
The R-CGS resources will be ring-fenced and exclusively target rural productive investment loans in line with the objectives
and targeting approach of RK-FINFA.
Wholesale lending to regulated SACCOs and MFBs will qualify for guarantee coverage. For these, larger loan sizes and
special conditions will be applied. The funds made available to SACCOs and MFBs, with R-CGS support, will be used for on-
lending to rural productive investments under the normal lending conditions by the SACCOs and MFBs.
Value Chain Financing, through SME-agribusinesses, is promoted whereby the SMEs will on-lend the borrowed funds to their
supplier smallholders as input loans.
For the MSME registration requirement of the MSME-CGS, the rural special window will apply special conditions for the
categories of Micro and Small loans below US$ 5,000.
72.
As indicated, the GoK’s plan is to convert the MSME-CGS into a Credit Guarantee Company (CGC) during the RK-FINFA
implementation period. WB has indicated potential technical assistance support as well as a significant capital investment into
the CGC, with the condition that CGC will be established as an independent incorporated legal entity, capitalized through both
public and private investments. The project will pro-actively work with the NT to ensure that the specific aspects and
requirements of the rural finance window will be appropriately incorporated into the CGC. This work is done under the policy
component 3.1 and further explained below in its dedicated section. It should be noted, however, that given the immediate
stimulus needs due to the COVID-19 crisis, the transfer of resources from the public Credit Guarantee Scheme to the CGC is
likely to be delayed.
15/32
73.
Sub-component 2.2:Green Financing Facility (GFF)
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
Sub-component 2.2 supports the target of the innovative and sustainable transformation of Kenyan rural economy through the
operations and services of the Green Financing Facility (GFF), to be established with the RK-FINFA support. The GFF will
contribute to the sustainable rural transformation, growth, and income generation through two fully interlinked methods: (a)
alleviating the liquidity constraints of non-bank financial institutions, and (b) encouraging small-scale farmers and
microenterprises to invest in climate-smart, labour saving and environmentally friendly activities. A taxonomy framework for
green financing will be elaborated during project initial phases to ensure buy-in from the PFIs and clarity for the GFF eligible
investment targets.
Alleviating Liquidity Constraint. As indicated, in Kenya there is an uneven distribution of liquidity among different types of FIs
hindering smaller rural FIs from expanding their outreach. The GFF will be established as a permanent facility to provide
wholesale capital to rural oriented SACCOs and MFBs/MFIs, for on-lending to the smallholder sub-sector and rural micro-
enterprises. The RK-FINFA budget will provide the start-up capital for the wholesale operations. On the medium term, a key
target is to pro-actively increase the capital base of the GFF through additional investments by other financiers with a green
agenda. During the RK-FINFA design process, various potential candidates to support the scaling up of the GFF operations have
been identified. These include Green Climate Fund’s Private Sector Facility, European Investment Bank, KFW, potential bilateral
partners as well as various UN funded programmes in Kenya.
The GFF will be hosted in a registered FI, which best meets the eligibility criteria[51] for the host institution, as defined in: (a) RK-
FINFA’s PIM and (b) GoK regulations concerning the on-lending of public funds. A number of leading commercial banks
(including the Co-operative Bank, Equity Bank, and ABSA) as well as the government-owned AFC[52] have expressed their
tentative interest to host the GFF, as the GFF objectives are in line with their own development vision. The selection of the host
institution will be finalised after the RK-FINFA approval.
The wholesale borrowers from the GFF will be the regulated non-bank FIs serving the key RF-FINFA target clientele, the
smallholders and rural MSMEs. This financial service market consists of two key segments. First, the deposit-taking SACCOs,
particularly the 49 farmer-based DT-SACCOs that nationally serve around 2.25 million smallholder households. In addition, there
are many employee-based DT-SACCOs that systematically provide credit facilities to farmers and other rural enterprises and
would qualify for GFF wholesale loans if they direct the received GFF funding to smallholders. Second, the microfinance banks,
serving large rural client networks nationwide and particularly low-income women. When the GFF operations mature and its
capital base grows, the increase in the number of wholesale borrowers from the GFF will be pro-actively promoted through (a)
actions and policies to increase the number of regulated SACCOs and MFBs in Kenya and (b) the inclusion of well-managed (but
not regulated) credit-only MFIs into the scheme. RK-FINFA support to speed up these institutional development processes will be
provided under Sub-component 3.1.
The final borrowers benefiting from the GFF funding would be the rural clients of the SACCOs and MFBs that meet the RK-FINFA
requirements. The key transformative element of GFF is the targeting of investments to the climate-smart productive projects of
the borrowers. This core element of the GFF is summarised below and further discussed in the PIM. Rural Transformation
through GFF’s Green Financing. While the general understanding of the importance of environmental issues and the impacts of
CC has improved in recent years in Kenya, environmentally friendly and innovative climate resilient options and related
investments are often overlooked due to the perception of higher upfront capital costs and the longer-term nature of realising the
tangible benefits and higher incomes, as well as limitations in knowledge of existing options and technologies. To achieve faster
progress in this area, the traditional knowledge applied in rural areas should be complemented with scientific knowledge to
achieve the desired climate resilient livelihoods and a sustainable natural resource base. Existing Government policies and
national plans strongly support greener pathways in rural development, and the updated Nationally Determined Contributions
include actions such as the enhancement of energy and resource efficiency; clean efficient and sustainable energy technologies;
low-carbon and efficient transportation systems; and climate smart agriculture as priorities for climate change mitigation.
The GFF will focus on green investments and targets its wholesale loans to PFIs for financing activities and projects in climate
change adaptation/mitigation, improved environmental management, and improved efficiencies in the use of natural resources.
Smallholder and microenterprise investments that qualify for GFF lending would include, but are not limited to, the following: (a)
efficient water use such as drip irrigation/sprinkler or micro-jet systems; (b) flood protection measures both physical and
biophysical; (c) climate resilient infrastructure/increased robustness of infrastructure; (d) climate smart farming including drought
or flood tolerant inputs; (e) soil and water conservation measures; (f) renewable energy and energy efficient systems especially
those that are labour efficient and time-saving to ease women’s workloads; (g) water harvesting/water storage systems; (h) agro-
forestry and afforestation/reforestation; (i) reduction of post-harvest food losses; (j) climate smart solutions for livestock and dairy
production systems; (k) rural insurance products; and (l) cleaner transport solutions. A comprehensive taxonomy framework for
green financing will be elaborated during the initial phases of project implementation. Special attention will be given to
investments that result in reduction of GHG emissions and the generation of carbon credits.
80.
Discussions with the key potential wholesale borrowers of the GFF indicated strong future demand for capital for innovative
green investments. Leading MFBs consider green financing as a key strategy in their future operations, and they already are
81.
82.
83.
84.
offering green products to their clients. The GFF will provide additional resources for these institutions to develop the green
segments of their portfolios, together with focused RK-FINFA technical support for green strategy and product development.
Rural oriented DT-SACCOs also expressed interest to finance sustainable, green agricultural and rural activities but their
development level in this area is lower than in the case of MFBs, requiring major TA investments under Component 1.
16/32
To ensure a smooth start-up of the GFF operations after the project effectiveness, during project years 1 and 2, at least 50 per
cent of the GFF-funded investments in each PFI have to be used for green investments as defined in the PIM and the GFF
Operations Manual. The rest of the issued GFF tranches can be used for other bankable productive investments of the RK-
FINFA target group. Starting from Project Year 3, all the GFF financed investments, including the capital from both the GFF
repayment reflows and the new GFF tranches, need to be in the green category. A minimum of the 50 per cent of the issued
loans at the GFF scheme level have to be for women and a minimum of 30 per cent for youth farmers and entrepreneurs.
GFF Operational Modality and Products. Both at the Host Institution and PFI level, the GFF operation would be based on
effective revolving of the repaid capital back to new GFF-financed loans, to achieve maximum outreach and impact. The long-
term (4-5 years) tranche based GFF disbursements will allow the PFIs to apply longer than their standard loan and grace periods
when issuing working capital and investment loans to their clients. This will be particularly important to support the post COVID-
19 recovery efforts.
The GFF financing will cover 75 per cent of each loan by an MFB or a SACCO that will be issued to an eligible borrower and loan
purpose. The PFI will provide the remaining 25 per cent as its own commitment from its own funds. The PFIs will carry the full
credit risk of the GFF loans to final borrowers and will use their own credit appraisal systems and criteria, together with GFF
eligibility criteria, to select the final borrowers to the scheme.
The GFF Host will receive financing at terms reflecting the low cost of IFAD financing. This will enable affordable wholesale
financing for the MFBs and SACCOs, which in turn enables the provision of loans to end clients at more client-friendly terms: (i)
longer loan duration and appropriate grace periods, and (ii) interest rates at the low end of the institution’s interest rate scale for
each type of a loan. Following the selection of the Host Institution, the detailed terms will be determined for the wholesale
tranches. Ring-fenced accounts for GFF operations will be established at each participating MFB and SACCO, which will hold all
the GFF funds including capital repayments from revolving loans. The Host Institution and PFIs will have a screening criteria and
checklist for investments and business plans referring to the IFC exclusion list to guide decision making[53].
85.
The proposed main start-up terms for the GFF-funded loans are included in Table 2 above and in more detail in the PIM’s draft
GFF Operations Guidelines. With these terms and the seed capital allocation from RK-FINFA, the GFF is projected during the
project implementation period to provide green financing support to over 30,000 rural households. The NT, IFAD and the GFF
host institution can propose justified changes to the GFF-funded loan terms for the RK-FINFA Steering Committee approval as
experiences on GFF scheme performance accumulate.
Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination
86.
Component 3 is divided into two sub-components: 3.1. Enabling Rural Finance Environment and 3.2. Project Coordination.
Sub-Component 3.1: Enabling Rural Finance Environment
87.
88.
The purpose of Sub-component 3.1 activities is to promote the creation of a conducive policy and institutional environment for
increased rural financial intermediation, to support rural and agriculture transformation in Kenya. It is important to note that the
main investment components of RK-FINFA specifically aim at supporting or creating economic policy instruments to increase
rural financial intermediation. Therefore, for a focused RK-FINFA approach, the limited project resources allocated to Sub-
component 3.1 will be directed to the development of institutional arrangements that support the medium and longer-term
conducive operational environment for the R-CGS and the GFF.
The Sub-component will be managed and operated by a co-financing Implementation Partner selected from among the
specialized non-government sector actors in Kenya. The finalisation of the focused activity plan for Sub-component 3.1 and the
selection of the core support areas will be completed after receiving a detailed proposal from a pre-selected Implementation
Partner candidate. Based on policy gap analysis performed through discussions with the NT and other key project stakeholders,
the topics are planned to include:
Finalisation of the addendum to the regulations of the current interim phase of the GoK’s MSME Credit Guarantee Scheme to
make it possible to include rural MSME and smallholder loans under the cover of guarantees as well as strategies to achieve
the women target at 30 per cent (with potential to increase to 50 per cent) and 30 per cent youth outreach. Planned key
partners: Treasury, FSD-K. Time: Q3/2022.
Development of a regulatory and supportive framework for allocation of affordable resources to green finance investments by
FIs including banks, MFBs and SACCOs. Planned key partners: Treasury, CBK, FSD-K. Time: Q2/2023.Support to the design
of the regulations and rules of the rural window of the planned credit guarantee company to take over from the NT-operated
MSME-CGS. Planned key partners: Treasury, WB, USAID, FSD-K. Time: Q4/2024.
Support the inclusion of additional SACCOs under the regulation and supervision of SASRA (which would qualify them as
candidates as wholesale borrowers from the GFF). Planned key partners: SASRA, CBK, Treasury, AGRA, FSD-K. Time:
Q2/2025.
Modify regulations to enable well-managed credit-only MFIs to seek for an MFB status (which would qualify them as
candidates as wholesale borrowers from the GFF). Planned key partners: CBK, Treasury, FSD-K. Time: Q2/2025.
Support to policies and action plans for increased registration of rural MSMEs to improve their access to bank loans and
guarantees. Planned key partners: Treasury, AGRA, Ministry of Industry, Trade and Enterprise Development. Time: Q2/2025.
Support a review of agricultural insurance operations and their regulatory status in Kenya, as a preparation for effective
agricultural insurance arrangements. Planned key partners: Treasury, FSD-K. Time: Q2/2025.
Sub-Component 3.2: Project Coordination
17/32
89.
The project coordination and management costs will be budgeted under this sub-component, consisting of financing from IFAD,
the Government, Participating Financial Institutions, and the co-investing implementation partners. The management and
institutional arrangements are presented in Chapter 4 below and described in more detail in the PIM.
E. Theory of Change
90.
91.
92.
The key development problem that RK-FINFA aims to solve can be described as follows: Limited investment flow hinders
modernization and improved income flows in the smallholder and agribusiness sectors, despite high development potential and
significant positive impacts on rural livelihoods and food systems development, poverty reduction and climate change resilience
while contributing to gender mainstreaming. (See ToC diagram in Annex 2).
Three identified underlying causes for this development problem are: (i) information and communication gap between the
financial sector and agribusiness sector due to capacity constraints; (ii) high perceived risk and real risk of financing smallholder,
agribusiness sectors, in particular of rural youth and women, and (iii) limited access to liquidity by rural MFBs and SACCOs, the
last mile financial service providers, particularly to commit resources into new innovative approaches such as green finance and
limited outreach for youth and women.
RK-FINFA provides solutions to each of these three underlying problems through the following interventions: (i) Technical
Support and Innovation Services (TSIS) both to PFIs and their potential pipeline of clients from the smallholder and agribusiness
sectors, to improve transparency and mutual understanding of the investment opportunities and risks; (ii) Rural Credit Guarantee
Scheme to help reduce the perceived risks and real lending risks and unlock private capital flows into agricultural value chains
and to introduce rural outreach innovations targeting women and youth; and (iii) Green Financing Facility to provide liquidity to
finance green investments of rural MFBs and SACCOs and to establish a long-term sustainable vehicle connecting non-bank
financial institutions to liquid financial resources. At the same the provision of project support to an enabling environment for
wider and innovative rural financial intermediation will set in motion a positive growth cycle that effectively supports the key target
of transformation of the rural economy. RK-FINFA gender mainstreaming pathways will lead to increased (i) Women economic
empowerment for enhanced access and control of productive resources, affordable access to finance and services (ii) Balanced
and reduced workloads for women. RK-FINFA will support women to access green financing for labour and time-saving
technologies such as solar lighting and energy saving cooking stoves, to encourage shifts towards equitable sharing of workload
burden within the households and (iii) Women’s voice in decision-making and leadership at household and community level will
be implemented through leadership trainings and mentorship of women and participation in all project interventions.
93.
The interventions are specifically tailored to target low-income smallholders, including women, youth, and marginalized groups, in
the RK-FINFA target areas. In particular, the project development objective is to achieve increased rural financial inclusion and
green investments by agriculture value chain stakeholders, leading to equitable employment opportunities, innovative and
resilient production systems, and increased incomes for smallholders, poor and marginalized rural households.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
Alignment with SDGs. RK-FINFA aims to contribute directly to SDG1 (no poverty) and SDG2 (zero hunger), through its key targets
of economic and social transformation and financing to smallholder agriculture and rural MSMEs. Further, RK-FINFA’s targeting
approach relies largely on active and beneficial participation of women and girls in all activities (SDG5 on gender and women
empowerment). The project also directly promotes investments and inclusive economic growth and decent work (SDG8) in agriculture
and promotes sustainable agro-industrialisation (SDG9).On climate action and environment protection (SDG13), RK-FINFA’s targeted
interventions through green finance aim to substantially increase adaptive capacity of targeted households through new, smarter
farming methods and at the same time to generally improve the resilience of households and rural MSMEs. Finally, RK-FINFA
promotes strong institutions in supervision and support of Financial Institutions (SDG16) as well as partnerships for mobilization of
domestic and international resources to sustainable development (SDG17).
94.
Alignment with national priorities. RK-FINFA is fully in line with the core priorities of the Government in rural and agricultural
development. The Government's strategy to improve agricultural performance and productivity as expressed in the ASTGS 2019-
2029. According to the ASTGS 2019-2029, to develop the rural sector successfully and in a sustainable manner, private sector
financial institutions (particularly commercial banks, SACCOs and MFIs) would need to play a central role in the financing of the
rural transformation process. The RK-FINFA operations are an integral part in efforts to support to this development process.
Furthermore, the project’s support to the climate smart green financing and its mainstreaming is directly in line with NDC, 2020
and the actions recognized in the Climate Change Act (2016) and Kenya’s GESIP (2016-2030), which emphasises resource use
efficiency. The gender targeting of RK-FINFA reflects the 2010 Constitution, Vision 2030, and national gender policies that
strongly support increased gender equality. Similarly, the special efforts to include the youth among the project beneficiaries are
directly in line with the GoK youth policies, including the Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy (2017). 
95.
Alignment with IFAD’s policies and corporate priorities. The project is fully in line with the IFAD Kenya COSOP’s rural
transformation target and its objectives of reducing poverty and improving incomes along the key agricultural VCs. It follows the
IFAD and COSOP emphasis on small farmer and MSME capacity building and especially on improved access to innovative and
inclusive financial services. With its strong focus on green financing, RK-FINFA directly responds to IFAD’s agenda on in climate
change adaptation/mitigation, improved environmental management, and improved efficiencies in the use of natural resources.
RK-FINFA aims to be gender mainstreamed and youth sensitive, therefore contributing to the IFAD11 commitments.
96.
Harmonization and Partnerships. RK-FINFA will strengthen the on-going IFAD-supported value chain projects in Kenya by
bringing in additional capacity building services and finance to their stakeholders. Outside IFAD projects, RK-FINFA is largely
built of implementation partnerships with Kenyan FIs serving the rural market. In addition, three leading NGOs supporting the
sector expressed interest to join RK-FINFA as implementing and co-financing partners: FSDK, Alliance for a Green Revolution in
Africa (AGRA), and the AMEA network in Kenya through its lead NGO, CORDAID International.
18/32
97.
Cooperation will be established with the World Bank’s “Supporting Access to Finance and Enterprise Recovery” (SAFER), under
preparation to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, with similar instruments to those of RK-FINFA but mainly targeting other
sectors than agriculture and rural. In particular, the synergy points include joint support to Credit Guarantee Scheme and the
enabling environment for financial sector outreach to microenterprises. Other partnership opportunities include: (i) United Nations
Resident Coordinator Office, United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), and the UN-GoK
flagship programme called SDG Partnership Platform, with special window for Food and Agriculture, under which the main
expected joint outputs include broad communication and mobilization of investment partners, PFIs and pipeline of investees, (ii)
African Development Bank’s ENABLE youth initiative; (iii) the European Union AgriFi and AgriBiz projects, and (iv) Land o’Lakes
value chain project “Dairy Nourishes Africa”.
98.
Furthermore, a number of international financiers expressed interest to potentially provide additional financial and/or technical
support to scale up the RK-FINFA support operations after the project becomes operational. These international financiers
include the European Investment Bank (EIB), KFW, Green Climate Fund’s Private Sector Facility, as well as a number of
potential bilateral partners.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
99.
The total RK-FINFA costs for the planned six-year project period (2022–2027) are estimated at approximately US$134.05 million.
Component 1, Technical Support and Innovation Services accounts for 6 per cent (US$ 8.25 million) of the total RK FINFA
project costs. Component 2, Rural Investment Instruments, accounts for 90 per cent (US$ 120.00 million) of the total project
costs. Component 3, Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination (US$ 5.80 million), constitutes 4 per cent of
the total project costs. The summary of the total costs is presented in Table 3 below. Tables 4 and 5 below show the breakdown
by expenditure category and component.
100.
It should be noted that the PFI investments include: (a) US$ 80 million through the Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme of
US$ 20 million, with 4-time leverage, (b) US$ 5 million through co-financing of the GFF investments, and (c) US$ 750 000 co-
financing of TSIS costs.
101.
RK-FINFA climate finance is estimated as USD 12.77 million, which is 58% of total IFAD project costs and only includes
adaptation finance. For women and youth, dedicated amounts of 50 per cent of GFF financing and 30 per cent of R-CGS
financing are earmarked. This equals to US$ 40 million of investments. The cost of implementation of the ESMF is estimated to
be approximately US$ 466,000 and is already included in the RK-FINFA budget.
102.
The breakdown of the costs in US$ by component and financier is shown in Table 4 below. Table 5 shows the breakdown of the
costs in US$ by expenditure category and financiers. 
103.
Table 4: Project costs by component and financier (Thousands of United States dollars)
Table 5: Project costs by expenditure category and financier (Thousands of United States dollars)
19/32
Table 6: Project costs by component and year (Millions of United States dollars)
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
Of the projected US$ 134 million total RK-FINFA budget, the IFAD loan is projected to finance US$ 22 million, from IFAD11 PBAS
allocation, accounting for 17 per cent of the total project costs. Co-financing from participating financial institutions is estimated at
US$ 85.75 million, covering 64 per cent of the total project costs, mainly due to the leverage in loan guarantee operations. The GoK
contribution is budgeted to cover US$ 24 million in cash and kind, covering 18 per cent of the total project costs, of which more than
half is financed through the PROFIT reflows. The share of co-financing from non-government sector implementing partners is
US$ 2.3 million, or two per cent of the project costs.
c. Disbursement
104.
The main disbursement category is credit and guarantee funds which accounts for 68% of the IFAD's resources allocated to the
project. Other expenditure categories are good, services and inputs; training; equipment and materials, vehicles and salaries and
allowances. Recurrent costs account for 2% of overall project costs. The breakdown of the costs in US$ by disbursement
accounts and years, and disbursement account per financiers are shown below and in section G.
20/32
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
105.
RK-FINFA is being designed as a Rural Finance Project to support the ultimate beneficiaries using predominantly Rural Finance
products. The ultimate beneficiaries are the final target group of RK-FINFA (the farmers but also the traders and processors who
support the smallholders). Therefore, from the EFA angle, the financial institutions, whose implementation role is important, will
only play an intermediary role to increase the financial outreach and make it possible for the “ultimate beneficiaries” to access the
working capital or investment finance to either expand production or improve productivity. For a project like RK-FINFA, the main
source of quantifiable benefits that can be attributable to the project are (i) productivity improvement, (ii) production increases,
and (iii) input costs reductions and efficiency gains. RK-FINFA will complement the initiatives/investments by other IFAD projects
in Kenya and focus its initial operations largely in counties with IFAD VC development support. Using production data from these
projects, 19 models along the value chains supported by IFAD projects with added RK-FINFA investments in finance have been
used. The models include on-farm production, rural trading, value addition and processing. Details are presented in Annex 4. It is
understood that there will be more benefits that will arise from: (i) efficiency gains in the financial system that will lower
operational costs and sustainability of financial services supply; (ii) shifts in portfolio composition of financial service providers to
productive loans; (iii) incremental taxation revenues to Government; and (iv) job creation.
106.
Financial viability. Nineteen illustrative farm/enterprise models have been developed to examine how the target group can
benefit from improved financial services supported by RK-FINFA. The enterprises used in the models were all found financially
viable to be able to seek additional funds. Incremental returns to incremental labour provide a sound incentive to household
production increase or productivity increase.
107.
Economic viability. The overall RK-FINFA economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 23 percent. The estimated economic net
present value (ENPV) at a 13 per cent discount rate is US$ 22.1 million. The BCR of 2.2 indicates a return of US$ 2.2 for every
dollar invested. These results indicate that the project is a sound investment yielding a positive rate of return as the EIRR is
greater than the hurdle rate (13 per cent) and the ENPV is greater than zero.
108.
Sensitivity analysis. An increase in programme costs by 10 per cent will reduce the EIRR to 20 per cent, while a decrease in
overall programme benefits by 20 per cent will result in an EIRR of 16 per cent. A one-year delay in benefits reduces the EIRR to
20 per cent and a two-year delay to 17 per cent. The switching values show that the project would remain economically viable if
benefits decreased by 16 per cent, or programme costs increased by 27 per cent. An examination of the response of the project
to identified project risks including droughts reveals it remains viable in the face of multiple short and medium drought sequences
(EIRRs of 17 per cent and 23 percent respectively). The project would become unviable in the severe longer-term drought (EIRR
of below 13 percent), but historical trends and projections do not foresee such a long-term weather shock for Kenya.
Sensitivity analysis
IRR
NPV (KES M)
Link with risk analysis
Base Scenario
23%
2,217
-10%
21%
            2,632
Decrease of Project benefits
-20%
16%
1,045
-30%
15%
               563
Continuous climate shocks such as drought &
floods, and occasional locusts’ invasion. This can
majorly impact on loan repayment thus portfolio of
the PFIs, leading to decrease of project benefits
1 year
21/32
20%
2,548
Delay in replenishment and disbursement of funds
by financiers is a key risk that can highly impact on
the delay of project benefits.
Delay of benefits
2 years
17%
1,106
Insufficient financial monitoring and reporting most
especially in such projects with various financing
sources can easily hinder project benefits. Related
to the above, lengthy government processes to
establish PMUs and recruit staff is also a factor
which can lead to delay of project benefits
Adoption rates
Cost Increase
Increase of benefits
90%
80%
70%
10%
20%
30%
10%
20%
20%
2,287
16%
880
Low uptake of good practices
19%
401
20%
2,657
17%
1,965
15%
580
High inflation/Macroeconomic fundamentals
26%
4,303
30%
6,510
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
109.
Exit strategy. The RK-FINFA exit strategy is presented in detail in Annex 10. The exit strategy of the project is an integral part of
the design of project’s instruments. The primary exit strategy element of the Component 1: TSIS is its aim of long-term
continuation of the supported rural financing models by the PFIs as well as the sustainability of the smallholder and MSME
investments. The second exit strategy element of TSIS the expected commercial viability of the service models. The programme
will primarily utilize local partners to implement the TSIS, with the exit strategy that these partners continue offering similar
services after the end of the project, and that the service users continue to utilize the services.  
110.
The Component 2 investment instruments, both the rural guarantee operations and the green financing support will be operated
through permanent facilities. Therefore, the exit strategy of the project is in-built in the R-CGS and the GFF structures which are
planned to continue to operate and support rural finance intermediation for a long time after the RK-FINFA operations close.
Scaling up of the operations is sought through additional investments by partners, in medium and long term, as a permanent
pillar of the IFAD and GoK strategies to achieve smallholder agriculture commercialization.
111.
Sustainability. Sustainability of the RK-FINFA benefits and results can be approached at different levels. At the smallholder
farmers’ and MSME level, RK-FINFA will support modernised, climate resilient production systems and develop the related skills
among the target group. The linkages established between smallholder and MSMEs with FIs and the banking histories
developed aim to serve the RK-FINFA beneficiaries long after the project period expires. A key feature of the project is that the
financial instruments used are permanent facilities that would support rural finance intermediation for decades to come. The
IFAD share of the RK-FINFA investment capital would revolve in these facilities at least for the duration of the IFAD loan. The
CGS is established by the Government as a permanent feature of the NT and the rural widow established with RK-FINFA
support would continue to be a part of that operation even if the CGS would be transformed into a more independent guarantee
company. Similarly, the GFF would continue to operate as a facility to support green financing even after RK-FINFA closes.
Furthermore, the policy and institutional support operation under Sub-component 3.1 will aim to ensure that particularly the
smaller FIs such as MFBs/MFIs and SACCOs would on a sustained basis be integrally linked to the financial sector, its support
services, and its regulatory and supervisory network.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
22/32
112.
The table below presents the main risks, rated either high or substantial in the Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM) in Annex 9,
with t proposed mitigation measures.
Main risks
Inherent
Residual
Mitigation measures
Macroeconomic. Maintaining achieved
economic growth levels during RK-FINFA
implementation period will be a challenge. Public
debt has increased and currently surpasses
standard risk levels. Due to COVID-19 and
environmental shocks, the economy contracted
by 1.0 per cent in 2020. Recovery expected to
take longer than initially assumed, affecting
practically the whole RK-FINFA period.
Governance. Governance and transparency
issues persist, as shown in 2019 CPI for Kenya,
resulting in high Governance Risk and corruption-
related risk rating. Lengthy Government
processes to establish Project Management Units
and conduct procurement have delayed start-up
of projects. Despite improved systems, problems
in effective monitoring and reporting by GoK
persist.
Fragility and Security. Security threats (ethnic
clashes, social and political conflicts, and terrorist
attacks) can be an inherent project risk, especially
in more vulnerable regions such as the Rift Valley
and North-Eastern Region.
Policy Alignment. While there is full alignment
on rural sector development policies between
GoK and IFAD, the Government has adopted a
more robust and cautious approach in negotiating
external debt. This has often resulted in long
delays in signing of financing agreements with
international financiers, which adversely affects
the co-operation between GoK and international
financiers, including IFAD. 
Project vulnerability to climate change
impacts. Climate shocks such as droughts and
floods as well as incidence of pests and diseases
will impact the end line investments, particularly
those in the agricultural sector, by the
smallholders and micro-enterprises. Climate
change impacts can also affect loan repayments
and thus the portfolio of the PFIs.
The marginalization of women and youth
beneficiaries, and persons with disabilities, who
are more vulnerable to climate change because
they face discrimination and inequalities in
accessing land and water, markets, technologies,
and credit.
Substantial Moderate
GoK economic measures for recovery include tax
reliefs, cash-transfers, suspension of loan default
penalties, and bank debt restructuring. RK-FINFA
contributes to GoK’s efforts to implement counter-
cyclical, pro-growth measures especially for the rural
and agriculture sector.
Substantial Moderate
For RK-FINFA, the main responsibility for almost all
the components has been contracted to
intermediaries, with tested implementation guidelines
and methods, supported by systematic development
of eligibility rules and procedures for RK-FINFA
project activities. The intermediaries are also
responsible for largest part of small scale
procurements to avoid obstacles potentially emerging
from GoK procurement processes.
Moderate
Moderate
RK-FINFA will avoid focusing its activities in areas
with obvious danger in terms of tribal clashes and
terrorism.
Substantial Moderate
Substantial Moderate
RK-FINFA is fully aligned with key GoK policies on
rural transformation and financial sector
development. It is also seen as a part of the GoK’s
COVID-19 recovery programme. The financial
arrangements for the projects are arranged in a
manner (large private sector leverage, the use of
PROFIT reflows) that supports a smoother co-
operation with Government that has been the case in
some earlier IFAD-supported projects.  
Climate change risk management will be incorporated
in the ESMS of the PFIs. Training and advisory
services will be provided for the target beneficiaries to
enhance their resilience and financial resources
provided for green investments. The products under
the green financing will promote climate resilience
and building back better after climate shocks.
Per RK-FINFA targeting strategy, women comprise
50% of beneficiaries, youth comprise 30% and a
minimum of 5% of beneficiaries will be from
vulnerable groups (marginalized groups including
persons with disabilities and persons with HIV).
Main risks
Inherent
23/32
Residual
Mitigation measures
Gender Inequalities: Women and youth may not
possess sufficient confidence, knowledge
technical skills, business skills, capital and access
to markets to engage profitably in selected value-
chains. They would therefore not feel confident to
apply for loans. Patriarchal norms may prevent
women from participating and benefitting from
project activities.
Substantial Moderate
A large percent of the business skills training will
target young women and men. Young women and
men will be selected and trained as business
coaches (ToTs) from the Counties and Wards.
Business skills training will be delivered to the various
groups through these ToTs.
Implementation arrangements. Due to the
Government’s debt situation and decreased fiscal
space, GoK continues to cut back on spending,
often putting ceiling on AWPBs of projects and
potentially further lowering the implementation
capacities in government institutions.  
High
Moderate
The whole RK-FINFA implementation approach is
based on the use of intermediaries in the
implementation of key investment components.
These include private financial institutions as well as
consultancy companies and experienced local and
international NGOs. With ring-fenced financing, these
arrangements aim to significantly improve the
changes of successful and cost-efficient
implementation of RK-FINFA. 
Fund flow/disbursement arrangements.
Although there is a high inherent risk in Kenya
(Transparency International rating of less than 3),
experience from IFAD projects indicate a more
satisfactory financial management regime. Key
project risks include delays in replenishments
and disbursements, and problems in financial
monitoring and reporting especially in projects
with various financing sources.
Substantial Moderate
All implementing partner institutions that will receive
funds from the PMU will have ring-fenced sub-project
accounts for segregating the funds received. All
partnering institutions will sign an MoU with
Government of Kenya clearly highlighting the
requirements for a separate bank account and
financial reporting requirements.
Procurement. The weaknesses of the Kenyan
procurement system lie mainly at accountability
and transparency stages. The corruption
perception index score and existence of only one
body with debarment authority are major
shortcomings in the system.
Substantial Moderate
Most of the procurement activities of the project will
be conducted by intermediaries/co-investing partners.
When using the NT in procurement, the core
shortcomings will be addressed by a more stringent
legal framework and more specific and targeted
corrective measures stipulated in the PRM and PIM.
Considering the PROFIT experience and delays in
procurement, RK-FINFA will be treated as a medium
risk project.
113.
The project’s financial inherent risk is assessed substantial and residual risk moderate.
114.
The project’s financial inherent risk is assessed as substantial and residual risk as moderate. The project faces risks of
commingling of funds at entity level (i.e the National Treasury and Planning, FSD and AGRA which will be involved in
implementation of the project under the management of the National Treasury), participating financial institutions (PFIs) may not
budget and contribute their co-financing of TSIS costs, delays in replenishments and disbursements of funds, possibility of the
PMU staff hired lacking familiarity with IFAD procedures, problems in financial monitoring and reporting especially in projects with
various financing sources. The disbursements of counterpart financing by Government of Kenya has also been inconsistence in
other projects which affect timely payments of activities.
115.
To mitigate these risks, all implementing partnering institutions that will receive funds from IFAD and PMU will have ring-fenced
project and sub-project bank accounts for segregating the funds received and ease of accounting and tracking of advances
provided. The sub-project account will be denominated in local currency (KES) and will be opened in financial institutions
acceptable to IFAD. There will be monthly financial reports to PMU for monitoring operations of sub-accounts and consolidation at
PMU. All partnering institutions will sign a MoU with Government of Kenya clearly highlighting the requirements for a separate
bank account, financial reporting requirements and budgeting and counter-part funds provisions requirements. An accounting
system will be acquired and installed at PMU before funds have been disbursed. The selection of project finance staff will also
consider the agility to use computerized systems. IFAD FMD will provide capacity building training to the Finance Staff who will
selected competitively. The capacity building will include familiarization with IFAD procedures on financial reporting, expenditures
categorizations across components, categories and alignment with Government chart of accounting, financial reporting timelines
and other financial management related to the project. In order to mitigate this risk of inadequate GoK counterpart funds, IFAD
will to continue to build strong relations with NT and also monitor the flow of funds from NT to the Project to assess any
deviations from the planned contribution. GoK will be required to reaffirm the commitment to transfer counterpart funds on a
timely basis for smooth implementation of the project during the negotiations.
I. Environment and Social category
116.
117.
24/32
The environment and social categorization of the RK-FINFA is B applying IFAD's Social, Environment and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP). This categorization recognises the environmental risks that may result from the project activities,
particularly the end line investments by the smallholders and MSMEs, can be avoided and/or minimized with appropriate actions.
In order to ensure that RK-FINFA remains within SECAP’s Category B classification, each activity/intervention supported through
RK-FINFA will be screened.  Thus, any activities/interventions that are likely to have high risk will be screened out at this early
stage, prior to any approval for financing. To ensure the minimisation of potential adverse impacts, environmental, social and
governance standards will be a criterion for participation in the project by the MSMEs and technical assistance will be provided to
strengthen or establish ESMS for PFIs.
Some MFBs already provide services and products for sustainable production, biodiversity and environmental protection, energy
efficiency and renewable energy and have established ESMS that enable reporting on these portfolios. The ESMS would have to
be established in the SACCOs including capacity developed for monitoring and reporting systems. The targeted end beneficiaries
are in many cases smallholders and entrepreneurs benefiting from IFAD-supported or other donor-funded projects/programmes
and therefore have already been receiving training in good practices in environmental and natural resources management. The
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) guides the project implementation with specific criteria for screening of
investments and steps for establishing or strengthening of the ESMS. The ESMF includes an assessment of potential PFIs to
implement ESMSs, with capacity building requirements and additional human resources for screening criteria and checklists to
be adequately applied and monitored. Guidance on incidence reporting procedures is also included.
J. Climate Risk classification
118.
The climate risk classification of RK-FINFA is “Moderate” given that the target end beneficiaries, their livelihoods, and the
economic activities are exposed to climate-related risks such as floods, droughts and incidence of pests and diseases. These
climatic events have already adversely impacted agricultural productivity for smallholders and profitability of agribusinesses, and
thus climate change projections should be taken into account in the due diligence for medium and long-term investments. Climate
risk screening will be incorporated in the ESMS for the PFIs and into the Environment, Social and Governance standards for the
MSMEs. Notably some MFBs already undertake climate risk screening as part of the loan appraisal for smallholders. The risk
screening will be complemented by strengthening the service provision for climate risk management advisory services for the
target beneficiaries and promotion of investments in climate smart technologies and practices. For the SACCOs, the capacity for
climate risk screening will have to be developed including the monitoring systems and products for building the climate resilience
of their clients. Larger PFIs already provide loans for new irrigation systems, water storage reservoirs, improved inputs such as
drought tolerant seed varieties as well as offer weather index-based insurance. Other products include green houses, biogas,
and solar energy.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
119.
The Lead Implementing Agency of RK-FINFA will be the Directorate of Budget, Fiscal and Economic Affairs in the National
Treasury and Planning (NT&P). The Directorate is headed by a Director General who is answerable to the Principal Secretary of
the NT&P. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established, with representatives from the ministries and private and
public agencies, which will play key roles in the implementation of RK-FINFA. Under the PSC, a dedicated PMU will be
established, and implementation partnerships established for RK-FINFA components as shown in the diagram below.
120.
The RK-FINFA Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established at the NT&P and housed in the Financial and Sectoral Affairs
Department. The list of the staff in the lean PMU of RK-FINFA is provided in the PIM, as well as the draft terms of references
(TORs). The key investment components and sub-components are planned to be implemented by intermediaries or investing
partner institutions. Below is a summary of the implementation arrangements for the components/sub-components.
25/32
121.
Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS). For the implementation of the TSIS, the TSIS Coordinator(s) will enter into
partnership with the National Treasury (NT), by covering 50 per cent of the TSIS coordination costs and assuming accountability
for the TSIS implementation process and results. The tasks include selection of PFIs into the TSIS pipeline, preparation of TORs
for Technical Service Providers (TSP), following the selected PFI demand, selection of the TSPs jointly with the PFIs, and their
recruitment, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), jointly with the PFIs. The detailed tasks of the TSIS Coordinator(s) are presented
in the PIM. The TSPs will be selected from among locally present and specialized organizations including private sector and Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs). Depending on the TSP capacity and specialization, they may focus on demand or supply
side of the TSIS or both.
122.
Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme (R-CGS). R-CGS will be operated by dedicated and already operational MSME-CGS
management unit in the NT. The Unit is staffed and housed at the National Treasury Division of Financial and Sectoral Affairs and
operates a progress monitoring system connected to the MISs of the PFIs. The detailed management guidelines have been
developed for the MSME-CGS operations and will be used also in R-CGS operations with special rulings to be agreed on for RK-
FINFA supported rural activities at the project start-up. The full “Operational Manual - MSME Credit Guarantee Scheme” is
included in the PIM. Dedicated staff will be recruited under the RK-FINFA PMU to support the rural investment aspects of the
Credit Guarantee Scheme.
123.
Green Financing Facility (GFF). The GFF wholesale lending operations will be undertaken by a financial intermediary, the GFF
Host institution. The National Treasury/RK-FINFA will enter into Financing Agreement with the GFF Host to on-lend the GFF
funds in tranches to SACCOs and MFBs based on the eligibility criteria agreed at the project start-up (see the PIM for draft
criteria). The PFIs will then on-lend the funds to eligible borrowers, again based on agreed criteria. Both at the Host and PFI
level, the operation is based on effective revolving of the repaid capital back to new GFF-financed loans, to achieve maximum
outreach and impact. Furthermore, both at the Host and PFI level, the GFF finances will be adequately ring-fenced from other
operations and finances of the implementing institutions, to enable effective fund utilisation, control, and reporting. A GFF
Operations Manual will be finalised before the lending operations commence, based on the principles in the PIM.
124.
Enabling Environment Support. The implementation responsibility for Sub-component 3.1 activities will be with the RK-FINFA the
Policy Component Co-Financing and Implementation Partner (NGO), under the supervision of the PMU. Before project start-up
and in consultation with key stakeholders, the Policy Component Implementation Partner will make the final action plan for this
support instrument and thereafter, detailed AWPBs for the sub-component. In the actual activity implementation, the Partner will
use either its own experts or contract external consultants/companies when required. The Partner will also ensure that the Sub-
component 3.1 activities are fully integrated with and provide support to the progress of the key investment instruments of RK-
FINFA, the R-CGS and the GFF.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
125.
Disbursements, Accounts and Financial Management Systems. There will be three types of disbursement mechanisms for
the Project, which consist of (i) Advance Withdrawal, (ii) Direct Payments, and (iii) Reimbursements. Disbursements from IFAD
will be made by way of an advance to the Designated Account and subsequent replenishments based on expenditure incurred
as supported with Statement of Expenditure (SoE). There will be one designated account held by the National Treasury at the
Central Bank of Kenya that would receive funds from IFAD which will have a corresponding dedicated project operational account
in Kenya Shillings (KES).
126.
All partnering institutions that will receive funds from the PMU will keep sub-project accounts for segregating the funds received.
The sub-project account will be denominated in local currency and will be opened in a financial institution acceptable to IFAD.
The R-CGS funds, after required conditions are met, will be deposited and ring-fenced at the Central Bank of Kenya. The
guarantee reserve is accessible to PFIs only after possible losses materialise and have been reported and approved. The GFF
funds will be transferred to the host financial institution after required conditions are met. There will be monthly financial reports to
the PMU for monitoring operations of sub-accounts and consolidation. Below is a diagram summarising the flow of funds:     
26/32
127.
The Designated Account limit will be set at the total 18 months of AWPB. For the implementing agencies, the earmarked
advances for specific activities agreed with the PMU will be disbursed on quarterly basis, by 15th of the month following the
quarter end. To manage risks of delays in accountability from implementing agencies, advances will be made for quarterly
budgets and additional amounts for the subsequent quarter made only after 50 per cent of the previous disbursements has been
accounted for. Recording of expenditure to the project accounting system will be done by the PMU based on reports submitted by
the implementing agencies. Payment for GoK counterpart costs for component 1 and 3 will be made from the PMU counterpart
funds project account.
128.
The NT will procure a financial management software as well as training for the finance staff on how to use it. IFAD requires a
financial system that will be able to (i) extract SoE for withdrawal applications, (ii) reporting expenditure per category and
comparing budget vs actual for the same for the current year and cumulatively, (iii) reporting expenditure per category and
comparing budget vs actual for the same for the current year and cumulatively, (iv) reporting expenditure by component and
comparing budget vs actual for the same for the current year and cumulatively, and (v) reporting of expenditure per financier.
There has been issue of full adoption and delays in implementation of accounting system in other projects. To mitigate on this,
acquisition of the accounting system will be a condition prior to withdrawal. The selection of project finance staff will also consider
the competence of the candidates to use computerised systems.
129.
Project Budgeting. The Project budgeting will be done in accordance with existing GoK procedures. The budget shall be based
on the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) developed by the National Treasury. The project planning and budgetary process
shall be implemented in accordance with the standard government fiscal year which begins on 1st July of each financial year as
provided for by the Public Financial Management Act 2012 and the Government Financial Regulations and Procedures. This will
form the basis for defining the Project activities and ensuring that sufficient funds are allocated to achieve the agreed results.
130.
Internal controls. The project expenditure initiation, authorization and payments will be in line with Public Finance Management
Act of Kenya. The Permanent Secretary (National Treasury) will be the responsible Accounting Officer for the Project. The Project
Coordinator will approve all payments memo at the National Treasury before they are forwarded to the PS for authorisation. At
the other implementing agencies, all payments memos will also be approved by responsible officers in accordance with their
organisational structure. The Financial Controller at the PMU will be responsible for proper recording in the accounting system
and all financial reporting for the project and will produce a consolidated financial statement for all the components. The financial
reporting will comply with International Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) - Cash basis.
131.
Financial Reporting. Financial reporting for the project will comprise of two separate reports namely i) overall project financial
report and ii) a separate report on R-CGS and GFF schemes financial performance. Disbursements of funds to R-CGS and GFF
host institution will be made in tranches on meeting the agreed terms and conditions. For the project overall financial statements
and SoE to IFAD, these capital disbursements will be recorded as expenditure under the respective categories and components
and the financial performance monitored through the separate report on R-CGS and GFF mentioned above. The overall project
financial statements will be prepared in accordance with International Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) - Cash basis.
On annual basis, the consolidated financial statements for the project will be audited in accordance with IFAD guidelines.
132.
The financial reporting for the R-CGS, which will be operated by a dedicated and already operational MSME-CGS management
unit in the NT, will be aligned to the financial reporting for CGS for which a rural window has been proposed. As guided by the
enabling frameworks i.e. CBK prudential guidelines, IFRS 9 and the National Treasury Policy on Assets & Liability Management,
2020, the CGS will pursue in its first year of reporting (2021/22) the adoption of the Accrual Basis International Public Sector
Accounting Standards (IPSASs). Relevant templates will be refined and adopted in consultation with the Public Sector
Accounting Standards Board (PSASB). The detailed management guidelines for the MSME-CGS operations have been
developed and will also be used in R-CGS operations. The full “Operational Manual - MSME Credit Guarantee Scheme” is
included in the PIM. The Financial Controller of the PMU will obtain periodical R-CGS financial statements prepared by the
MSME-CGS management unit in the NT and share them with IFAD and other stakeholders on quarterly basis. On annual basis,
the R-CGS will be audited by the Office of the Auditor General and audited financial statements submitted within six months after
the end of financial year in accordance with the PFM Act of Kenya.
27/32
133.
The GFF financial performance reports will be aggregated by the selected GFF host institution and submitted to the NT/PMU
periodically. The National Treasury/RK-FINFA will enter into subsidiary financing agreement with the selected host institution
which will include interim and annual financial reporting requirements to PMU/NT. On annual basis, the GFF host institution will
include in their financial statements a specific disclosure note on GFF funds.  Alternatively, the GFF host institution should
provide annual financial statements for the GFF validated by their auditor. These should be provided at least six months after the
end of GFF financial reporting period. If the Government AFC is selected as the host institution, the audit of the GFF will be
carried out by the Office of the Auditor General. However, if a private commercial bank is selected, the audit will be carried out by
their institutional auditor.
134.
Internal Audit. There are internal auditors at National Treasury that are under the direct supervision of the Internal Auditor
General at the National Treasury. Internal Audit Department reports to Audit Committee of the Ministry that is required to meet on
a quarterly basis. The auditee committees are independent of the Ministry and are appointed in accordance with The Public
Finance Management Act 2012. The PMU finance staff will also regularly carry out financial monitoring reviews at the
implementing agencies which will serve to ensure expenditure are made and supported as expected and further provide capacity
building on any areas of weakness that may be noted.
135.
External Audit. On annual basis, the consolidated financial statements for the project will be audited by Office of the Auditor
General and audited financial statements submitted to IFAD within six months after the period end in accordance with IFAD
guidelines. The quality and timeliness of the external audit by the Office of the Auditor General has been rated as highly
satisfactory at the portfolio level based on performance on the other existing IFAD-supported projects.
Procurement
136.
PRM Assessment. At its design phase, the project scores an inherent low procurement risk of 2.69. However, in practice both
the implementation and compliance with national systems and IFAD’s procurement systems have been weak, therefore
mitigation actions which would apply to a medium risk project, rather than a low risk one, will apply in this case. The weaknesses
of the Kenyan procurement system lie mainly at accountability and transparency stages. The corruption perception index score
and existence of only one body with debarment authority are major shortcomings in the system. These can only be addressed by
a more stringent legal framework and more specific and targeted corrective measures stipulated in the PRM and PIM. The
revisions are susceptible to improve the risk from the current rating and make it even lower.
137.
Procurement Regulations. Procurement will be conducted in accordance with the Government of Kenya Public Procurement
and Disposal Act of 2015 and attendant Public Procurement and Disposal Regulations of 2020 and Public Procurement Manual of
2009. The GoK procurement guidelines address processes relating to procurement of goods, works consultancies and non-
consulting services. Standard bidding documents exist for all categories of procurement except for International Competitive
Bidding (ICB). Therefore, IFAD’s Standard Bidding Documents for ICB are used in lieu of national systems. As far as applicable
and to ensure smooth implementation throughout the project’s lifetime, similar activities will be packaged together following
IFAD’s guidance on the subject. Similarly, the project will seek framework agreements for routine and iterative purchases (works
and services). Thresholds for the selection of the procurement modality under each commodity shall be those set out by in the
procurement plan which shall obtain a No Objection from IFAD. The thresholds contained GoK Public Procurement Act shall not
prevail. Procurement oversight review will be established in accordance with the score obtained in the Procurement Risk Matrix.
Revisions related to the PP, including any new procurement arrangements, are subject to IFAD’s prior approval. The Borrower
will ensure the PP budgets under each respective activity are updated accordingly and reflect the prevailing market situation. The
estimated budgets, as approved by IFAD, will constitute a basis for determining the commercial reasonableness of the actual
cost.
138.
Institutional Arrangements. Some procurement activities will be carried out by the PMU within the National Treasury, while
others will be carried out by the co-investing partners (preliminary identified as AGRA and FSDK). The PMU will have a dedicated
Procurement Officer to co-ordinate and oversee RK-FINFA procurement operations. All agreements entered into with project
parties and co-investing parties shall be subject to IFAD’s prior NO. Prior to entering any agreement, IFAD will conduct adequate
due diligence exercises that respond to all requirements under IFAD’s Project Procurement Framework and relevant policies
(anti-corruption, anti-money laundering and SH/SEA).
139.
Under the RK-FINFA components, the investments of the core Component 2 for the R-CGF and the GFF do not involve
procurement activities by the project, only the provision RK-FINFA financial support to these investment facilities. For
Components 1 and 3.1, the plan is to handle procurements fully by a co-investing partner or partners (AGRA and FSDK) whose
procurement frameworks will be adequately assessed under the initial due diligence carried out. All measures shall be taken to
ensure their frameworks are consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement Framework. Where necessary, the mandatory use of
IFAD Standard Procurement Documents and IFAD’s Procurement Handbook may be recommended.
140.
As potential partner candidates, the Design Mission assessed the procurement capacities of AGRA and FSDK). AGRA is
adequately resourced with technical capacity in procurement with a whole department of four qualified procurement
professionals. Their procurement guidelines capture most of the requirements of IFAD, and IFAD guidelines can fill in the areas
where there may be gaps. For FSDK, because of the smaller procurement resources compared to AGRA, IFAD’s Procurement
guidelines, handbook and standard Procurement documents shall be used in lieu of the FSDK systems, to ensure effective and
transparent procurement processes (for more details, see the PIM).
141.
Governance Aspects and Anti-corruption Measures.  The Transparency Corruption Perception Index for Kenya scores 31
points (2020), which, although high, has improved from 28 points (in 2019). Strengthened efforts are required to ensure that
IFAD’s procurement principles are observed throughout the project lifetime. Therefore, strict compliance with IFAD’s Policy on
Preventing Fraud and Corruption will be required. Similarly, the project will ensure strict adherence IFAD’s policy related to
preventing Harassment, Sexual Harassment and Discrimination.
28/32
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
142.
Planning. The logframe of RK-FINFA (Annex 1) will guide the development of work plans and budgets for the project. Planning
and budgeting will be integrated in the GoK processes and cycles and will be based on AWPBs. These, together with the
logframe’s quantified results-based indicators and RK-FINFA’s MIS database, will provide the primary basis for monitoring the
RK-FINFA progress. At the project start-up, the PMU will update the Logical Framework and based on that, develop the first
AWPB. Thereafter, the PMU will prepare each year a consolidated AWPB. Subsequent AWPB processes will offer the
opportunities to the PMU to reflect on lessons from the implementation experience of the previous years, and to propose activities
and expenditures required to achieve the intended project outcomes. The Project will have the possibility of revising the AWPB at
any time of the year, and any proposed adjustments will require approvals by both the GoK and IFAD.
143.
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).  During the pre-project period and immediately after project effectiveness, RK-FINFA will
develop a robust M&E system in compliance with IFAD and the GoK requirements. The system will be anchored to the Kenya’s
National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System (NIMES) that tracks implementation of policies, programmes, and projects
in the country, as well as to the Core Indicator measurement system of IFAD. The RK-FINFA M&E system will (i) collect, analyse,
and update information on project outputs, outcomes, and impact; (ii) support PMU and the Steering Committee in planning and
making informed decisions on RK-FINFA strategies and actions; and (iii) create opportunities for learning and sharing results.
The system will be participatory, results-oriented, disaggregated by age and gender, enable the analysis of climate change
vulnerability, and enable integration of physical and financial progress reporting. In addition to the regular monitoring of progress,
the system will incorporate in-depth baseline, mid-line and completion surveys, as well as qualitative thematic studies to
understand the development impact of the interventions.
144.
Relevant indicators have been specified and quantified in the RK-FINFA logframe. The indicators relate to the different levels
(output, outcome, and impact) and include IFAD Core Indicators (COI guideline) as well as project specific indicators. At start-up,
the project will develop a glossary of indicators, detailing the exact meaning of each indicator (including CIs) in the specific
context of RK-FINFA. The approach is based on the Theory of Change of RK-FINFA (see Annex 2 of the PDR) and demonstrates
the logical links between the results at their different levels, thereby enabling meaningful analysis at different project stages.  The
M&E system implementation for the various Project activities will be fully integrated with one another, to ensure aggregation of
data to the reports covering all activities, as well as the provision of appropriate guidance to management.
145.
The Programme will set up a Management Information System (MIS) to facilitate the storage, use and analysis of information,
based on data received from implementing partners. The project’s M&E plan will be refined as part of the first implementation
support mission scheduled to take place within the first six months of the programme approval. It will comprise: i) setting up a
Management Information System (MIS); ii) providing clear details on the reporting requirements from different stakeholders; iii)
developing standard reporting formats and agreeing on the timeline and modality of reporting by all partners.
146.
Especially for the R-CGS and GFF schemes, under which the PFIs issue loans to clients, the PFIs MIS systems will be
strengthened with Component 1 technical support. Most of the performance data will be automatically available from the
accounting/management information systems of the PFIs. This data will be aggregated to periodically present the whole scheme
level information, including data on portfolio indicators such as the gender, age and location of the borrower, loan purpose, loan
disbursements and outstanding balances, as well as the repayment performance for each of the above categories.
147.
Learning and knowledge management. The project’s KM activities are guided by a robust KM plan, to improve learning, KM
and communication practices within the project. A comprehensive draft RK-FINFA Knowledge Management (KM) Plan is
incorporated in the PIM. Lessons learnt in implementation will be actively shared between key RK-FINFA stakeholders. Semi-
annual review meetings with RK-FINFA staff and implementing partners will be organised by the PMU to discuss progress
towards results in relation to each semi-annual progress report, with the focus on lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good
practices, etc.
148.
The KM Plan has a strong focus on documenting best practices as well as positive and negative lessons from RK-FINFA
implementation experience, supported by reliable evidence and analysis. The project KM will promote the key innovations and
will be aligned to the policy engagement activities of the project. The wider adoption of RK-FINFA’s documented best practices
and financing methods will be an important measure of the project’s success in KM.
b. Innovation and scaling up
149.
Innovation and scaling up. To support the overall target of rural transformation, innovation will be encouraged at various level
of the RK-FINFA operations. In the training of smallholders, new agricultural technologies (modern, climate resilient and
environmentally friendly) and diversification for increased incomes will be encouraged. In the capacity building of the PFIs, a
permanent culture will be promoted for long term pro-active rural product innovation and product development. The R-CGS will
scale the innovative rural outreach methods and GFF in particular will finance innovative activities and projects in climate change
adaptation/mitigation, better environmental management, and improved efficiencies in the use of natural resources as an integral
part of their lending activity. Following effective launch, scaling up of the key investment activities of RK-FINFA is promising. As
discussed above, various international financiers have expressed interest in investing in the scaling up of the RK-FINFA
operations, for both investments in the financing capital and support to the related capacity building operations. Furthermore, the
GoK has indicated that it would apply for more IFAD funding for the two supported investment instruments once they are
successfully launched and allocate more funds for the operations from the state budget.
29/32
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
The target group engagement will occur at different levels encompassing the PFIs and end beneficiaries. The engagement of the PFIs
will be through sensitisation and periodic monitoring sessions and review of reports. The sensitisation sessions will present the project
objectives, rules of engagement and expectations. The PFIs will be able to provide feedback on the portfolios (that incorporates
monitoring and reporting) they are managing and their performance during review and planning meetings. The geographic spread and
reach of the PFIs may require clustering of counties during the planning and review meetings. Channels of communication between
the PFIs and the PMU will be provided for feedback to be received systematically and follow up on actions taken to be conveyed.  
150.
The end user engagement will be through sensitisation meetings of the project activities and through meetings and consultations
with PFIs that will provide the loans. The sensitization will take the form of community level public meetings to convey the project
objectives, presenting PFIs and criteria and expectations for participation in the project. These meetings will be conducted in
local languages and at times that allow maximum participation of different groups, women, men, youth, and persons with
disabilities, and they will be announced in local media. Further engagement will be done through PFI officers during their risk
analyses and advisory services for enterprises, groups, and individuals. These consultations with the end beneficiaries and
monitoring visits will also provide an opportunity for feedback on the project services and challenges being faced. The feedback
will be used in the adaptive management of the project through annual reviews and quarterly progress reporting.
b. Grievance redress.
151.
The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will record and address any complaints that may arise during the implementation
phase of the project promptly and transparently with no impacts (cost, discrimination) for any reports made by project affected
people. The GRM will work within existing legal and cultural frameworks, providing an additional opportunity to resolve grievances
at the local level. Complaints at the project level will be recorded on the Grievances Register that will be maintained by the
project. Implementing the grievance mechanism and recording all grievances will be the responsibility of the Targeting, Gender,
Youth and Social Inclusion Specialist in the PMU. A Grievance Redress Committee, comprised by the Targeting, Gender, Youth
and Social Inclusion Specialist in the PMU, a County level representative and a representative from the PFIs will investigate to
check the validity and severity of the grievance and resolve it.  Complaints can also be submitted through IFAD’s Complaints
Procedure that allows individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly and file a complaint if they believe they are or might
be adversely affected by an IFAD-funded project/programme not complying with IFAD's Social and Environmental Policies and
mandatory aspects of SECAP. Further, the mechanism should implicitly discourage referring matters to the court system for
resolution.
152.
Each PFI, to be supported through RK-FINFA, will be expected to develop grievance redress mechanism of their own, specific to
the types of borrowers, adopting local and institution-based mechanisms.  
153.
Gender Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
154.
In line with IFAD’s Policy to Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (2020), RK-
FINFA will ensure that adequate safeguard measures are in place for a safe working environment free of harassment, including
sexual harassment, and free of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) in its activities and operations. The ESMS for all PFIs will
include prevention and mitigation measures for GBV/SEA, and PFIs will be bound to ensure that these are applied across their
client base.
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
155.
Supervision. RK-FINFA will be directly supervised by IFAD with annual supervision and implementation support missions,
followed initially by shorter follow-up missions as needed, organised with the participation of the GoK. Continuous
implementation support will be provided to the project by IFAD staff, in particular during the 18 first months of implementation to
assure the strategic approach and the correct set up of financial management, procurement and M&E. Supervision will focus on
(i) joint assessment of achievements and identification of implementation challenges, solutions, and agreement on actions to
achieve project objectives; (ii) development impact based on progress measured against agreed indicators; and (iii) ensuring
compliance with loan covenants, procurement, and efficient use of project funds.
156.
Mid-term Review (MTR). As RK-FINFA is a six-year project, an MTR will be undertaken towards the end of third year of RK-
FINFA implementation. The MTR will be jointly organised by the GoK and IFAD in close collaboration with the other stakeholders.
157.
Project Completion Report (PCR). At the end of project implementation period, the GoK in collaboration with IFAD will
undertake a project completion review exercise, in order to report on the results and impact achieved. The PCR would need to be
finalised before the project closing date, which will be six months after the completion date. As part of the completion activities, a
Beneficiary Impact Assessment will be undertaken, and findings used to inform the PCR. The lessons documented in the impact
assessment and PCR will be used by both IFAD and the GoK to improve the quality of the future project designs and
implementation.
30/32
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans
158.
The objective is to obtain IFAD and GoK final approval for the RK-FINFA project in December 2021 and start its implementation
during Q1/2022. A comprehensive draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) has been prepared as a part of the RK-FINFA
design process. In addition, a draft AWPB and a draft procurement plan for the first 18 months of project implementation, have
been prepared and are annexed to this PDR. These documents aim to ensure that the project implementation starts as
scheduled, without unnecessary delays during the first project year. The pre-start-up activities to be completed after the project
approval by IFAD and GoK include: (i) selection and contracting of co-financing/ implementation partners for components 1.1, 1.2
and 3.1, (ii) selection and contracting of the GFF host institution, and (iii) finalization of the R-CGS addendum agreement.
Completion of these three activities is a pre-condition to the RK-FINFA start-up, in addition to the standard IFAD conditions for
project effectiveness.
Footnotes
[1] Central Bank of Kenyan Annual Reports 2014 - 2019
[2] Kenya Bankers Association: Realisation of Full Potential of the Agriculture Sector: Is Commercial Financing a Core Missing Cog?,
2018
[3] Kenya Bankers Association: Realisation of Full Potential of the Agriculture Sector: Is Commercial Financing a Core Missing Cog?,
2018
[4] FinAccess 2019 Household Survey Report, Central Bank of Kenya and Financial Sector Deepening Kenya, 2019.
https://www.centralbank.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/2019-FinAcces-Report.pdf
[5]https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/957121606226133134/pdf/Kenya-Economic-Update-Navigating-the-Pandemic.pdf
[6] (i) “Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme-Climate Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window” (KCEP-CRAL) supports 185,000
smallholders; (ii) “Aquaculture Business Development Programme” (ABDP) supports 159,750 smallholders; (iii) “Upper Tana
Catchment Natural Resource Management Project” (UTaNRMP) develops capacities for conservation and sustainable use of land,
water and forestry; and (iv) “Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project” (KeLCoP) supports 270,000 smallholder producers.
[7] 2019 National Census
[8] World Population Statistics, 2021
[9 comms.centralbank.go.ke
[10] Central Bank of Kenya Statistics, 2021
[11 Kenya National Household Survey 2015/16
[12] UNPD Human Development Index, 2020
[13] Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Report: Kenya, March 2021
[14] Ibid
[15] FAO.Org/Kenya 2021
[16] World Bank & CIAT (2015). Climate-smart agriculture in Kenya. CSA Country Profile. Washington D.C
[17] Republic of Kenya, Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2020 – 2025, IFAD, 2019
[18] GoK: Agriculture Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy (ASTGS 2019-2029)
[19] ASTGS 2019-2029, p. 46
[20] 2019 Kenya Fin Access Household Survey
[21] Project level Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
[22] Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
[23] To be provided by ECG.
[24]https://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/publications/2019_07_FocusNote_Emerging_Evidence.pdf
[25] https://www.weforum.org/reports/gender-gap-2020-report-100-years-pay-equality
31/32
[26] 2017 Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy
[27] https://sparkassenstiftung-easternafrica.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Youths___Savings.pdf
[28] https://www.iwgia.org/en/kenya
[29] Kenya National Survey for PWDs, preliminary report, 2007
[30] See full list of PROFIT lessons at PIM
[31] IFAD ESA Rural Finance Stocktake including review of projects PROFIT/Kenya, MIVARF/Tanzania, RUFIP II/Ethiopia, RUFEP/
Zambia, PROFIRA/Uganda, PAIFAR-B/Burundi, FARMSE/Malawi, REFP/Mozambique, FINCLUDE/Eswatini and RUFIP III/Ethiopia
[32] See experiences of PROFIT at Mid Term Review report 2014, Supervision reports 2015-2019, IFAD
[33] Principles for Public Credit Guarantee Schemes for SMEs, 2015, World Bank Group
[34] Ibid
[35] See targeting structures of IFAD ESA RF projects PROFIT/Kenya, MIVARF/Tanzania, RUFIP II/Ethiopia, RUFEP/Zambia,
PROFIRA/Uganda, FARMSE/Malawi, REFP/Mozambique and RUFIP III/Ethiopia
[36] PROFIT Completion Report, 2019
[37] PROFIT Completion Report, 2019
[38] (i) Bungoma, (ii) Busia, (iii) Embu, (iv) Kakamega, (v) Kirinyaga, (vi) Kisii, (vii) Machakos, (viii) Meru, (ix) Nakuru, (x) Nandi, (xi)
Nyeri, (xii) Siaya, (xiii) Tharaka Nithi and (xiv) Trans-Nzoia
[39] For RK-FINFA the definition of “Smallholder” is based on the criteria: (i) engaged in agriculture activity, (ii) main household
income from agriculture activity, (iii) majority of agriculture work carried out by family members, (iv) the RK-FINFA supported “small
loans” and “microloans” are appropriate for the household agriculture investments.
[40] According to GoK definition, a microenterprise has 1-9 employees and up to KES 500,000 (about US$ 5,000) annual turnover.
[41] According to GoK definition, a small enterprise has 10-49 employees and up to KES 5,000,000 annual turnover, and a medium
enterprise has 50-250 employees and up to KES 100,000,000 annual turnover.
[42]Profiles of 150 agribusinesses have been collected by the predecessor Kenya RF project PROFIT. These agribusiness profiles
are available and serve as possible initial pipeline for RK-FINFA support.
[43]https://www.treasury.go.ke/publications/regulations/category/71-pfm-regulations.html?download=1134:public-finance-
management-credit-guarantee-scheme-regulations-2020-1-2
[44] NT invited applications from 39 banks across all tiers. The final set of seven banks that qualified consists of only Tier 1 and Tier 3
banks
[45] The criteria for GFF host include general indicators for financial institution performance (see PIM points (a) to (k)) and special
indicators which are: 1. Experience to act as a host to credit line-based wholesale lending operations with donor funding, 2.
Experience and competence in the assessment of the performance and non-bank financial institutions as the bank’s borrowing
clients, 3. Overall experience in in financing rural and agricultural clients, including particularly the smallholders and rural micro-
enterprises, 4. Adequate MIS systems to collect and aggregate information from various borrowing SACCOs and MFBs into
comprehensive reports at the total GFF scheme level, and 5. Capacity to proactively participate in fundraising efforts to increase the
volumes and impact of the GFF.
[46] In the case of AFC, a potential constraint for its role as a GFF Host can be that it does not operate under the
supervision/regulation of the Central Bank of Kenya. To attract additional investments to the GFF, some key international investors
consider central bank supervision as a required condition for their investments.
[47] The content and detail of the screening criteria and checklist will vary based on the size and activities of the PFIs. SACCOs are
expected to have basic checklists. The IFC exclusion list is provided on
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/sustainability-at-ifc/company-
resources/ifcexclusionlist#2007
[48] IFAD Programme of Loans (PoL) i.e. sovereign lending window, earmarked for micro- and smallholder guarantees
[49] R-CGS will require minimum 4 times leverage with guarantees provided. The US$80 million PFI investment is an estimation of
the market demand. With more demand, additional investment to the guarantee instrument will be sought
[50 ABSA Bank, KCB Bank, Equity Bank, Cooperative Bank, National Bank, and the Agriculture Finance Corporation (AFC)
[51] Kenya Women’s Microfinance Bank, Faulu Microfinance Bank, Rafiki Microfinance Bank, SMEP Microfinance Bank, and SUMAC
Microfinance Bank
32/32
[52] A list of 100 SACCOs have expressed demand for wholesale lending through the AFC.
[53] AGRA, FSDK and Cordaid have expressed interest to co-invest with NT and IFAD in the technical aspects of RK-FINFA
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Logical Framework
1/8
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Total number of persons
receiving services
Male
Female
Young
13200
34000
13200
34000
8160
20400
26400
68000
50
50
50
50
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Household members
127840 319600
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Households
27200
68000
Project Goal 
Poverty reduction and improved livelihoods in rural areas
Incidence of poverty in the selected counties
Percentage
33
30
27
PMU
quarterly
report
from
project
MIS
PMU
quarterly
report
from
project
MIS
PMU
quarterly
report
from
project
MIS
KNBS
Surveys
Project initiates its
activities on
expected timelines
and all approvals
and implementation
arrangements are in
place. The end
target of 68,000
HHs include 2,000
MSME
entrepreneurs.
Annually
PMU
Annually
PMU
Annually
PMU
Third Party
Surveys
Baseline,
Midline
and End
Line
This is average
poverty rate in the
selected 14
counties
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Participating FIs
fully engaged in the
project /
Beneficiaries willing
to take up financial
services to expand
operations
Development Objective 
Increased rural financial inclusion and investments by agriculture value chain stakeholders,
leading to equitable employment opportunities, resilient production systems and increased
incomes for smallholders, poor and marginalized rural households, women and youth
Volume of formal credit to agricultural sector
Percentage
4
6
8
KNBS
Surveys
and CBK
Reports
Baseline,
Midline
and End
Line
Third Party
Surveys
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services Surveys
Household members
102272 255680
Households (%)
80
80
Households (number)
21760
54440
Percentage of households reporting increase by at least
25% in income from among the recipient households
COI
Survey
Percentage
25
60
2.2.1 New jobs created
Job owner - men
New jobs
Job owner - women
Job owner - young
COI
Surveys
6400
16000
12800
32000
6400
16000
8448
21120
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices
COI
Surveys
Total number of household
members
Households
Households
38352
95880
30
30
8160
20400
Third Party
Surveys
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Third Party
Surveys
Third Party
Surveys
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Third Party
Surveys
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outcome 
Outcome 1 Technical Support and Innovation Services
Number of PFIs reporting improved capacity to develop
agricultural finance products and analyse agricultural loans
Outcome
surveys
Number
Commercial banks
MFBs
Rural SACCOs
34
41
4
5
5
6
25
30
Number of bankable proposals developed by targeted
businesses
Outcome
surveys
Number
Micro
Small
Medium
1200
1500
850
150
35
1250
200
50
Number of bankable proposals developed by targeted
farmers
Outcome
surveys
Number
Young
Not young
Males
Females
Vulnerable
Not vulnerable
24500
35000
7350
10500
12250
17500
12250
17500
1225
1750
Technical
Assistance is rolled
out in time / 70% of
MSMEs supported
will prepare
bankable proposals
/ TA rolled out in
time and individuals
are willing to
participate
PMU
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
PMU
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
PMU
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in
empowerment
Outcome
surveys
Total persons
Total persons
Females
60
80
15840
54400
30
40
PMU
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Females
Males
Males
7920
27200
30
40
7920
27200
Output 
Output 1.1 PFI Capacity Building for rural outreach and Innovation
Number of financial service providers supported in
delivering outreach strategies, financial products and
services to rural areas
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
Technical
Assistance is rolled
out in time
Output 
Output 1.2: Business Development Services for Agribusinesses and Smallholders
2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business development
services
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
Commercial banks
MFBs
SACCOs
Number
4
5
25
34
5
6
30
41
Size of enterprises
1200
1500
1.1.7 Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy
and/or use of financial products and services
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Persons in rural areas
trained in FL and/or use of
FProd and Services (total)
20000
25000
20000
25000
12000
15000
40000
50000
Technical
Assistance is rolled
out in time
Outcome 
Outcome 2: Rural financial instruments mobilized for improved access for agribusinesses
and farmers
Leverage ratio achieved by participating PFIs
Ratio (Number of times)
2
4
Output 
Output 2.1: Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme mobilized
Number of PFIs contracted under the R-CGS
Number
41
41
Outcome
surveys
PMU
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
PFIs are willing to
participate in the
project
PFIs are willing to
participate in the
project
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
PMU
Records
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
Annual
PMU
Volume of credit disbursed by PFIs
Volume of credit
32000
80000
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Total number of accesses to
financial services
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - credit
Total persons accessing
financial services - savings
Total persons accessing
financial services - credit
5640
14100
5640
14100
13160
32900
5640
14100
5640
14100
5640
14400
18800
47000
18800
47000
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - insurance
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - remittances
Women and youth specific products developed and
deployed by Commercial Banks
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
Number
Female
Youth
4
2
2
6
3
3
Output 
Output 2.2: Green Financing Facility (GFF) mobilized
Number of MFBs and rural SACCOs mobilized to access
credit line
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
Number
30
36
Volume of wholesale finance disbursed by FI managing the
Green Financing Facility (GFF)
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
PMU
Records
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
Annual
PMU
Volume of credit
10000
20000
Leveraged PFIs Contributions
Volume of credit
2500
5000
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
Total number of accesses to
financial services
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
savings
4500
11250
2700
6750
PFIs are willing to
participate in the
project
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
7/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
4500
11250
4500
11250
4500
11250
2700
6750
9000
22500
9000
22500
900
2250
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - savings
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - credit
Total persons accessing
financial services - savings
Total persons accessing
financial services - credit
Total persons accessing
financial services - insurance
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - insurance
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services -
insurance
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
insurance
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - insurance
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
8/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - remittances
Women and youth specific products developed and
deployed by SACCOs and MFBs under GCF
PMU
Records
Annual
PMU
Number
Female
Youth
20
10
10
32
16
16
Outcome 
Outcome 3: Strengthened rural finance sector policies
Number of rural finance sector policies developed
Number
2
7
Outcome
surveys
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-
making of local authorities and project-supported service
providers
Outcome
surveys
Household members
Households (%)
20400
51000
75
75
Households (number)
95880 239700
The National
Treasury facilitates
the policy
development
process
PMU
PMU
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2: Theory of Change 
Goal 
Development 
Objective 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
Solutions 
Poverty reduction, climate change resilience and improved livelihoods in rural areas 
Increased rural financial inclusion and green investments by agriculture value chain stakeholders, leading to equitable employment opportunities, 
innovative and resilient production systems, and increased incomes for smallholders, poor and marginalized rural households 
RF innovations implemented 
and agribusiness/smallholder 
capacities enhanced 
Agribusinesses invest in resilient 
production, generate employment and 
develop sustainable value chains 
MSMEs and smallholders access financial 
services, invest in green production, access 
markets and improve profitability 
Technical Services introduce RF 
innovations and train agriculture 
and foods sector stakeholders 
Banks finance agribusinesses and 
smallholders directly and indirectly through 
SACCOs and MFBs 
MFBs and SACCOs finance green 
investments of agribusiness MSMEs and 
smallholders 
Technical Services and 
Enabling Environment 
Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme to 
unlock commercial bank finance 
Green Financing Facility to provide 
liquidity for MFBs and SACCOs 
Underlying issues 
Information opacity between the 
financial sector and agri-food sector 
High perceived risk and real risk of financing 
smallholder and agribusiness sectors 
Limited access to liquidity by rural MFBs and 
SACCOs to increase green investment portfolios 
Development 
problem 
Limited investment flow hinders modernization of the smallholder and agribusiness sectors, despite high development potential and 
significant positive impacts on rural livelihoods and food systems development, poverty reduction and climate change adaptation 
1 
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA). 
Annex 3: Project costs and financing: Detailed cost tables. 
1.  RK  FINFA  Preliminary  Budget  and  Financing  –  The  budget  and  financing  plan  for  RK-FINFA  is 
presented in the tables below. Based on  preliminary  analysis, the total RK-FINFA costs for the planned 
six-year  project  period  (2022 –  2027)  are  estimated  at  approximately  US$ 134 million.  The  project  has 
been done in US$ as the input currency. Of this total amount, the IFAD loan is projected to finance US$ 
22 millionaccountingfor  16  per  cent  of  the  total  project  costs.  Co-financing  from  participating  financial 
institutions  is  estimated  at  US$ 85.7million,  covering  64%  of  the  total  project  costs,  mainly  due  to  the 
leverage in loan guarantee operations. The GoK contribution is budgeted to cover US$24 million in cash 
and kind, taking up to 18 per cent of the total project costs, partly financed with the PROFIT reflows. The 
share of co-financing from non-government sector implementing partners is US$ 2.3 millioncovering 2 per 
cent of the project costs. 
2.  Component 1, Technical Support and Innovation Services accounts for 6 percent (US$ 8.2 million) of 
the total RK FINFA project costs, while Component 2, Rural Investment Instruments accounts for 90 per 
cent (US$ 120 million) of the total project costs, and Component 3, Enabling Rural Finance Environment 
and Project Coordination constituting of 4 per cent (US$ 5.8 million) of the total project costs. 
Table 1:Project costs by component and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Table 2:Project costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
1 
KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFAComponents by FinanciersPrivate FinancePartnerLocal(US$ '000)IFADInstitutionsInstitutionsThe GovernmentTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Technical Support and Innovation Services1. PFI Capacity Building2,58653  3156     75015  1,25026  4,9004     4,9002. BDS for Smallholders and MSMEs1,31039  42313   75022  86726  3,3503     3,350Subtotal3,89647  7379     1,50018  2,11726  8,2506     8,250B. Rural Investment Instruments1. Rural Credit Guarantee SchemeGuarantee Amount5,00025  15,00075  20,00015   20,000Leveraged Amount80,000100  --    80,00060   80,000Subtotal5,0005    80,00080   15,00015  100,00075   100,0002. Green Financing Facility10,00050  5,01325   4,98725  20,00015   20,000Subtotal15,00013  85,01371   19,98717  120,00090   120,000C. Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination1. Enabling Rural Finance Environment90439  80035  59626  2,3002     2,3002. Project Coordination2,20063  1,30037  3,5003     63,45044Subtotal3,10454  80014  1,89633  5,8004     65,75044Total PROJECT COSTS22,00016  85,75064   2,3002    24,00018  134,050100  6134,00044KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFAExpenditure Accounts by FinanciersPrivate FinancePartnerLocal(US$ '000)IFAD LoanInstitutionsInstitutionsThe GovernmentTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment CostsA. Equipment and Materials2076 --    --      725       27-      1242B. Training2,44945 3156   80015   1,85634       5,4204     -5,420-C. Credit, Guarantee FundsCredit5,0005   80,00080 --      15,00015       100,00075   -100,000-Guarantee Funds10,00050 5,01325 --      4,98725       20,00015   -20,000-Subtotal15,00013 85,01371 --      19,98717       120,00090   -120,000-D. Goods, Services and Inputs2,57746 4238   1,50027   1,14420       5,6444     25,6357E. Vehicles4556 --    --      3544       800     44235Total Investment Costs20,09215 85,75065 2,3002     23,02818       131,17098   6131,12044II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and Allowances1,90866 --    --      97234       2,8802     -2,880-Total Recurrent Costs1,90866 --    --      97234       2,8802     -2,880-Total PROJECT COSTS22,00016 85,75064 2,3002     24,00018       134,050100 6134,00044 
Table 3: Project costs by disbursement account and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Summary Cost Tables: 
Table4: Summary of Costs by Components 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
2 
KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFADisbursement Accounts by FinanciersPartnerLocal(US$ '000)IFAD LoanInstitutionsThe GovernmentTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Credit, Guarantee FundsCredit5,0005.080,00080.0--15,00015.0100,00074.6-100,000-Guarantee Funds10,00050.05,01325.1--4,98724.920,00014.9-20,000-Subtotal15,00012.585,01370.8--19,98716.7120,00089.5-120,000-B. Goods Services and inputs2,57745.74237.51,50026.61,14420.35,6444.225,6357C. Training2,44945.23155.880014.81,85634.25,4204.0-5,420-D. Equipments and materials2075.5----724.527-1242E. Vehicles4556.3----3543.8800.144235F. Operating costs-------------G. Salaries and allowances1,90866.3----97233.82,8802.1-2,880-Total PROJECT COSTS22,00016.485,75064.02,3001.724,00017.9134,050100.06134,00044KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary(US$ '000)BaseTotalCostsA. Technical Support and Innovation Services1. PFI Capacity Building4,90042. BDS for Smallholders and MSMEs3,3502Subtotal8,2506B. Rural Investment Instruments1. Rural Credit Guarantee SchemeGuarantee Amount20,00015Leveraged Amount80,00060Subtotal100,000752. Green Financing Facility20,00015Subtotal120,00090C. Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination1. Enabling Rural Finance Environment2,30022. Project Coordination3,5003Subtotal5,8004Total PROJECT COSTS134,050100 
Table 5:Project costs by expenditure category 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Table 6:Project costs by component and year 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
3 
KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA% TotalExpenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary(US$ '000)BaseTotalCosts I. Investment CostsA. Equipment and Materials27-B. Training5,4204C. Credit, Guarantee FundsCredit100,00075Guarantee Funds20,00015Subtotal120,00090D. Goods, Services and Inputs5,6444E. Vehicles80-Total Investment Costs131,17098II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and Allowances2,8802B. Operations and maintainance--Total Recurrent Costs2,8802Total PROJECT COSTS134,050100KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFAProject Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(US$ '000)Totals Including ContingenciesY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalA. Technical Support and Innovation Services1. PFI Capacity Building9569569569567753004,9002. BDS for Smallholders and MSMEs570570570670970-3,350Subtotal1,5261,5261,5261,6261,7453008,250B. Rural Investment Instruments1. Rural Credit Guarantee SchemeGuarantee Amount2,5005,0005,0007,500--20,000Leveraged Amount10,00020,00020,00030,000--80,000Subtotal12,50025,00025,00037,500--100,0002. Green Financing Facility5,00010,0005,000---20,000Subtotal17,50035,00030,00037,500--120,000C. Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination1. Enabling Rural Finance Environment2005505004003503002,3002. Project Coordination6995235885435436033,500Subtotal8991,0731,0889438939035,800Total PROJECT COSTS19,92537,60032,61540,0702,6381,203134,050 
Table 7:  Project Components by Year. Investment Vs Recurrent costs 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
4 
KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFAProject Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs(US$ '000)Totals Including ContingenciesY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalA. Technical Support and Innovation Services1. PFI Capacity BuildingInvestment Costs9569569569567753004,900Recurrent Costs-------Subtotal9569569569567753004,9002. BDS for Smallholders and MSMEsInvestment Costs570570570670970-3,350Recurrent Costs-------Subtotal570570570670970-3,350Subtotal1,5261,5261,5261,6261,7453008,250B. Rural Investment Instruments1. Rural Credit Guarantee SchemeGuarantee AmountInvestment Costs2,5005,0005,0007,500--20,000Recurrent Costs-------Subtotal2,5005,0005,0007,500--20,000Leveraged AmountInvestment Costs10,00020,00020,00030,000--80,000Recurrent Costs-------Subtotal10,00020,00020,00030,000--80,000Subtotal12,50025,00025,00037,500--100,0002. Green Financing FacilityInvestment Costs5,00010,0005,000---20,000Recurrent Costs-------Subtotal5,00010,0005,000---20,000Subtotal17,50035,00030,00037,500--120,000C. Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination1. Enabling Rural Finance EnvironmentInvestment Costs2005505004003503002,300Recurrent Costs-------Subtotal2005505004003503002,3002. Project CoordinationInvestment Costs219431086363123620Recurrent Costs4804804804804804802,880Subtotal6995235885435436033,500Subtotal8991,0731,0889438939035,800Total PROJECT COSTS19,92537,60032,61540,0702,6381,203134,050Total Investment Costs19,44537,12032,13539,5902,158723131,170Total Recurrent Costs4804804804804804802,880 
Table 8:  Project costs by expenditure category by Year. Totals including contingencies 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
5 
Kenya Project Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) Totals Including ContingenciesY1Y2Y3Y4Y52015Y6 I. Investment Costs A. Equipment and Materials 27-----27B. Training 8661,2061,1561,0568253105,420C. Credit, Guarantee Funds Credit 12,50025,00025,00037,500--100,000Guarantee Funds 5,00010,0005,000---20,000Subtotal 17,50035,00030,00037,500--120,000D. Goods, Services and Inputs 9829139681,0331,3334135,644E. Vehicles 70-10---80Total Investment Costs 19,44537,12032,13539,5902,158723131,170II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 4804804804804804802,880Total Recurrent Costs 4804804804804804802,880Total PROJECT COSTS 19,92537,60032,61540,0702,6381,203134,050 
Detailed Cost Tables: 
DT. 1.1 Capacity building. 
DT. 1.2 BDS to smallholders. 
DT. 2.1 Credit Guarantee scheme. 
6 
Kenya Project Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA Table 1.1. PFI Capacity Building Detailed Costs Expenditures by Financiers(US$) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesPrivatePartnerUnitY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalUnit CostY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalIFADFinance InstitutionsInstitutionsThe Government I. Investment Costs A. TSIS Coordination, M&E and Knowledge Management Per/Year1111116300,000300,000300,000300,000300,000300,000300,0001,800,0001,050,330-749,670-0B. Bank Services Per/Year1111--493,75093,75093,75093,75093,750--375,000172,50042,500-160,000C. MFB Services Per/Year1111--4112,500112,500112,500112,500112,500--450,000225,50045,000-179,500D. SACCO Services Per/Year11111-5361,800350,000350,000350,000350,000409,000-1,809,000904,500180,900-723,600E. FI ESMF Services Per/Year11111-593,200100,000100,000100,000100,00066,000-466,000233,00046,600-186,400Total 956,250956,250956,250956,250775,000300,0004,900,0002,585,830315,000749,6701,249,500Kenya Project Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) Table 1.2. BDS To Borrowers Detailed Costs Expenditures by Financiers(US$) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesPrivate Partner InstitutionsTheUnitY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalUnit CostY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalIFAD LoanFinance InstitutionsGovernment I. Investment Costs A. Agribusiness BDS Services Per/Year111115300,000300,000300,000300,000300,000300,0001,500,000350,000262,500750,068450,000B. Small holder Fin Literacy Per/Year111115270,000270,000270,000270,000270,000270,0001,350,000960,000160,000405,000Total 570,000570,000570,000570,000570,0002,850,0001,310,000422,500750,068855,000Kenya Project Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) Table 2.1. Credit Guarantee Scheme Detailed Costs Expenditures by Financiers(US$) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesPrivate FinanceUnitY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalUnit CostY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalIFADInstitutionsThe Government I. Investment Costs A. R-CGS Guarantees 1. IFAD Financing Per/Year11131,666,6672,000,0002,000,0001,000,0005,000,0005,000,0002. Government financing Per/Year111143,750,000500,0003,000,0004,000,0007,500,00015,000,00015,000,0003. CGS supported loans USD (by PFIs) Per/Year1111420,000,00010,000,00020,000,00020,000,00030,000,00080,000,00080,000,000Total 12,500,00025,000,00025,000,00037,500,000100,000,0005,000,00080,000,00015,000,000 
DT. 2.2 Green Financing Facility. 
DT. 3.1 Enabling Rural Finance Environment 
7 
Kenya Project Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) Table 2.2. Green Financing Facility Detailed Costs Expenditures by Financiers(US$) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesPrivate FinanceThe UnitY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalUnit CostY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalIFAD InstitutionsGovernment I. Investment Costs A. Green Financing Facility Investment Capital PER/YEAR11136,666,6675,000,00010,000,0005,000,00020,000,00010,000,0005,012,8004,987,200Total 5,000,00010,000,0005,000,00020,000,00010,000,0005,012,8004,987,200Kenya Project Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) Table 3.1. Enabling Rural Finance Enviroment Detailed Costs Expenditures by Financiers(US$) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesPartner The UnitY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalUnit CostY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalIFADInstitutionsGovernment I. Investment Costs A. Research reviews documentation PER/YEAR1111116300,000150,000400,000400,000300,000300,000250,0001,800,000720,000650,000430,000B. Workshops thematic events information dissmination PER/YEAR111111683,33350,000150,000100,000100,00050,00050,000500,000183,889150,000166,111Total 200,000550,000500,000400,000350,000300,0002,300,000903,889800,000596,111 
DT. 3.2. Project coordination. 
8 
Kenya Project Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA Table 3.2. Project Coordination Detailed Costs Expenditures by Financiers(US$) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6TotalIFADThe Government I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles, Office and equipment 1. 2 Vehicles Per/Vehicle2-----270,000-----70,00035,00035,0002. Vehicle operation and maintainance Per/Year2222221212,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,00072,000-72,0003. Office equipment and furniture Lumpsum10,000-----10,0008,0002,0004. Office rent Per/month1212121212127212,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,00072,000-72,0005. Utilities Per/month121212121212726,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,00036,000-36,0006. Laptops Per PC10-----1012,000-----12,00012,000-7. Mobile phones Per phone10-----104,500-----4,500-4,5008. Mobile phone airtime Per/Year1201201201201201207201,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,80010,800-10,800Subtotal 128,30031,80031,80031,80031,80031,800287,30055,000232,300B. M&E, KM and key workshops 1. M&E systems and costs Lumpsum28,700-----28,700-28,7002. Baseline Lumpsum50,000-----50,00050,000-3. Mid term evaluation Lumpsum--35,000---35,000-35,0004. End line evaluation Lumpsum-----50,00050,00050,000-5. Knowledge management Per/Year--11114--20,00020,00020,00020,00080,00080,000-6. Start up workshops Lumpsum10,000-----10,000-10,0007. Annual supervision support costs Per/Year-111115-10,00010,00010,00010,00010,00050,00037,00013,0008. Mid term review workshop Lumpsum--10,000---10,00010,000-9. completion Workshop Per/Year-----10,00010,00010,000-10. Project Steering Committee Expenses Per/Year11111161,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,5009,000-9,000Subtotal 90,20011,50076,50031,50031,50091,500332,700237,00095,700Total Investment Costs 218,50043,300108,30063,30063,300123,300620,000292,000328,000II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff costs 1. Project coordinator Per/month1212121212127272,00072,00072,00072,00072,00072,000432,000432,000-2. Financial and Administration Manager Per/month1212121212127260,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,000360,000360,000-3. Senior rural finance specialist Per/month1212121212127254,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,000324,000324,000-4. Procurement specialist/contract manager Per/month1212121212127248,00048,00048,00048,00048,00048,000288,000288,000-5. Monitoring & Evaluation Specialists Per/month1212121212127248,00048,00048,00048,00048,00048,000288,000288,000-6. Value chain finance officer Per/month1212121212127236,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,000216,000216,000-7. Environment and Climate Change Officer Per/month1212121212127236,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,000216,000-216,0008. Social inclusion officer Per/month1212121212127236,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,000216,000-216,0009. Accountant Per/month1212121212127236,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,000216,000-216,00010. Administrator/programme assistant Per/month1212121212127212,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,00072,000-72,00011. Two drivers Per/month24242424242414418,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000108,000-108,000Subtotal 456,000456,000456,000456,000456,000456,0002,736,0001,908,000828,000B. PMU Staff travel costs for regular monitoring 1. Travel costs for 6 PMU technical staff Man/day2402402402402402401,44024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,000144,000-144,000Total Recurrent Costs 480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,0002,880,0001,908,000972,000Total 698,500523,300588,300543,300543,300603,3003,500,0002,200,0001,300,000 
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis. 
Introduction. 
RK-FINFA is being designed as a Rural Finance Project to support the ultimate beneficiaries 
1. 
using predominantly Rural Finance products. The ultimate beneficiaries are the final target group of RK-
FINFA (the farmers but also the traders and processors who support the smallholders).  Therefore, from 
the  EFA  angle,  the  financial  institutions,  whose  implementation  role  is  important,  will  only  play  an 
intermediary role to increase the financial outreach and make it possible for the “ultimate beneficiaries” 
to access the working capital or investment finance to either expand production or improve productivity. 
For  a  project  like  RK-FINFA,  the  main  source  of  quantifiable  benefits  that  can  be  attributable  to  the 
project  are  (i)  potential  productivity  improvement  and  (ii)  production  increases.  RK-FINFA  will 
complement the initiatives/investments by other IFAD projects in Kenya and focus its initial operations 
largely in counties with IFAD VC development support. Using production data from these projects, 19 
models along the value chains supported by IFAD projects with added RK-FINFA investments in finance 
have been used. The models include on-farm production, rural trading, value addition and processing. 
Details are presented in Annex 4. It is understood that there will more benefits that will arise from: (i) 
efficiency gains in the financial system that will lower operational costs and sustainability of financial 
services supply; (ii) shifts in portfolio composition of financial service providers to productive loans; (iii) 
incremental taxation revenues to Government; and (iv) job creation.  
2. 
The  basis  of  measuring  the  Without  Project  (WOP)  for  RK-FINFA,  is  the  end  target  for  the 
existing or even recently closed projects such as Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Project (SDCP). 
To  measure  the  incremental  effect  of  RK-FINFA  the  With-Project  (WP)  for  existing/  recently  closed 
projects then become WOP for RK-FINFA. With this, 19 models along the value chains supported by 
IFAD  projects  have  been  used.  The  models  include  on-  farm,  trading,  value  addition  and  some 
processing. Details are presented in annex 4. It is understood that there will more benefits that will arise 
from: (i) efficiency gains in financial system that will lower operational costs and ensure self-sufficiency 
and  sustainability  of  financial  services  supply;  (ii)  Shifts  in  portfolio  composition  of  financial  service 
providers (productive loans versus consumption); (iii) incremental taxation revenues to government; (iv) 
economic benefits of transfer effects and (v) job creation.  
3. 
proposed RK-FINFA, has been done using the methodological approach below: 
Following  the  IFAD  EFA  guidelines,  quantifying  benefits  in  a  Rural  Finance  Project  like  the 
Box1: Methods considered on the quantification of the RK-FINFA: 
  Potential  productivity  increases  through  financing  of  working  capital  (incremental  benefits  to 
clients/borrowers)  
  Efficiency gains in financial system can lower operational costs and ensure self-sufficiency and 
sustainability of financial services supply 
  Shifts  in  portfolio  composition  of  financial  service  providers  (productive  loans  versus 
consumption) 
Incremental taxation revenues to government  
 
  Economic benefits of transfer effects 
  1 
INCREMENTALITY APPROACH/ATTRIBUTION OF BENEFITS TO RKFINFA 
4. 
This EFA annex aims to demonstrate the RK-FINFA additional incremental benefits as a result 
of  beneficiaries’  access  to  finance.   The  importance  of  measuring  the  anticipated  RK-FINFA  benefit 
attribution  effect  draws  from  the  lessons  learned  under  the  closed  PROFIT  that  in  the  end  was  not 
successful in showing its impacts to the ultimate beneficiary. It spent more effort documenting the work 
done with Banks and MFIs but not the ultimate beneficiaries who are the farmers, traders, some value 
addition, processors etc. 
Approach to determining the RK-FINFA Without project situation: RK-FINFA will complement 
5. 
the  initiative/  investments  being  undertaken  or  already  undertaken  by  other  IFAD  projects  in  Kenya. 
This does not mean that other target beneficiaries will not benefit. But at least for the basis of measuring 
the WOP for RK-FINFA, the IFAD portfolio information has been useful. To measure the incremental 
effect of RK-FINFA the WP for existing projects then becomes WOP for RK-FINFA. 
6. 
Possible value chains that are supported by other IFAD projects. 
Project  
Crop/Enterprise 
Kenya Livestock commercialization 
project (KEL-COP) 
Kenya Cereal Enhancement program- 
Climate Resilient Agricultural Livelihood 
window (KCEP-CRAL) 
Upper Tana catchment Natural Resource 
Management project (UTaNRMP) 










Poultry 
Small ruminants 
Maize 
Sorghum 
Poultry 
Beans  
Green grams 
Tomatoes 
Maize 
Sorghum 
Small holder Dairy commercialization 
program (SDCP) 


Coolers 
Dairy 
  2 
Financial  viability:  Nineteen  illustrative  farm/enterprise  models  have  been  developed  to 
7. 
examine how the target group can benefit from improved financial services supported by RK-FINFA. 
The enterprises used in the models were all found financially viable to be able to seek additional funds. 
Incremental returns to incremental labour provide a sound incentive for household production increase 
or productivity increase. 
Table 1.Financial Analysis of the Models: 
The  primary  objective  of  the  financial  analysis  is  to  determine  the  financial  viability  and 
8. 
incentives of the target households for engaging in the project activities, by examining the impact of 
project interventions on family labour, cash flow and net incomes.  
The  financial  aspects  of  models  are  presented  in  table  2  demonstrating  production  and 
9. 
investment costs including labour and excluding labour costs, the average production and investment 
costs by third year of the project, average revenue and average incremental income at the third year 
which is considered the climax of the project.  
Table 2: Financial analysis: 
Production 
& 
investment 
cost, 
including 
labour(year 
1) KES 
51,744 
217,148 
639,454 
277,504 
62,019 
31,015 
329,981 
4,128,456 
Production & 
investment 
cost, before 
labour(average) 
KES 
28,080 
187,359 
572,638 
216,256 
39,190 
15,425 
272,074 
3,962,856 
Average 
Production 
& 
investment 
cost, 
including 
labour (Yr 
3)KES 
50,352 
274,593 
903,798 
220,651 
64,404 
33,439 
216,661 
1,015,924 
AverageRevenue 
per year KES 
Incremental 
income, 
(year 3) 
KES 
80,000 
540,000 
1,187,837 
308,800 
205,325 
54,072 
375,840 
2,299,770 
9,215 
202,386 
326,714 
87,174 
59,944 
10,683 
99,072 
786,703 
Model  
Maize 
Tomatoes 
Broilers 
Piggery 
Cassava 
Beans 
Dairy Cow 
Coolers 
10. 
The  estimated  incremental  production  of  the  farm  and  off  farm  models  is  expecting 
improvement in productivity due to the project intervention. The analysis has been done by taking into 
consideration the average current prices assuming similar condition in area region. A cash-flow analysis 
is finally carried out to present the “with” and “without” project analysis. 
11. 
Most models are expected to provide farmers with physical outputs and financial returns that 
are attractive in relation to their extra labour, other farm inputs and financial investment. The project is 
supposed to provide farmers with financial resources needed to cover production costs (operational or 
working capital), capacity building and administrative support. Due to the project intervention, increase 
in yield, quality and distribution of products has been projected.  
Demand for labour provides opportunities for the poorest to gain employment. The cost of rural 
12. 
farm labour set at going market rate varies and it is estimated to be from KES 300/day to KES 600/day 
depending  on  the  activity  and  region.  Returns  to  labour  as  well  as  net  farm  income  within  different 
models  increases  by  a  rate  that  is  substantial  and  much  higher  than  the  prevalent  wage  rate  for 
inexperienced labour in the area. 
13. 
All the models present a higher financial efficiency in terms of financial Net Present Value (NPV) 
and the financial benefits-cost ratio (BCR). For instance, NPV is positive for the all models (KES 65,856 
  3 
A)Hoticulture Maize models  Sale of maize flour  Sorghum  Sale of sorghum flour  Beans Model  Green Grams Model  Tomato model  Local chicken model  Broilers chicken model  Layers chicken model  Goat enterprise model  Sale of goat's meat  Piggery  Pork processing and selling  Sweet potato Model  Cassava Model  Dairy Cow Model  Goat Dairy Model  Coolers Ent. Model PY1-24-5875                  (223)(7)                        (14)                      17-24-104-488(163)               (187)               (102)               (203)               (48)                 5                     (108)               (49)                 (3,200)                      PY21313922                      22 3                         7                          1072579660820                   49                   (40)                 36                   51                   11                   633                           PY3920921                      95 6                         8                          20212872121088078                   109                58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           PY4920921                      95 6                         8                          202531197927766                   90                   58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           PY5920921                      95 6                         8                          1341287212718280                   110                58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           PY6920921                      95 6                         8                          1341287212718280                   110                58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           PY7920921                      95 6                         8                          134531197717766                   90                   58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           PY8920921                      95 6                         8                          1341287212718280                   110                58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           PY9920921                      95 6                         8                          1341287212718280                   110                58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           PY10920921                      95 6                         8                          134531197717066                   70                   58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           920921                      95 6                         8                          134531717066                   70                   58                   60                   83                   31                   787                           40%29%31%69%54%29%61%34%47%30%53%41%50%65%49%18%2541510519520267241822046022315622025915727027490763** ERR does not compute in models without negative cashflow  Farm models' net incremental benefits(in  KES 000)Cereals/On farm AgricultureLegumesPoultrySmall ruminantsRoot cropsDairy IRR/**  NPV (KES'000)  
for maize, KES 688,329 for tomatoes, KES 204,457 for broilers, KES 253,258for Piggery, KES 255,567 
for cassava, KES 40,433 for beans, KES 227,704 for dairy cow and KES 600,025 for coolers over 6 
years period. Changes in financial indicators illustrate the predicted transformation in livestock practices 
in the project area. Analysis of the livestock and enterprise models confirm that the impact of the project 
at the farmers’ level is financially attractive for family households and net farmers’ incomes are expected 
to increase. The table below illustrates the financial profitability indicators for the project.  
Table 3: Financial profitability indicators: 
Model  
Net present value / KES 
B/C Ratio  Return to family labour (KES/day) 
Maize 
Tomatoes 
Broilers 
Piggery 
Cassava 
Beans 
Dairy cow 
Coolers 
65,856 
688,329 
204,457 
253,258 
255,567 
40,433 
227,704 
600,025 
1.4 
1.3 
0.9 
1.2 
1.9 
1.4 
1.4 
1.4 
366 
2965 
1420 
742 
2844 
478 
890 
2254 
Table 4 provides overall project costs by components and beneficiaries. The total project costs 
14. 
have  been  estimated  at  US$  134  million  over  6-year  project  implementation  period.  The  cost  per 
beneficiary has been estimated at modest KES 13,768 and cost per household has been estimated at 
KES  55,073 Adoption  rate  of  the  project  is  60%  and  up  to  263,026  of  direct  households  has  been 
estimated to be impacted by the project implementation (equivalent to 1 million beneficiaries). 
Table 4; Programme/project costs and log frame targets 
Economic Analysis: 
15. 
Economic  viability.  The  overall  RK-FINFA  economic  internal  rate  of  return  (EIRR)  is 
23 percent.  The  estimated  economic  net  present  value  (ENPV)  at  a  13  per  cent  discount  rate  is 
US$ 22.1 million. The BCR of 2.2 indicates a return of US$ 2.2 for every dollar invested. These results 
indicate that the project is a sound investment yielding a positive rate of return as the EIRR is greater 
than the hurdle rate (13 per cent) and the ENPV is greater than zero. 
16. 
The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to assess the overall project viability; and (ii) to 
estimate the project impact by calculating the economic rate of return. The computation of economic 
costs  is  derived  from financial  project  costs,  by  excluding  transfers  such  as  duties,  taxes,  and  price 
contingencies. Production inputs and outputs, labour, and other items have been shadowed priced to 
stand  for  market  imperfections.  Economic  costs  in  border  prices  for  major  agricultural  inputs  and 
products were computed using the associated conversion factors to adjust the local content of costs 
and goods assumed to be non-traded. Prices requiring a different conversion factor are introduced. The 
related labour financial price is adjusted downward by using a standard conversion factor of 0.92; 0.93 
for imported agricultural products and 93.4 for exported agricultural products. Shadow conversion factor 
is 0.93 which changes shadow exchange rate to value of KES 110.4 for 1 US$. The financial discount 
rate  has  been  adjusted  according  to  data  available  on  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  commercial  banks 
weighted average rates (13.148%) and social rate was adjusted to Govt. bonds (6 years duration 7%, 
source - Central Bank of Kenya). Detailed have been summarized in table 5 below.  
  4 
B)            14,486            1,089,779 people272,445Households                13,292  KES x person            53,169 KESWOP (KES)                      837                             -                  133                 12,960                       689 Cost per beneficiaryPROGRAMME COSTS AND INDICATORS FOR LOGFRAMETOTAL PROGRAMME COSTS (in million KES)BeneficiariesComponents and Cost (USD million)Average increase in rural income per capitaA. Technical Support and Innovation ServicesAverage  increase in income per HH per yearB. Rural Investment InstrumentsC. Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination 
Table 5; Main assumptions and shadow prices: 
Table 6; Summary reflecting the WOP and WP yields, costs, revenues and labour requirements. 
Justification on family labour. 
17. 
The labour budget used in the models is based on the experience of the ongoing projects in 
Kenya.  The  price  has  been  justified1.  Labour  costs  have  also  been  based  on  the  financial  models 
successfully used in the EFA analysis for KCEP-CRAL, KEL-COP, UTaNRMP and SDCP. Family labour 
budget in economic models has been estimated at KES 278, and hired labour at KES 557. 
18. 
Project  economic  costs  and  benefits.  The  economic  analysis  includes  the  investment  and 
incremental recurrent costs of the project components. The project financial costs have been converted 
to  economic  values  by  removal  of  price  contingencies,  taxes  and  duties.  In  order  to  avoid  double 
1https://africapay.org/kenya/salary/minimum-wages/minimum-wage-rates-in-kenya-2 
  5 
C) Output land SizePrice (KES)MAIN ASSUMPTIONS & SHADOW PRICES1 Yields  (Annually)FINANCIALWOPWPMaize Model1 ha2,000                  3,500                 25                  Sale of maize flour36,000                46,800               50                  Sorghum1 ha2,500                  4,000                 20                  sale of sorghum flour15,400                20,020               55                  Tomato model1 ha5,000                  20,000               60                  Local Chicken Model150                      300                    700                Broilers Chicken Model150                      400                    600                Layers Chicken Model150                      500                    600                Green Grams400                      880                    60                  Beans Model600                      1,235                 60                  Sweet potatoes2,000                  3,000                 50                  Cassava Model2,000                  3,333                 70                  Goat finance model1 ha-                           2                        11,000          Goat's meat processing & selling1 ha10                        70                      450                Piggery livestock model1 ha4                          10                      400                Pork processing and selling1 ha10                        30                      400                Dairy cow Model5,400                  10,800               40                  FINANCIALECONOMICDairy goat model360                      1,440                 90                  Coolers enterprise model-                           5,000                 42                  Official Exchange rate (OER)10012%Shadow exchange rate (SER)93.447%Labour Conversion factor \30.93ECONOMICDisc. rate (opp. cost of Discount rate  on savings/ deposit accounts/cFamily labourHired LabourTotal Labour DaysWOPWPWOPWPWP (Yr. 3)WP (Yr. 3)Maize ModelKgs2,000    3,500            25            37,500       80,000         76278Sale of maize flourKgs36,000 46,800         50            1,791,000  2,398,500    360100460SorghumKgs2,500    4,000            20            44,500       72,800         89291sale of sorghum flourKgs15,400 20,020         55            804,650     975,975       10360370Tomato modelKgs5,000    20,000         60            246,000     540,000       120                2122           Local Chicken ModelNo.150       300               700          97,200       189,000       251035Broilers Chicken ModelNo.150       400               600          342,000     911,998       240                10250Layers Chicken ModelNo.150       500               600          249,163     717,324       200                10210Green GramsKgs400       880               60            19,440       44,352         51                  253Beans ModelNo.600       1,235            60            23,040       43,798         60                  262Sweet potatoesNo.2,000    3,000            50            78,000       127,500       95                  297Cassava ModelNo.2,000    3,333            70            117,600     205,325       83                  285Goat finance modelKgs-            2                   11,000     85,595       171,190       15015           165Goat's meat processing & sellingKgs10         70                 450          767,025     2,301,075    250                20270Piggery livestock modelNo.4           10                 400          123,520     308,800       220                10230Pork processing and sellingKgs10         30                 400          1,225,980  3,064,950    250                20270Dairy cow ModelLtrs5,400    10,800         40            166,320     357,048       200                4204Dairy goat modelLtrs360       1,440            90            30,456       125,712       100                2102Coolers enterprise modelLtrs-            5,000            42            689,931     2,299,770    300                10310Total6,938,920  14,935,118  2,879             585         3,464        7,996,198  54%83%17%100%ModelUnit of measureProduction YieldsUnit Cost (KES)Production RevenueLabour budget 
counting,  the  final  aggregation  considered  only  those  costs  that  were  not  included  in  the  financial 
models. Costs of replacing/maintaining of some specific small equipment are considered. 
19. 
Benefits  estimation:  Incremental  production  was  calculated  by  calibrating  the  incremental 
benefits  by  the  standard  conversion  factors  and  then  aggregating  them,  based  on  the  phasing  of 
household and enterprises uptake during the project implementation period. 
20. 
Based  on  the  expected  farmers’  responsiveness  to  the  project,  the  assumption  on  farmers’ 
participation is smooth the first years, and increases from project activities such as extension, market 
development,  technical  assistance,  training  and  awareness.  Incremental  aggregated  financial  and 
economic budgets, production and inputs including labour, financial and economic efficiency measures, 
and  other  technical  and  economic  indicators  were  then  calculated.  The  phasing  of  beneficiaries’ 
participation  to  the  Project  activities  was  based  on  the  rate  at  which  beneficiaries  are  projected  to 
contribute to Project output.  
Beneficiary and household phasing; 
21. 
Beneficiary and household phasing has been derived as follows: 
Table 7; Beneficiaries and household phasing for Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme. 
Table 8. Beneficiaries and household phasing for Green Financing Facility. 
Table 9;Summary of beneficiaries and household phasing for R-CGS & GFF. 
  6 
D) Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Yea 4  Year 5  Yea 6 TotalRCGS-Investmenting HHs/ ano3,9177,8337,83321,16740,750GFF- Borrowersno3,6337,2675,4503,6333,6333,63327,2507,55015,10013,28324,8003,6333,63368,000a/in addition to this there the followingFarmer network benefitting#20,000 40,000 40,000 60,000 160,000       Employment#5,556   11,111 11,111 16,667 44,444         Total Beneficiaries HH272,445       COMPONENT 2.1Y1Y2Y3Y4+Y5Y6TOTALCGS Guarantees USD2,500,000            5,000,000         5,000,000        7,500,000      20,000,000   25%by IFAD2,000,000                         2,000,000                    1,000,000                   5,000,000                75%by GoK500,000                             3,000,000                    4,000,000                   7,500,000                15,000,000              CGS supported loans USD (by PFIs)10,000,000          20,000,000      20,000,000      30,000,000   80,000,000   15,000,000          CGS loans #3,917                    7,833                 7,833                21,167           40,750           14,400,000          CGS outreach to HHs13,500                  27,000              27,000              40,500           108,000         44,400,000          Among outreach to HHsInvesting HHs3,917                    7,833                 7,833                21,167           Farmer network benefitting20,000                  40,000              40,000              60,000           Employment5,556                    11,111              11,111              16,667           USD/loan1,417              USD/outreach741                 USD/farmer500                 USD/job1,800              Computation of number of beneficiariesY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Total HHDisbursement plan (GFF) USD millionsCycle 1 loan5105-            -            Cycle 2 loan-            -            5105-            Cycle 3 loan-            -            -            -            510Cycle 4 loan-            -            -            -            -            -            Cycle 5 loan-            -            -            -            -            -            Computation of number of beneficiaries (assuming 50% loan repeatersCycle 1 loan5105-            -            Cycle 2 loan-            -            2.552.5-            Cycle 3 loan-            -            -            -            2.55Cycle 4 loan-            -            -            -            -            -            Cycle 5 loan-            -            -            -            -            -            Dsibursement to new customers5107.5555Number of beneficiaries3,633        7,267        5,450        3,633        3,633        3,633        27,250       
Table 10; Overall economic analysis showing Incremental net benefit and cash flow at the project level. 
22. 
Objective, the project activities are structured into three mutually reinforcing components:  
Components  and  Activities.  To  achieve  the  RK-FINFA  Project  Goal  and  Development 
Table 11;Project components and activities. 
Component 1:Technical 
Support and Innovation 
Services (TSIS); 
Component  2:  Rural 
Investment 
Instruments. 
1.  Rural Credit 
Guarantee Scheme. 
2.  Green Financing 
Facility 
Component 3: Enabling 
Finance 
Rural 
and 
Environment 
Project Coordination. 
USD. 8,250,000 
The  capacity  of  all  41  PFIs  built  to 
implement and monitor green investment 
portfolios. 
in 
Improvements 
the  productivity  of 
smallholder  operations  through  modern 
cultivation  methods  and  climate  smart 
to  well-
technologies, 
operating  value  chains  and  building 
their 
farmer 
to 
and 
readiness 
diversification. 
capacity 
for 
innovation 
increase 
farmers 
linking 
USD. 
120,000,000 
policies 
USD. 5,800,000  The  activities  of  this  sub  components  to 
promote 
institutional 
arrangements  that  support  the  medium 
and  longer-term  development  of  a  more 
conducive operational environment for the 
Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme and the 
Green Financing Facility. 
and 
23. 
Incremental crop production will either be consumed by the households in the Project area or 
sold to local and external traders in the primary, secondary and terminal markets. Sales are made both 
for consumption in large cities. 
  7 
E. OVERALL ECONOMIC ANALYSISPY10                        0                       0                 2,146           52                  2,197          1,318-           PY2196                    182                   377             4,012           52                  4,064          2,212-           PY3587                    484                   1,071          3,474           52                  3,526          1,473-           PY41,766                 794                   2,559          4,268           52                  4,320          1,056-          PY52,284                 1,214                3,498          193              52                  245             1,952          PY62,715                 1,656                4,370          81                52                  133             2,542           PY73,582                 2,121                5,703          -                   -                     -                  3,422           PY84,688                 2,578                7,265          -                   -                  4,359           PY94,688                 2,624                7,312          -                   -                  4,387           PY10-                 -                   -                  -                   -                 -                   -                   -                 -                   -                  -                   NPV@ 13% (KES Millions)2,217        NPV@ 13 % ('000 USD)22,169EIRR23%BCRBenefits32,157               costa14,486         BCR2.2 Project year BENEFITS COSTSCASH FLOWIncremental Benefits  R-CGSIncremental Benefits GFFTotal Net Inc. Benefits (millions)Investment Costs Recurrent Costs Total Incremental Costs 
Graph 1. Cash flow of incremental benefits, costs and net cash flow: 
24. 
The  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  on  the  investments  in  the  Project  area  over 
6 years is estimated at 23 per cent and the Net present value (NPV) of the project is positive (US$ 22.1 
Million;  KES  2.2  Billion).  The  economic  analysis  suggests  that  the  RK-FINFA  Project  is  feasible. All 
these worthiness indicators establish the economic feasibility of the project.  
25. 
Sensitivity analysis. An increase in programme costs by 10 per cent will reduce the EIRR to 
20 per cent, while a decrease in overall programme benefits by 20 per cent will result in an EIRR of 16 
per cent. A one-year delay in benefits reduces the EIRR to 20 per cent and a two-year delay to 17 per 
cent. The switching values show that the project will remain economically viable if benefits decreased 
by 16 per cent, or programme costs increased by 27 per cent. An examination of the response of the 
project to identified project risks including droughts reveals it remains viable in the face of multiple short 
and medium drought sequences (EIRRs of 17 per cent and 23 percent respectively). The project would 
become unviable in the severe longer-term drought (EIRR of below 13 percent), but historical trends 
and projections do not foresee such a long-term weather shock for Kenya. 
Table 12;Sensitivity Analysis. 
Justification for discount rate. 
  8 
IRRNPV (KES M)Link with risk analysis23%2,217-10%20%2,632             -20%16%1,045-30%14%431                1 year20%2,548Delay in replenishment and disbursement of funds by financiers is a key risk tha can highly impact on the delay of project benefits.2 years17%1,106Insufficient financial monitoring and reporting most especially in such projects with various financing sources can easily hinder project benefits. Related to the above, lengthy government processes to establish PMUs and recruit staff is also a factor which can lead to delay of project benefits90%19%2,28780%16%88070%14%40110%20%2,65720%17%1,69530%14%58010%25%4,30320%29%6,510High inflation/Macroeconomic fundamentals Adoption ratesLow uptake of good practicesCost IncreaseIncrease of benefitsSensitivity analysisBase ScenarioDecrease of Project benefitsDelay of benefitsContinous climate shocks such as drought & floods, and occasional locusts invasion. This can majorly impact on loan repayment thus portfolio of the PFIs, leading to decrease of project benefits 
Social discount rate (discount rate used for economic analysis): 
26. 
The Kenya 10Y Government Bond has a 13.148%2 yield. 
Justification on own consumption and post harvest loss. 
27. 
Self-consumption and posted harvest/production losses have been factored into the analysis 
and considered in the various models but at various percentages to reflect the reality of how much a 
household can consume. Own consumption has been estimated from a range of 5% to 20% according 
to the production level of each model.  Post-harvest losses are expected to be reduced in from a high 
percentage in WOP to lower percentage in WP situation due to modern farming skills and access to 
finance. 
2http://www.worldgovernmentbonds.com/country/kenya/ 
  9 
Table 13; Summary of models showing justification of own consumption. 
Table 14; Summary of models showing justification of Post harvest/production loss. 
Explanation that there is no double counting of costs between the models and costab. 
28. 
The nature of this project such that inputs are not being directly financed, there cannot be any 
double counting of costs. There’s no cost included in any model which will come from the costs included 
in the costab. In conventional agricultural/livestock projects, costs included in the models but also in 
costab are supposed to be deducted in the aggregation/ERR/NPV computation. However, in a project 
like  this  (RK-FINFA),  even  the  line  of  credit,  funds  will  flow  back  given  the  nature  of  the  loans. The 
beneficiary will repay the loan to the bank and the funds will revolve meaning that the lending is not a 
write-off and not an expense incurred by the project as a one off. So, in substance, the inputs in the 
models will have been financed by the beneficiary except the project will have helped in creating access 
to credit. The real cost of credit, has however been factored into the analysis.  
 10 
Summary of Models - Own ConsumptionWOPYear 0Year 1Year 2Year 3Maize ModelKgs10%200240300400SorghumKgs1%180198216234Sale of maize flourKgs7%175228263280sale of sorghum flourKgs1%7784.792.4100.1Tomato modelKgs3%150187.5225300Local Chicken ModelNo.10%11141821Broilers Chicken ModelNo.3%18                 24            36               48                 Layers Chicken ModelNo.1%4                   9               12               15                 Green GramsKgs12%4858            96               106               Beans ModelNo.20%120               132          180             200               Sweet potatoesNo.7%140               168          182             210               Cassava ModelNo.6%120144168200               Goat's meat processing & sellingKgs1%19                 29            48               58                 Piggery livestock modelNo.2%6                   10            13               16                 Pork processing and sellingKgs1%34                 50            74               84                 Dairy cow ModelLtrs8%432               648          734             821               Dairy goat modelLtrs2%7                   20            24               29                 Coolers enterprise modelLtrs1%-                    288          414             460               WPModelUnit of measure% assumedSummary of Models - Post harvest lossModelWOPWPYear 0Year 1Year 2Year 3Maize ModelKgs15%10%300        240             300400SorghumKgs4%2%100     65           7580Sale of maize flourKgs8%5%2,880 1,980      21602340sale of sorghum flourKgs5%2%770     339         369.6400.4Tomato modelKgs15%7%750     438         525700Local Chicken ModelNo.20%14%36       48           5970Broilers Chicken ModelNo.2%1%12       16           2432Layers Chicken ModelNo.5%3%5         9             12                15       Green GramsKgs7%4%28       19           32                35       Beans ModelNo.16%7%96       46           63                70       Sweet potatoesNo.15%8%300     192         208             240     Cassava ModelNo.10%6%200     144         168             200     Goat's meat processing & sellingKgs5%3%26       39           66                79       Piggery livestock modelNo.2%1%5         7             10                12       Pork processing and sellingKgs2%1%42       63           92                105     Dairy cow ModelLtrs15%5%810     405         459             513     Dairy goat modelLtrs4%1%14       10           12                14       Coolers enterprise modelLtrs11%5%146     208         250             292     % assumed (WP)% assumed (WOP)Unit of measure 
Table 15; Project costs by component and by category. 
Summary of Costs by Components 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Project costs by expenditure category 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Summary of Costs by Components
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Project costs by expenditure category
(Thousands of United States dollars)
PFI Capacity Building
BDS for smallholders and 
MSMEs
Guarantee Amount
Leveraged Amount
Green Financing Facility
Eanbling Rural Finance 
Environment
Project Coordination
Equipment and 
Materials
Training
Credit
Guarantee Funds
Goods, Services and 
Inputs
Vehicles
Salaries and Allowances
Operations and 
Maintenance
 11 
KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary(US$ '000)BaseTotalCostsA. Technical Support and Innovation Services1. PFI Capacity Building4,90042. BDS for Smallholders and MSMEs3,3502Subtotal8,2506B. Rural Investment Instruments1. Rural Credit Guarantee SchemeGuarantee Amount20,00015Leveraged Amount80,00060Subtotal100,000752. Green Financing Facility20,00015Subtotal120,00090C. Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination1. Enabling Rural Finance Environment2,30022. Project Coordination3,5003Subtotal5,8004Total PROJECT COSTS134,050100KenyaProject Design Mission for Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA% TotalExpenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary(US$ '000)BaseTotalCosts I. Investment CostsA. Equipment and Materials27-B. Training5,4204C. Credit, Guarantee FundsCredit100,00075Guarantee Funds20,00015Subtotal120,00090D. Goods, Services and Inputs5,6444E. Vehicles80-Total Investment Costs131,17098II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and Allowances2,8802B. Operations and maintainance--Total Recurrent Costs2,8802Total PROJECT COSTS134,050100 
Description of selected enterprise models: 
29. 
RK-FINFA in various models. 
As already stated above, the end target of the above projects (WP) is the starting of (WOP) of 
Sorghum. KCEP CRAL has been supporting production and productivity of cereals including 
30. 
sorghum using the e-voucher facility. Farmers are desirous to expand production and productivity which 
obviously requires financing and that’s RK-FINFA comes in. If a typical beneficiary under KCEP CRAL, 
is to double productivity, the following working capital need and associated cost of financing emerges: 
If this beneficiary is enabled to access the financing at affordable cost, income change will increase 
from KES 18,000 WOP to revenue of KES 39,618 WP after accounting for the cost of financing. As a 
result of access to finance, the ongoing projects in Kenya have confirmed that farmers can be able to 
increase their yield level (production and productivity) from the end target of ongoing project (RK-FINFA) 
which is the WOP of RK FINFA of 2,500 Kgs to WP of 4,000 Kgs of sorghum. This  change will have 
significant impact on the beneficiaries’ livelihoods. 
31. 
The need for working capital; The above increase in production and productivity comes with 
need for working capital. This now brings in the justification for RK-FINFA. As it can be seen from above, 
it means to achieve that gross, farm costs would increase from KES 25,805 to KES 32,391. To afford 
this  change,  this  beneficiary  would  need  a  loan  in  the  region  of  KES  6,586  which  would  cost  that 
household a financial cost of around  KES 790after the project has brought in the targeted efficiency 
gains by bringing down the interest rate from a high of 18% to a low of 12% which is feasible. Even after 
factoring  in  this  financial  cost,  the  abridged  model  above  shows  the  beneficiary  would  remain  with 
positive cash flow which illustrates affordability. This working capital will be mainly needed for improved 
seeds, proper fertilizers hired labour and other agronomic inputs.  
32. 
Dairy goats.Under the closed SDCP, dairy goats were found to be viable investments. With 
improved access to finance, a typical beneficiary under SDCP can increase the herd up to  2 or even 
more. The model however has been based on a herd of 2 and the following working capital need and 
associated cost of financing will emerge. 
33. 
If this farmer is enabled to access the above financing at affordable cost of financing, income 
change will increase from KES 4,520 WOP to revenue of KES 74,706 WP after accounting for the cost 
of financing. As a result of access to finance, the ongoing projects in Kenya have confirmed that farmers 
can be able to increase their yield level (production and productivity) from the end target of ongoing 
project (RK-FINFA) which is the WOP of RK FINFA of 360 Litres to WP of 1,440 Litres of milk.  
 12 
The Republic of KenyaRural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) Unit/ Measure Yr 1Yr 2Yr 3Units Qty  Unit Price/ cost  Total- KES Qty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountAmountAmountSales(Revenue)2,500      20           50,000      3,250      20             65,000      3,750      20           75,000      4,000      20            80,000       65,000      75,000      80,000     Total costs25,805      32,391       34,474      27,133      32,391     Gross Margin before capex18,695      40,409       24,676      41,117      40,409     Cost of financing790           790          790         Net cash flow after capex23,886      40,327      39,618     Incremental Benefit with and without project5,191        21,632      20,924     Return to family labour*539            Discount rate13%NPV99,517       PVb377,087     PVc172,461     B/C ratio2.19           Switching values Benefits(0.54)          Switching values Costs1.19           SorghumWithout ProjectWith Project Year 0 Year 1Year 2Year 3Cost of Financing (KES)Financing needed for the increase in production or productivity:WOPWP Working capital needed  Cost of financing at 12% Working capital changes25,805         32,391     6,586       790             
The need for working capital. The above increase in production and productivity comes with 
34. 
need for working capital. This now brings in the justification for RK-FINFA. As it can be seen from above, 
it means to achieve that gross, farm costs would increase from KES 29,320 to KES 61,154. To afford 
this  change,  this  beneficiary  would  need  a  loan  in  the  region  of  KES  31,834  which  would  cost  that 
household a financial cost of around KES 3,820 after the project has brought in the targeted efficiency 
gains by bringing down the interest rate from a high of 18% to a low of 12% which is feasible. Even after 
factoring  in  this  financial  cost,  the  abridged  model  above  shows  the  beneficiary  would  remain  with 
positive cash flow which illustrates affordability.This working capital will be mainly needed for increasing 
the number of improved does and proper feeds. 
35. 
Dairy Cows. Still under the closed SDCP, dairy cow were also found to be viable investments. 
With  improved  access  to  finance,  a  typical  beneficiary  under  SDCP  can  increase  the  herd  up  to  2 
improved heifers or even more. The model however has been based on a herd of 2 and the following 
working capital need and associated cost of financing will emerge. 
36. 
If this farmer is enabled to access the above financing at affordable cost of financing, income 
change will increase from KES 56,589 WOP to revenue of KES 166,137 WP after accounting for the 
cost of financing. As a result of access to finance, the ongoing projects in Kenya have confirmed that 
farmers can be able to  increase their  yield level (production and productivity) from the end target of 
ongoing project (RK-FINFA) which is the WOP of RK FINFA of 5,400 Litres to WP of 10,800 Litres of 
milk per year.  
37. 
The need for working capital. The above increase in production and productivity comes with 
need for working capital. This now brings in the justification for RK-FINFA. As it can be seen from above, 
it means to achieve that gross, farm costs would increase from KES 118,047 to KES 216,661. To afford 
this  change,  this  beneficiary  would  need  a  loan  in  the  region  of  KES  98,614  which  would  cost  that 
household a financial cost of around KES 11,834 after the project has brought in the targeted efficiency 
gains by bringing down the interest rate from a high of 18% to a low of 12% which is feasible. Even after 
 13 
Republic of KenyaRural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) Unit/ Measure Yr 1Yr 2Yr 3Units Qty  Unit Price/ cost  Total- KES Qty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountAmountAmountSales(Revenue) MilkLtrs360        100         36,000       1,008     100        100,800      1,188      100         118,800      1,440      100          144,000      100,800      118,800      144,000      Total costs29,320       103,394      59,894       61,154       103,394      59,894       61,154       Gross Margin before capex4,520         78,526       (5,618)        55,342       78,526       Cost for Financing3,820         3,820         3,820         Net cash flow after capex(9,438)        51,522       74,706       Incremental Benefit with and without project(38,758)      22,202       45,386       Return to family labour*785                      Discount rate13%NPV152,352                IRR /a89%PVb697,348                PVc366,228                B/C ratio1.90                     Switching values Benefits(0.47)                    Switching values Costs0.90                     Dairy GoatWithout ProjectWith Project Year 0 Year 1Year 2Year 3Cost of Financing (KES)Financing needed for the increase in production or productivity:WOPWP Working capital needed  Cost of financing at 12% Working capital changes29,320                     61,154     31,834     3,820           Republic of KenyaRural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) Unit/ Measure Yr 1Yr 2Yr 3Units Qty  Unit Price/ cost  Total- KES Qty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountAmountAmountSales(Revenue) MilkLtrs5,400      42              226,800      8,100       42             340,200      9,720      42           408,240      10,800    42            453,600      340,200      408,240      453,600      Total costs118,047      329,981      211,261      216,661      329,981      211,261      216,661      Gross Margin before capex56,589       177,971      (34,007)      143,908      177,971      Cost for Financing11,834       11,834       11,834       Net cash flow after capex(45,841)      132,074      166,137      Incremental Benefit with and without project(102,430)     75,485       109,548      Return to family labour*890                      Discount rate13%NPV227,704                IRR /a82%PVb2,010,744             PVc1,264,669             B/C ratio1.59                     Switching values Benefits(0.37)                    Switching values Costs0.59                     Dairy CowWithout ProjectWith Project Year 0 Year 1Year 2Year 3 
factoring  in  this  financial  cost,  the  abridged  model  above  shows  the  beneficiary  would  remain  with 
positive cash flow which illustrates affordability.This working capital will be mainly needed for increasing 
the number of more improved heifers and proper feeds. 
38. 
Chicken Layers. Under the livelihood component of Upper Tana project, poultry enterprise is 
proving  successful.  With  many  chances  for  a  typical  beneficiary  to  expand  the  operation  if  allowed 
access to finance and that’s where RK-FINFA comes in to compliment. While Upper Tana has enabled 
these beneficiaries to have a 150 bird farm size, if allowed access to finance, these beneficiaries could 
go up to 500 birds or even more hence enhancing egg production. This analysis assumes an increase 
from the 150 bird farm size that Upper Tana Project has managed to support the beneficiaries to 500 
birds which is feasible.  
If this farmer is enabled to access the financing at affordable cost, income change will increase 
39. 
from KES 28,000 WOP to revenue of KES 210,000 WP after accounting for the cost of financing. As a 
result ofaccess to finance, the ongoing projects in Kenya have confirmed that farmers can be able to 
increase their yield level (production and productivity) from the end target of ongoing project (RK-FINFA) 
which is the WOP of RK FINFA of 800 trays of eggs to WP of 2900 trays of eggs due to the increase in 
number  of  bird  farm  size.  This  change  will  have  significant  impact  on  the  beneficiaries’  livelihoods. 
40. 
The need for working capital; The above increase in production and productivity comes with 
need for working capital. This now brings in the justification for RK-FINFA. As can be seen from above, 
it means to achive that gross, farm costs would increase from KES 221,099 to KES 474,762. To afford 
this change, this beneficiary  would need a  loan in the region of KES 253,663  which  would cost that 
household a financial cost of around KES 30,440 after the project has brought in the targeted efficiency 
gains by bringing down the interest rate from a high of 18% to a low of 12% which is feasible. Even after 
factoring  in  this  financial  cost,  the  abridged  model  above  shows  the  beneficiary  would  remain  with 
positive cash flow which illustrates affordability.This working capital will be mainly needed for increasing 
the number of birds, improved proper feeds. 
41. 
Tomatoes.Tomatoes  crop  model  has  been  used  as  a  representative  of  horticulture 
enterprise.Horticulture  enterprises  are  quick  yielding  investments  and  usually  farmers  would  go  for 
 14 
Cost of Financing (KES)Financing needed for the increase in production or productivity:WOPWP Working capital needed  Cost of financing at 12% Working capital changes118,047                   216,661   98,614         11,834         The Republic of KenyaKenya Rural Finance Project (KRFP EFA template)Broilers Chicken Model (500)YIELDS AND INPUTSITEMS UNITPRICE(KES)Year 1Year 2Year 3Year 4Year 5Year 6Year 7Year 8Year 9Year 10Main productionChicksNumber150            300            400            500            500            500            500            500            500            500            500            Total number of trays of eggs expected per batchtrays146            291            388            485            484.52      484.52      484.52      484.52      484.52      484.52      484.52      Main production revenueNet available trays of eggs per year215,413    430,826    574,937    717,324    717,324    717,324    717,324    717,324    717,324    717,324    717,324    Net available production- off layers33,750      33,750      135,000    180,158    224,775    224,775    224,775    224,775    224,775    224,775    224,775    Total revenue249,163   215,413   574,937   717,324   717,324   717,324   717,324   717,324   717,324   717,324   717,324   Total investment & labour costs221,099    451,929    448,504    474,762    489,762    474,762    474,762    489,762    474,762    474,762    489,762    Cost of Financing30,440      30,440      30,440      30,440      30,440      30,440      30,440      30,440      30,440      30,440      Gross Margin after CAPEX28,063      (266,955)  95,993      212,123    197,123    212,123    212,123    197,123    212,123    212,123    197,123    Additional benefits (Incremental Income )(488,055)  95,993      212,123    197,123    212,123    212,123    197,123    212,123    212,123    197,123    Income (before labour costs)-             (432,375)  151,673    267,803    252,803    267,803    267,803    252,803    267,803    267,803    252,803    Return to family labour*1,061                        *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate13%NPV @ 0.13148414,899                   IRR34%NPVb3,314,654                NPVc2,540,149                B/C ratio1.30                          Switching values Benefits-23%Switching values Costs30% WOP WITH PROJECTCost of Financing (KES)Financing needed for the increase in production or productivity:WOPWP Working capital needed  Cost of financing at 12% Working capital changes221,099                 474,762        253,663   30,440      
credit to finance both increase in productivity and production. In the model used in this analysis, with 
improved access to better seeds, agronomic inputs, payment for hired labour, Upper Tana project has 
demonstrated that on one hectare farm of tomato, yields can improve from 5,000 kg to 10,000 kg, but 
this would require working capital to have this kind of change. 
If this farmer is enabled to access the above financing at affordable cost of financing, income 
42. 
change will increase from KES 88,000 WOP to revenue of KES 290,000 WP after accounting for the 
cost of financing. As a result of access to finance, the ongoing projects in Kenya have confirmed that 
farmers can be able to  increase their  yield level (production and productivity) from the end target of 
ongoing  project  (RK-FINFA)  which  is  the  WOP  of  RK  FINFA  of  5,000  kgs  to  WP  of  10,000  Kgs  of 
tomatoes. This change will have significant impact on the beneficiaries’ livelihoods. 
43. 
The need for working capital; The above increase in production and productivity comes with 
need for working capital. This now brings in the justification for RK-FINFA. As it can be seen from above, 
it means to achieve that gross, farm costs would increase from KES 157,080 to KES 274,593. To afford 
this change,  this  beneficiary  would need a loan  in the region of KES 117,513  which  would cost that 
household a financial cost of around KES 14,102 after the project has brought in the targeted efficiency 
gains by bringing down the interest rate from a high of 18% to a low of 12% which is feasible. Even after 
factoring  in  this  financial  cost,  the  abridged  model  above  shows  the  beneficiary  would  remain  with 
positive cash flow which illustrates affordability. This working capital will be mainly needed for improved 
inputs. 
labour 
seeds, 
agronomic 
fertilizers 
proper 
other 
hired 
and 
44. 
Nineteen  (19)  enterprise  models  have  been  run  similar  to  the  above  description  which  also 
shows  financial  viability,  if  target  beneficiaries  are  allowed  affordable  access  to  finance.  These  are 
included in the detailed worksheet. 
 15 
The Republic of KenyaRural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) Unit/ Measure Units Qty  Unit Price/ cost  Total- KES Qty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountSales(Revenue)kgs5,000       60            300,000       6,250       60            375,000       7,500        60             450,000       10,000     60              600,000       Total costs157,080       217,148       224,704       274,593       Gross Margin before capex88,920         265,407       Cost of FinancingNet cash flow after capexIncremental Benefit with and without projectReturn to family labour*2,965             Discount rate13%NPV688,329         PVb1,608,049      PVc1,218,888      B/C ratio1.32               Switching values Benefits(0.24)              Switching values Costs0.32               TomatoWithout ProjectWith Project Year 0 Year 1Year 2Year 3Cost of Financing (KES)Financing needed for the increase in production or productivity:WOPWP Working capital needed  Cost of financing at 12% Working capital changes157,080         274,593   117,513   14,102          
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures  
1. Introduction 
The Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Annex details 
1. 
the analysis of the social, environmental and climate change risks and opportunities of RK-
FINFA  project.  The  Annex  outlines  the  contextual  background  and  recommends  risk 
management  and  opportunities  maximisation  measures.  It  has  been  produced  mainly 
using  literature  review  of  county  and  national  strategies,  surveys  conducted  by  other 
organisations  and  development  partners  as  well  as  the  SECAP  documents  produced  for 
on-going IFAD financed projects. The environment and climate change analysis also drew 
on the national commitments and targets from the multilateral conventions. Primary data 
was collected during discussions with potential beneficiaries from on-going IFAD financed 
projects, Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) and officers from Government Agencies. 
No site visits to potential intervention areas were conducted due to the remote nature of 
the design. However, the engagement will be continued throughout the project life cycle 
particularly through the sensitization, planning and review sessions with PFIs and end line 
beneficiaries during the selection, monitoring and reporting processes. 
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts 
2.1 Socio-economic and nutritional assessment 
2. 
Overall poverty situation - Kenya has experienced relatively fast growth since 
2000 that has translated into gains in the fight to reduce poverty, with about 4.5 million 
Kenyans  escaping  poverty  between  2005/6  and  2015/16.    In  that  period,  poverty, 
measured as people under the national poverty line, declined from 46.8% to 36.1% of the 
population. Poverty declined considerably in rural areas, from about 50% in 2005-06 to 
38.8%  in  2015-16,  largely  accounting  for  the  reduction  at  the  national  level.  Although 
trends in household food security (availability, accessibility and stability) have generally 
improved over the last three decades in Kenya, food insecurity continues to persist due to 
the  stagnation  of  agricultural  production,  low  use  of  agricultural  technology,  high  food 
prices,  frequent  disasters  and  the  effects  of  climate  change  on  the  mainly  rain-fed 
agriculture  and  a  decline  in  resilience  of  pastoral  livelihoods,  especially  in  the  northern 
frontier counties. The food security situation is further affected by seasonality, with rapid 
deterioration  during  drought  years  resulting  in  emergency  levels  of  acute  malnutrition. 
The demographics of the initial 14 target counties of RK-FINFA are presented in the table 
below, illustrating a predominantly rural population in the counties and the poverty index.  
No
. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Table 1: Demographic details on the target counties1  
County 
Population 
Kenya  
47,564,29
6 
Number  of 
Households 
Household 
Size 
Land 
Area  
(Sq. Km) 
Population 
Density 
Poverty 
Index 
(%)   
Percentage2 
Rural 
Population 
Rural 
Population 
Rural 
Youth 
Population 
%  Youth 
to  Rural 
Population 
45.2 
72.0 
34,246,293 
12,143,913  3.9 
580,876  82 
Bungoma 
1,670,570 
358,796 
Busia 
Embu 
893,681 
608,599 
198,152 
182,743 
Kakamega 
1,867,579 
433,207 
4.6 
4.5 
3.3 
4.3 
Kirinyaga 
610,411 
204,188 
3.0  
Kisii 
1,266,860 
308,054 
Machakos 
1,421,932 
402,466 
Meru 
Nakuru 
1,545,714 
426,360 
2,162,202 
616,046 
10  Nandi 
11  Nyeri 
12  Siaya 
885,711 
759,164 
993,183 
13 
14 
Tharaka Nithi  393,177 
Trans Nzoia 
990,341 
199,426 
248,050 
250,698 
109,860 
223,808 
4.1 
3.5 
3.6 
3.5 
4.4 
3.0  
3.9 
3.6 
4.4 
3,024 
1,696 
2,821 
3,020 
1,478 
1,323 
6,043 
7,006 
7,462 
2,856 
3,325 
2,530 
2,564 
2,495 
552 
527 
216 
618 
413 
958 
235 
221 
290 
310 
228 
393 
153 
397 
47.3 
60.4 
35.3 
49.2 
25.2 
51.4 
24.1 
31.0 
33.5 
40.7 
27.6 
38.2 
41.0 
52.8 
88.6 
87.3 
87.5 
90.1 
77.7 
88.0 
70.9 
91.0 
51.6 
93.3 
80.1 
91.4 
91.7 
82.0 
1,480,125 
508,873 
780,184 
532,524 
270,310 
183,966 
1,682,689 
562,951 
474,289 
154,258 
1,114,837 
385,983 
1,008,150 
341,565 
1,406,600 
496,628 
1,115,696 
415,829 
826,368 
608,090 
907,769 
360,543 
812,080 
306,008 
184,772 
302,968 
121,531 
279,758 
34.4 
34.6 
34.5 
33.5 
32.5 
34.6 
33.9 
35.3 
37.3 
37.0 
30.4 
33.4 
33.7 
34.4 
1 Kenya 2019 Population Census 
2 https:www.citypopulation.de/en/Kenya/admin/eastern/16_embu (“the county”) – 2019 
3. 
Gender – Kenya has made significant progress over the years in the advancement 
of  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment.  Women  constitute  about  51%  of  the 
Kenyan  population.  The  Global  Gender  Gap  Index  2020  of  the  World  Economic  Forum 
placed  Kenya  at  position  109  out  of  153  countries.  The  2010  constitution,  Vision  2030, 
national gender policies and other programs support gender equality. Similarly, the Public 
Procurement Act of 2015 reserves 30% of public procurement opportunities for women, 
youth and persons with disabilities (PWD). The government-established Women Enterprise 
Fund (2009) and the Uwezo Fund (2014), in which a number of banks are participating, 
will merge into the newly established Biashara (business) Fund, aimed to consolidate reach 
to  smallholders,  women,  youth  and  other  vulnerable  groups.  Nevertheless,  entrenched 
socio-cultural  norms  and  attitudes  continue  to  disadvantage  women  in  Kenya. 
Discrimination in land  ownership  and  property  rights  are  the  main  barriers  in  access  to 
finance. Female farmers and entrepreneurs in agriculture lack access to credit, resources 
and business assets, high cost  of  credit while gender norms and intra-household power 
relations  influence  women’s  control  over  resources  and  decision-making  power  in  their 
households and the community. Only 59% of women borrowed from a credit source and 
cannot in most cases decide alone how that credit would be used. Women usually receive 
credit  from  informal  sources,  such  as  friends,  relatives  and  merry-go-rounds.  Lack  of 
control  over  income  and  time-use  and  heavy  workload  for  women  and  lack  of  women’s 
leadership  and  decision  making  over  economic  activities  continue  to  be  among  the 
challenges faced by women. There is a hesitance to borrow from formal lenders, such as 
banks, because of a fear of repossession of property in case of a default3.  
Women typically receive less than 10% of the credit awarded to smallholders and 
4. 
only 1% of the total credit directed to agriculture. This is much lower for younger women 
and  those  with  disability,  who  have  no  access  to  assets.  This  limits  women’s  economic 
growth4  and is one of the root causes of poverty. Gender Based Violence (GBV) at 45%, 
disparities  in  labour  force  participation  (men  77.35%  and  women  72.51%5),  unequal 
workloads and unequal participation in decision making further exacerbate the situation 
for women.  At the same time, women face challenges in access to commercial and formal 
credit  services.  Women  are  often  unable  to  meet  loan  conditions,  specifically  collateral 
requirements. Many financial institutions lack confidence in businesses owned by women 
or  have  inefficiencies  in  collateral  registration  processes.  Women  are  seen  to  lack 
management skills, due to relatively low levels of education and technical skills especially 
in the rural areas. They often lack proper business financial records and their capacity to 
prepare viable business plans is limited.  
5. 
In summary, the success of women in agribusiness is not only determined by the 
level  of  access  to  credit,  resources  and  business  assets,  but  also  by  gendered-specific 
behaviour and roles, which influences women’s decision-making power and control around 
the available resources and business assets. Tackling the inequalities that exist between 
men and women therefore also requires a change in gendered perceptions, attitudes and 
practice by all actors. It should be noted that, available evidence indicates women-owned 
small  businesses  have  the  lowest  proportion  of  non-performing loans,  much  lower  than 
the proportion among men, showing that women and women-owned businesses are more 
prudent borrowers than their male counterparts. 
Youth  –  Around  35.7  million  Kenyans  (75.1%)  are  below  35  years,  and 
6. 
32.73 million  (68.9%)  live  in  rural  areas,  with  unemployment  rate  at  39%6.  The 
3https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/empowering_women_in_agribusiness_through_social_behaviour_ch
ange_kenya_vietnam.pdf 
4 https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/kenya-country-gender-note-for-kenya-in-the-context-of-the-bank-csp-2014-
2018-mid-term-review-is-gender-a-number-one-poverty-issue-107493  
5 World Bank Data Atlas 
6 2019 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) National Census 
Government  has  put  in  place  various  legal,  institutional  and  policy  frameworks  and 
institutions to empower the youth. These include the State Department in charge of youth, 
the  Kenya  Youth  Employment  and  Opportunities  Project,  the  National  Youth  Council, 
National  Youth  Service,  the  Youth  Enterprise  Fund,  among  others.  The  Kenya  Youth 
Development Policy (2019) and Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy (2017) underscore the 
importance  of  positioning  the  youth  at  the  forefront  of  agricultural  growth  and 
transformation for national development. The Government is keen to support the youth’s 
involvement in agri-businesses through access to innovative agricultural technologies and 
integrated  use  of  ICT7.  Currently,  over  one  million  young  people  enter  into  the  labour 
market annually having either dropped out of school or completed high school and are not 
enrolled  in  any  institution  of  higher  learning  or  lack  requisite  skills.  Despite  few 
opportunities in the job market, agriculture is not considered by the youth as a preferred 
business option largely because majority of farmers practice traditional farming methods 
or operate poorly remunerated rural enterprises that do not lead to decent livelihoods. As 
a result, the youth perceive agriculture only as a second best option or a career of last 
resort8. 
Youth are 33% less likely to have a savings account than adults and 44% less likely 
7. 
to save in a formal institution. In Kenya, despite the low account uptake rate among female 
youth, they save as much or more compared to male youth9. Younger youth save more 
than  the  older,  because  younger  youth  withdraw  less  money  from  their  accounts  than 
older  youth.  However,  working  with  youth  would  pose  challenges  because  they  would 
require an adult guarantor to enable them to open a bank account or to borrow money. 
By  the  age  of  18,  almost  a  third  have  mobile  money  accounts.  Youths  are  attracted  to 
financial  institutions  that  reach  out  to  them.  Evidence  indicates  direct  outreach 
programmes by financial institutions in locations where the youth gather facilitate overall 
account  uptake.  Challenges  affecting  youth  access  to  affordable  finance  include  limited 
financial literacy, limited incomes, lack of a savings culture and lack of access to land and 
assets for use as collateral, making it difficult for young people to achieve their potential 
and to access the opportunities available, especially the agriculture value chains, which 
are dominated by older farmers. 
8. 
Other  constraining  factors  for  the  youth  include  the  negative  perceptions  of 
financial service providers (FSPs) regarding youth in agriculture, lack of desirable products 
to attract youth and lack of FSP capacity to service rural youth. Young people have the 
potential to contribute and benefit from the higher levels of the agricultural value chain 
through  creation  of  jobs  and  employment.  Therefore,  improving  access  to  finance 
especially  using  digital platforms  can  lead  to  increased  participation of  young  people  in 
off-farm activities as intermediaries, brokers and market-information agents. In particular, 
young women are increasingly taking part in off-farm opportunities, including operating 
retail shops and organising transport activities for agricultural produce. Such activities are 
especially  suitable  for  young  women  because  they  provide  them  with  employment 
opportunities closer to their homes.  
9. 
Indigenous  peoples  -  In  Kenya,  the  people  who  identify  with  the  indigenous 
groups  are  estimated  to  number  approximately  79,000,  and  are  found  among  the 
pastoralist communities of Turkana, Rendille, Borana, Maasai, Samburu, Ilchamus, Somali, 
Gabra,  Pokot  and  Endorois  communities,  mainly  living  in  the  Arid  and  Semi-Arid  Lands 
(ASALs). Few of these groups are within the IFAD-supported projects’ catchment areas. 
They  regularly  experience  land  tenure  and  food  insecurity,  poor  service  delivery,  weak 
political  representation,  as  well  as  general  discrimination  and  exclusion.10  Kenya  has  no 
specific legislation governing indigenous peoples and abstained from voting when the UN 
7 https://ict.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Kenya-Youth-Development-Policy-2019.pdf  
8 2017 Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy 
9 https://sparkassenstiftung-easternafrica.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Youths___Savings.pdf 
10 https://www.iwgia.org/en/kenya 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) was adopted by the UN General 
Assembly in 2007. Kenya has yet to ratify the ILO Convention 169 on indigenous and tribal 
peoples.  However,  the  2010  Constitution  specifically  recognises  minorities  and 
marginalized  communities  as  a  result  of  various  historical  processes,  with  specific 
reference to indigenous peoples and guarantees protection of minorities and marginalized 
groups. Despite these progressive constitutional provisions, indigenous peoples continue 
to suffer as a result of the State’s lack of compliance with these provisions and with legal 
rulings on land issues. Moreover, the principle of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) 
remains a dream for indigenous peoples in Kenya11. 
10.  Marginalised groups - Kenya is a country of great ethnic, linguistic, cultural and 
religious diversity. The 2010 Constitution guarantees the rights of minorities, such as the 
Nubians  and  Somalis.  However,  access  to  basic  services  and  opportunities  remains  a 
challenge.  Although  the  relationship  has  generally  been  one  of  tolerance,  divisions 
between  Christians  and  Muslims  are  of  growing  significance.  In  recent  years  political 
conflict on ethnic lines has increased, exacerbated by the combination of divisive politicics 
and  economic  decline.  Particularly  vulnerable  minorities  include  Muslims  and  nomadic 
pastoralists such as Somali and Maasai. Others include Persons Living with HIV and AIDS 
and Persons Living with Disabilities (PWDs), who are estimated to represent around 4.6 
per cent of the whole population in Kenya. More PWDs live in rural than in urban areas. A 
quarter of PWDs work on family farms or MSMEs but about a third are unemployed.12 As 
the other marginalised people, PWDs often face challenges in accessing education, health 
care and financial services and are vulnerable to food insecurity and hunger.  To address 
this, PWDs access grants and loans from the Government National Council of PWDs and 
the Uwezo Fund. 
11. 
Nutrition  -  Malnutrition  in  Kenya  is  characterized  by  the  coexistence  of  (i) 
undernutrition  as  manifested  by  stunting,  wasting,  underweight;  (ii)  micronutrient 
deficiencies;  and  (iii)  overweight  and  obesity  including  diet-related  non-communicable 
diseases13. Out of 7.22 million children under five, nearly 1.9 million are stunted (26 per 
cent); 290,000 wasted (4 per cent); and 794,000 (11 per cent) underweight14. There are 
notable  geographical  and  social  demographic  variations  in  the  severity  of  malnutrition.  
Out of the 47 counties, nine have prevalence of stunting above 30%, a level categorized 
as  “severe”  and  of  public  health  significance.  Annual  costs  for  malnutrition  related  to 
health, education and labour productivity are estimated between 1.9% and 16.5% GDP. 
Further,  the  risk  of  overweight/obesity  and  diet-related  non-communicable  diseases  in 
adults  is  rising15.  A  total  of  28%  of  adults  aged  18–69 years  were  either  overweight  or 
obese,  with  the  prevalence  for  women  at  38.5% and  men  17.5%.  On  the  other  hand, 
considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  reducing  the  prevalence  of  micronutrient 
deficiencies, except for zinc deficiency. The prevalence of anaemia was highest in pregnant 
women  (41.6  per  cent),  followed  by  children  of  6–59  months  (26.3%)  and  school–age 
children (5–14 years) at 16.5%. An analysis on breastfeeding and complimentary feeding 
shows  remarkable  improvement,  with  81%of  breastfed  children  aged  6–9  months 
receiving complementary foods in addition to breastfeeding16. On dietary diversity, 95%of 
adults  aged  18–69  years  did  not  consume  the  World  Health  Organisation  (WHO)  daily 
recommended five servings of fruits and/or vegetables; fruits were consumed on average 
about 2.4 days in a week, and vegetables were consumed five days in a week17. 
11 Ibid 
12 Kenya National Survey for PWDs, preliminary report, 2007 
13 Kenya National Nutrition Action Plan 2018-2022 
14 Kenya Health Demographic Survey (KDHS) 2014  
15 Kenya National Nutrition Action Plan 2018-2022 
16 KDHS 2014 
17 Kenya National Nutrition Action Plan 2018-2022 
The  underlying  causes  for  the  above  are  food  insecurity  including  availability, 
12. 
economic access and use of food; feeding and care practices at individual, household and 
community level; environment; and poor access to and use of health services18. The basic 
causes of malnutrition, which act on the macro level include issues such as knowledge and 
education  (literacy),  politics  and  governance,  leadership,  infrastructure  and  financial 
resources. Therefore, addressing the forms of malnutrition at all three levels of causation 
requires actions that have the potential to improve nutrition outcomes across the spectrum 
through integrated initiatives, policies and programmes. 
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications 
13. 
Environmental  assessment  –  This  section  focuses  on  the  environment  and 
natural resources context of the initial 14 counties that RK-FINFA will be implemented in: 
Bungoma,  Busia,  Embu,  Kakamega,  Kirinyaga,  Kisii,  Machakos,  Meru,  Nakuru,  Nandi, 
Nyeri, Siaya, Tharaka Nithi and Trans-Nzoia. 
14. 
Bungoma  County  is  within  the  Lake  Victoria  Basin  and includes  Mt.  Elgon  whose 
forest  ecosystems  are  critical  in  the  hydrological  cycle,  local  biodiversity  and  plant 
production. The County encompasses six agro ecological zones suitable for crops such as 
cotton,  coffee,  sugarcane,  maize,  beans,  tea,  Irish  potatoes,  tomatoes  and  onions. 
Environmental degradation in the county has resulted in reduced crop yields and animal 
productivity and loss of biodiversity. The main causes of degradation include sub-optimal 
agricultural practices, deforestation through illegal logging and soil erosion. Busia County 
also mostly falls within the Lake Victoria Basin with peneplain marked by low flat divides 
and a shallowly incised swampy drainage system. Its vegetation includes medium altitude 
forest as well as grass and wooded savannas with diverse wildlife.19 Major land uses are 
crop production and livestock farming. The main causes of environmental degradation are 
sub-optimal agricultural practices and expansive agriculture. Embu County is covered by 
two distinct agro-climatic profiles on the windward side of Mt. Kenya, from cold and wet 
upper zones to hot and dry lower zones in the Tana River Basin. The main contributors to 
environmental  degradation  in  the  county  include,  sand  harvesting,  land  degradation, 
deforestation especially in farming areas, illegal logging and charcoal burning. 
 Kakamega County has two main ecological zones, the Upper and Lower Medium. 
15. 
The former covers the Central and Northern parts of the county with intensive maize, tea, 
beans and horticultural cultivation. The Lower Medium, covers mainly the southern part 
and  economic  activity  is  predominantly  sugarcane  production  along  with  maize,  sweet 
potatoes, tea, groundnuts and cassava production. Environmental degradation is caused 
by poor waste management, quarrying, sub-optimal land use practices and encroachment 
on the gazetted forest land, hill tops and slopes. Kirinyaga County three ecological zones, 
lowland, midland and highland areas. The lowland area is characterized by gentle rolling 
plains while the highland area covers the whole of the mountain area. The County is well 
endowed with a thick, indigenous forest with unique types of trees covering Mt. Kenya and 
is inhabited by a variety of wildlife. The lower parts of the forest zone provide grazing land 
for livestock. Agriculture is the most important activity and main crops include rice, tea, 
coffee,  bananas,  tomatoes,  beans,  mangoes,  maize  and  other  horticultural  crops.  The 
major causes of environmental degradation are deforestation, poor solid waste disposal, 
cultivation  along  river  banks  by  the  community,  and  pollution  from  industries  and 
farmers20.  Kisii  County  has  three  ecological  zones,  the  most  dominant  being  the  Upper 
Midland, Lower Highland and Lower Midland. The County’s main food crops include maize, 
beans, finger millet, bananas, sweet potatoes, cassava, arrow roots, sorghum, tomatoes, 
carrots,  avocados  and  vegetables  while  cash  crops  include  coffee,  tea,  pyrethrum  and 
18 World Health Organization, & The World Bank, 2012 
19 Busia County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022 
20 Kirinyaga County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022 
sugarcane21. The main causes of environmental degradation are cultivation on fragile areas 
such  as  steep  slopes,  wetlands,  riparian  reserves  and  quarrying  activities  for  hard  core 
and  ballast. Deforestation,  raw  discharges  of  effluent  and  poor  farming  practices  cause 
loss  of  biodiversity  and  leave  the  soil  bare  making  it  prone  to  soil  erosion.  The  water 
catchment areas have been degraded by logging. 
16. 
Machakos  County  is  covered  by  seven  agro  ecological  zones  suitable  for  maize, 
beans, dairy, coffee, mangoes, pigeon pea, cow peas and indigenous poultry. The County 
is  the  largest  national  exporter  of  sand,  the  harvesting  of  which  results in  drying  up  of 
some rivers. Apart from the sand harvesting, environmental degradation is also caused by 
industrial discharges, emissions from factories and industries and deforestation, linked to 
charcoal burning. Meru County has varied ecological zones ranging from upper highlands, 
lower highlands, upper midlands and lower midlands. The major land use in the County is 
agriculture,  both  crop  farming  and  livestock-keeping.  The  crops  include  wheat,  barley, 
potatoes, millet, sorghum, maize, high grade tea, coffee, bananas and miraa (khat). The 
main causes of environmental degradation include sub-optimal farming practices, mining 
and overstocking of livestock. The major degraded areas within the County comprise of 
river,  hill  and  forest  ecosystems22.    Nakuru  County  includes  the  Mau  Escarpment  that 
contains forests and the source of Njoro River that drains into Lake  Nakuru,  one of the 
tourist  attraction  sites  in  Kenya.  The  County  has  13  agro  ecological  zones  suitable  for 
maize, beans, Irish potato, wheat, dairy, poultry, barley and horticulture. Environmental 
degradation in the County mainly results from sub-optimal farming methods, poor solid 
and  liquid  waste  disposal,  soil  erosion,  inadequate  sanitary  facilities,  deforestation  for 
firewood, encroachment of forest reserves and  land clearing for agricultural use. Use of 
agro-chemicals leads to water pollution through the effluent discharge. 
17. 
Nandi County has minimal variation among the five agro-ecological zones that are 
suitable  for  dairy,  maize,  wheat,  pyrethrum,  barley  and  coffee.  The  main  causes  of 
environmental  degradation  include  deforestation,  poor  waste  management,  unplanned 
settlement and development and discharge of industrial effluents. Nyeri County has two 
forest eco-systems, Aberdare and Mt. Kenya, which play vital roles such as maintenance 
of water cycle, wildlife habitat and are also repository of a wide range of biodiversity. The 
main cultivated food crops are maize, beans, Irish potatoes and vegetables while the major 
cash  crops  are  coffee,  tea  and  horticulture.  Main  causes  of  environmental  degradation 
include cultivation on fragile areas such as steep slopes, wetlands, riparian reserves and 
quarrying  activities  that  lead  to  landslides  and  soil  erosion  hence  reduced  productivity. 
Overall natural resources ability to support the population has declined e.g. reduced farm 
productivity due to soil erosion, over cultivation of the land, increased scarcity of resources 
such  as  water,  grazing  lands  and  arable  area23.  Siaya  County  geomorphology  includes 
Dissected Uplands, Moderate Lowlands and Yala Swamp with different relief, soils and land 
use  patterns.24  Its  forest  vegetation  provides  natural  habitat  for  birds  and  indigenous 
plants. The County is also home to the Lake Kanyaboli National Reserve, which is part of 
the Yala swamp complex. 25 The main land use is small-scale agriculture. The main causes 
of environmental degradation are the sub-optimal agricultural practices, deforestation and 
land  clearing  for  agricultural  purposes.  Tharaka-Nithi  County  has  two  main  ecological 
zones,  the  highlands,  which  receive  adequate  rainfall  for  agriculture  and  the  semi-arid 
(lower  zone)  that  receives  less  rainfall  and  is  therefore  more  suitable  for  livestock 
production.  The  main  causes  of  environmental  degradation  include  sub-optimal  farming 
and  soil  conservation  methods,  poor  waste  management  practices,  logging,  charcoal 
burning and clearing of land for agricultural activities. Strong winds also result in erosion 
and reduced soil infertility. Trans Nzoia County has three main agro-ecological zones. The 
21 Kisii County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022 
22 Meru County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
23 Nyeri County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
24 Siaya County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
Upper Highland is suitable for sheep and dairy farming, while the Lower highland is suitable 
for  Pyrethrum,  wheat,  tea,  maize,  barley,  sunflower,  coffee  and  horticulture  as  well  as 
cattle  and  sheep  rearing.  The  Upper  Midland  is  suitable  for  maize,  sunflower,  coffee, 
wheat, barley and horticulture as well as dairy, beef and sheep. Environmental degradation 
within the County is mainly caused by  sub-optimal farming practices,  deforestation and 
soil erosion.  
18. 
As noted above, most Counties face the challenges of environmental degradation 
resulting from sub-optimal agricultural practices, encroachment in forests, slopes and hills, 
poor  waste  management  and  land  clearing  for  agricultural  production.  Therefore  the 
investments  from  RK-FINFA  would  have  to  provide  support  and  incentives  to  the 
beneficiaries to help address these current challenges. In addition the knowledge of the 
beneficiaries will have to be enhanced to improve the management of natural resources 
while improving their agricultural productivity and building on their traditional knowledge. 
Investment advice will be required for the beneficiaries to make informed decisions that 
will benefit their livelihoods in the medium and long term. The ASALs, that include parts 
of Embu, Machakos, Meru, Nyeri and Tharaka Nithi Counties for the initial coverage of the 
RK-FINFA,  need  particular  attention.  Investments  in  livestock  may  increase  land 
degradation in some of these regions due to increased pressure on the natural resources 
and overgrazing resulting in soil fertility decline and reduced availability of quality pasture 
(GoK, 2019b; GoK and IFAD, 2019). Therefore measures to reverse current trends of land 
degradation will have to be factored into the investments and portfolios in these Counties.  
19. 
Climate trends and impacts – This section presents the historic climate trends, 
future projections and implications as well as the current responses to climate change in 
the initial 14 countries of RK-FINFA.  
20. 
Bungoma County’s erratic and unpredictable weather patterns, particularly rainfall, 
have resulted in declines in volumes of species of indigenous flora and fauna and terrestrial 
and  freshwater  biodiversity.  These  patterns  have  negatively  impacted  agriculture 
productivity  and  provision  of  ecosystems  services  leading  to  increased  food  insecurity. 
Busia  County’s  future  climate  projections  show  an  increase  in  intense  precipitation 
resulting  in  increased  flooding  risk.  The  increase  in  temperature  and  greater  rainfall 
variability  will  affect  wildfires  with  the  fire  season  likely  to  increase  in  duration  and 
severity. Embu County has experienced increased temperatures, heat and moisture stress 
from  dry  spells  and  excessive  rainfall,  which  increasingly  compromise  the  agricultural 
activities of smallholder farmers. Kakamega County’s mean temperatures have increased 
by approximately 0.4 and 0.3°C for the first and second agricultural seasons respectively 
and  resulted  in  a  moderate  increase  in  heat  stress  days  during  these  periods.  Rainfall 
variability  from  year  to  year  has  also  increased,  resulting  in  an  increased  risk  and 
uncertainty  of  occurrence  of  floods  and  droughts.  In  Kirinyaga  County,  future  climate 
projections identify a likely increase in temperature and  rainfall variability. Wildfires are 
likely to increase in duration and severity.  An increase in intense precipitation due to the 
effects  of  climate  change  is  also  expected  to  increase  flood  occurrence.  Kisii  County’s 
future climate projections show an increase in temperature and rainfall variations. Wildfire 
season  is  likely  to  increase  in  duration  and  severity  of  fires.  Machakos  County  has 
experienced mean temperature increase that are more pronounced in the first agricultural 
season. Precipitation  trends depict a decline, which is more pronounced during the first 
season,  where  it  is  about  25  mm.  This  trend  is  projected  to  continue  and  thus  affect 
agricultural productivity.  
21. 
Meru  County  climate  change  projections  depict  an  increase  in  temperature  and 
rainfall  variability  altering  the  slope  and  bedrock  stability  in  some  areas.  The  wildfire 
season is likely to increase in duration and intensity.  Nakuru County has endured extreme 
weather  conditions  like  flooding,  heavy  rains  and  drought.  Mean  temperatures  are 
projected to increase by 0.3ºC, with the first agricultural season projected to experience 
even greater changes. Precipitation is projected to increase by 0.3% and 6% in the first 
and  second  wet  season  respectively.  Nandi  County  usually  experiences  dry  spells  and 
mean  temperatures  have  been  increasing  gradually.  These  trends  will  continue  in  the 
future and therefore affect agricultural productivity. Nyeri County’s future climate entails 
an increase in temperature and rainfall variability. The wildfires are expected to increase 
and be more severe.  Siaya County’s future climate projections show an increase in intense 
precipitation with flooding more likely to occur. Wildfires ae also expected to increase both 
in frequency and intensity due to increase in temperature and rainfall variability. Tharaka-
Nithi County’s mean temperatures have increased by approximately 0.6°C and resulted in 
a moderate increase in heat stress days in the first and second agricultural seasons. Severe 
and mild droughts have been  experienced leading to poor  crop  yields and low livestock 
production. Trans Nzoia County has  experienced changes in rainfall patterns, which are 
expected to be more intense in the future. These  changes result in reduced soil fertility 
and  poor  soil  structure  while  higher  temperatures  and  atmospheric  humidity  favours 
development of crop pests and diseases.  
22. 
As  indicated  above,  some  of  the  intial  RK-FINFA  Counties  are  within  the  ASALs, 
which are highly vulnerable to extreme weather events, particularly drought that continues 
to  affect  agricultural  productivity  and  predominantly  pastoralist  livelihoods.  Prolonged 
droughts in the ASALs have contributed to the long-term environmental changes such as 
deforestation,  drying  up  of  rivers  and  shallow  wells, land  degradation,  re-emergence  of 
climate  related  diseases  and  amplified  wildlife-human  conflicts.  The  medium  and  high 
potential regions in which most  of the  other initial RK-FINFA  Counties lie, are relatively 
cooler,  wetter  with  mean  annual  temperatures  lower  compared  to  the  ASALs.  In  these 
regions, farmers have noted changing seasonality, i.e. delayed onset of rains, unreliability 
and variability of rains, reduced or increased amounts of rainfall and higher temperatures 
during the dry season. Intense rainfall events have been recorded and resulted in floods 
in some parts of these Counties. 
Farmers  in  the  various  Counties  initially  targeted  by  RK-FINFA  have  adopted 
23. 
various types of strategies to cope with climate change in their locations. These include 
soil and water conservation and protection of catchment area measures such as terraces, 
diversion  and  infiltration  ditches,  planting  pits,  conservation  agriculture  techniques, 
planting  of  napier  grass  and  fodder  trees.  Agricultural  productivity  climate  change 
adaptation techniques include staggered cropping,  adoption of improved early maturing 
and  drought-tolerant  crop  varieties,  integrated  pest  management,  use  of  indigenous 
knowledge  in  post-harvest  handling  and  disease  control,  water  harvesting  and  use  of 
irrigation.  Soil  nutrients  are  managed  through  mulching,  composting,  using  improved 
fallows  and  more  optimal  use  of  fertilizers.  Off-farm  strategies  include  early  warning 
systems, insurance schemes, extension education, value addition on various commodities, 
credit,  storage  facilities,  market  information  and  diversification  of  enterprises.  Some 
farmers also have access to accurate and timely weather information to help  farm level 
planning  and  decision  making  in  terms  planting  dates,  crop  and  varieties  selection  and 
harvesting  periods.  RK-FINFA  support  will have  to  build  on  the  current  strategies  being 
adopted by target beneficiaries based on their local climate change risks. This support will 
be through diversifying the options for climate change adaptation, enhancing the climate 
risk  management  knowledge  to  inform  the  selection  of  options  and  also  through  the 
products that will be offered through RK_FINFA PFIs.  
Climate change mitigation. The focus of the RK-FINFA end line investments is 
24. 
expected to be predominantly targeted at climate change adaptation. However, in line with 
Kenya  Green  Economy  Strategy  and  Investment  Plan  (GESIP)  as  well  as  the  climate 
change  mitigation  priorities  in  the  Nationally  Determined  Contributions  (NDCs), 
investments in activities such as renewable energy and efficient use of natural resources 
will be promoted.   
2.3 Poverty and target group profiles 
25. 
The  primary  target  group  for  this  project  will be  economically  active  low-income 
smallholders and rural micro-entrepreneurs, including the vulnerable, poor, food insecure, 
women  headed  households  and  young  women  and  men  interested  in  agricultural 
production  and  entrepreneurial  activities  along  agricultural  value  chains.  These  include 
traders, processors, transporters, agro-vet dealers, input suppliers, animal health service 
providers, etc. The project will ensure inclusion of women and youth, marginalized groups 
and persons with disabilities, the poor and food insecure. They will be largely classified as: 
26. 
Smallholder  farmers  producing  at  subsistence  level  with  potential  for 
growth.  Agribusiness is important for economic opportunities especially to the poorest 
households.  These  households  can  have  very  little  land  around  their  dwelling  and  few, 
productive  assets.  A  significant  proportion  of  these  households  are  likely  to  be  women-
headed  households  with  children  under  five  years,  who  are  likely  to  experience 
malnutrition.  The  number  of  dependents  may  be  higher  than  average  and  include 
members who are vulnerable, adolescents, persons with HIV, persons with disabilities, and 
children  out  of  school.  These  households  depend  for  their  livelihoods  on  casual  labour, 
trading  groceries  and  other  small  trades.  Coping  mechanisms  include  reliance  on 
traditional  safety  nets  such  as  borrowing  from  family,  friends,  village bank  savings  and 
‘merry go rounds”, in which each person contributes a part of their daily earnings and each 
day a different person receives a loan collected from the members on a revolving basis.  
27. 
Smallholders in this category are involved in subsistence farming and agribusiness 
with low level of production. They lack access to inputs to increase their production for 
consumption  and  to  make  their  production  market-oriented.    These  farmers  own  an 
average  of  ≤2ha  of  land  or  one  to  two  fish  ponds  or  equivalent  and  have  very  limited 
access to productive assets and inputs for market-oriented production. Most women and 
youth have no access to the land and lack productive assets to act as collateral. In addition, 
apart  from  mobile  money,  very  few  have  bank  accounts  or  links  to  financial  education, 
knowledge  and  advice.  They  may  be  members  of  informal  or  financial  organizations  at 
village level, but they are usually reluctant to borrow from commercial FIs due to limited 
business skills and poor mindsets. The beneficiaries to be supported among this group will 
be  expected  to  be  members  of  farmer  groups  and  organizations  and  to  benefit  from 
improved  access  to  financial  products  and  services  such  as  ‘group  lending’,  financial 
literacy and Business Development Services. 
28.  Medium  size  farmers,  and  enterprises  and  producers  involved  in  Value 
Chain (VC) activities.  The group comprises of economically active/entrepreneurial small 
and  medium  holders  requiring  support  for  surplus  production  and  entrepreneurship 
activities.  These  will  include  rural  Households  already  engaged  in  crop,  livestock, 
aquaculture and fish farming and production. These households produce goods for home 
consumption but also trade goods for other necessities, and sell their crops, livestock or 
fish for income. Specific opportunities and products will be developed to meet the interests 
and capacities of women and youth of different ages, including support towards access to 
finance  and  land.  This  group  will  also  include  existing  MSMEs  and  SME  agro-dealers  in 
processing and marketing parts of the VCs.  
29. 
Few  specialized  farmers  may  be  organized  into  formally  established  and  legally 
registered producers and/or processors cooperatives or organizations. These farmers may 
have a market-oriented approach but have limited access to financial products services to 
reach  more  commercial  markets.  This  category  will  comprise  of  50%  women  and  30% 
youth.  
30. 
Financial  Service  Providers  (FSPs).  These  include  commercial  banks, 
microfinance  banks  and  institutions  including  SACCOS.  The  Programme  will  provide 
technical  support  to  key  financial  institutions  including  targeted  support  to  women  and 
youth  product  development  and  friendly  services,  in  order  to  improve  rural  access  to 
financial products and services for agribusiness. Staff in the financial institutions involved 
in  the  project  will  benefit  from  capacity  building  interventions  including  training  and 
business skills to improve outreach, know your customer requirements such as alternative 
collateral  for  women,  youth  and  PWDs,  product  development  and  tailored  outreach  to 
these groups.  
31. 
Smallholder farmers comprising of women, men, young males and females involved 
in rural microenterprises will represent about 90 per cent of the total number of RK-FINFA 
beneficiaries, and will include 50 per cent women and 30 per cent youth. Under-employed 
rural people and especially youth represents about 10 per cent of RK-FINFA beneficiaries.  
Marginalized  and  vulnerable  groups  i.e.  PWDs,  PLWHAs,  indigenous  groups,  ethnic  and 
religious  minorities  such  as  the  Muslims  will  constitute  5  per  cent  of  the  target 
beneficiaries. 
3. Institutional analysis 
32. 
RK-FINFA will include the following institutions as implementing and co-financing 
partners:  Financial  Sector  Deepening  Kenya  (FSDK),  Alliance  for  a  Green  Revolution  in 
Africa  (AGRA),  and  the  AMEA  network  in  Kenya  through  its  lead  NGO,  CORDAID 
International.  The  project  will  consider  organising  operational  partnerships  as  well  as 
strategic  collaborations.  In particular, the  synergy points include joint support to Credit 
Guarantee  Scheme  and  the  enabling  environment  for  financial  sector  outreach  to 
microenterprises.  Other  partnership  opportunities  include:  (i)  United  Nations  -  GoK 
flagship programme called SDG Partnership Platform,  with special window for Food and 
Agriculture, for public advocacy and communications with potential investors, (ii) African 
Development Bank’s ENABLE youth initiative; (iii) the European Union AgriFi and AgriBiz 
projects,  (iv)  Land  o’Lakes  corporation  regional  value  chain  commercialization  project 
“Dairy  Nourishes  Africa  (DNA)”.  The  project  will  explore  opportunities  to  work  with  and 
learn from the Government led national Youth and Uwezo26 Funds which target youth and 
women respectively and are merging into the Biashara27 Fund under the Ministry of Public 
Service and Gender and Youth. At County and Sub-County levels, RK-FINFA will work with 
community-based organizations such as farmer’s groups, VSLAs, women and youth groups 
and networks to ensure equitable representation of all key stakeholders. 
33. 
The  2010  Constitution,  Vision  2030  and  National  Gender  policy  (2011)  support 
gender  equality.  Similarly,  the  Public  Procurement  Act  of  2015  reserves  30%  of  public 
procurement  opportunities  for  women,  youth  and  PWD.  The  government  established 
Women Enterprise Fund (2009) and the Uwezoi Fund (2014) in which a number of banks 
are  participating  will  merge  into  the  newly  established  Biasharaii  Fund,  aimed  to 
consolidate reach to smallholders, women, youth and other vulnerable groups. These are 
coordinated by the State Department for Gender under the Ministry of Public Service and 
Gender. Other relevant institutions include the National Gender and Equality Commission 
(NGEC), Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services, National Council for People with 
Disabilities  and  National  Council  for  Children  Services.  The  Government  has  also  put  in 
place various legal, institutional and policy frameworks and institutions to empower the 
youth. These include the State Department in charge of youth, the Youth Enterprise Fund, 
the  Kenya  Youth  Employment  and  Opportunities  Project,  the  National  Youth  Council, 
National  Youth  Service,  the  Youth  Enterprise  Fund,  among  others.  The  Kenya  Youth 
Development Policy (2019) and Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy (2017) underscore the 
importance  of  positioning  the  youth  at  the  forefront  of  Agricultural  growth  and 
transformation for national development. The nutrition commitments are articulated in the 
National Comprehensive School Health policy (2007); National Food and Nutrition Security 
Policy  (2011);  National  School  Health  Strategy  Implementation  Plan  (2011)  and  the 
National  Nutrition  Action  Plan  (2012)  and  coordinated  under  the  Ministry  of  Health, 
Ministry of Education and Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. 
34. 
Kenya’s National Environment Council provides policy formulation and direction for 
the purposes of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination Act (EMCA, 1999). The 
National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) is the regulatory and advisory body 
on  environmental  management  in  Kenya.  NEMA  coordinates  and  supervises  various 
environmental management activities being undertaken by statutory organs with a view 
to promote the integration of development policies, programme, plans and projects that 
provide  sustainable  development.  The  National  Environment  Action  Plan  Committee 
(NEAPC)  is  a  cross-sectoral  committee  responsible  for  the  development  of  a  five-year 
national environment action plan. The national environment action plan contains, among 
other aspects, an analysis of the natural resources of Kenya and their distribution, quantity 
and  diverse  uses.  It  also  recommends  legal  and  fiscal  incentives  for  business  that 
incorporate environmental requirements into their planning and operational processes and 
sets  out  guidelines  for  the  planning  and  management  of  the  environment  and  natural 
resources. The national environment action plan is binding on all organs of government. 
County  Environment  Committees  assist  NEMA  in  effectively  carrying  out  its  function  of 
proper  management  of  the  environment  at  county  level.  The  membership  of  these 
committees  include,  representatives  of  farmers  or  pastoralists,  business  community, 
women and youth, among others. 
35. 
The  GoK  has  undertaken  several  efforts  to  manage  climate  change  and  build 
resilience of its sensitive sectors such as agriculture. Kenya’s Vision 2030, the overarching 
development  plan,  seeks  among  others  to  transform  smallholder  agriculture  into  an 
innovative and competitive sector. The Climate Change Act (2016) provides a regulatory 
framework  for  an  enhanced  response  to  climate  change,  mechanisms  and  measures  to 
improve resilience to climate change and promote low carbon development. The Act also 
seeks  to  mainstream  climate  resilience  in  all  development  plans.  The  National  Climate 
Change  Policy  Framework  (2017)  seeks  to  enhance  climate  change  adaptation  capacity 
and build resilience to climate change variability and promote a low carbon pathway. The 
National  Adaptation  Plan  (2015)  highlights  short,  medium  and  long-term  actions  that 
enhance  resilience  in  the  agriculture,  livestock  and  fisheries  value  chains.  The  National 
Climate  Smart  Agriculture  Implementation  Plan  (2018)  outlines  climate  change  impacts 
on  food  and  nutrition  and  proposes  areas  for  mitigation,  including  provision  of  climate 
change  information  services,  scaling  up  of  technologies  that  enhance  resilience  of  the 
sector and reduce GHG emissions where possible. 
five 
thematic  areas  and  strategies, 
Kenya’s Green Economy Strategy and Implementation Plan (GESIP, 2016-2030) is 
36. 
a  blueprint  for  enhancing  low-carbon,  resource  efficient,  equitable  and  inclusive  socio-
economic transformation. GESIP will support the country’s transition to a sustainable path 
including:  promoting  sustainable 
through 
infrastructure; building resilience; sustainable natural resource management; promoting 
resource efficiency and social inclusion and sustainable livelihoods. GESIP implementation 
will  be  guided  by  principles  for  sustainable  development  including:  sustainable 
consumption  and  production;  equity  and  social  inclusion;  resource  efficiency,  Pollution-
Pays-Principle and; precautionary principle and good governance. The private sector has 
an  important  role  in  the  implementation  of  GESIP  through  adoption  of  green  economy 
technologies and practices.  
4. Environmental and social category 
The environment and social categorization of the RK-FINFA is B. This categorization 
recognises the environmental risks that may result from the project activities, 
particularly the end line investments by the smallholders and MSMEs, can be avoided 
and/or minimized with appropriate actions. In order to ensure the minimisation of 
potential adverse impacts, environmental, social and governance standards will be a 
criterion for participation in the project by the MSMEs and technical assistance will be 
provided to strengthen or establish Environment and Social Management Systems 
(ESMS) for PFIs. The MFBs already provide services and products for sustainable 
production, biodiversity and environmental protection, energy efficiency and renewable 
energy and have established ESMS that enable reporting on these portfolios. The ESMS 
would have to be established in the SACCOs including capacity development for 
monitoring and reporting systems. The targeted end beneficiaries are in many cases 
smallholders and entrepreneurs benefiting from IFAD-supported or other donor-funded 
projects/programmes and therefore have already been receiving training in good 
practices in environmental and natural resources management. An environment and 
social management framework will guide the project implementation with specific criteria 
for screening of investments and steps for establishing or strengthening of the ESMS. 
RK-FINFA will pay attention to potential social risks related to COVID-19 prevention, 
GBV, child labour and any unintended consequences in order to put mitigation measures 
through project activities such as integrating awareness creation on prevention of GBV 
and child labour. 
5. Climate risk category 
The climate risk classification of RK-FINFA is “Moderate” given that the target end 
37. 
beneficiaries, their livelihoods and the economic activities are exposed to climate-related 
risks such as floods, droughts and incidence of pests and diseases. These climatic events 
have already adversely impacted agricultural productivity for smallholders and profitability 
of agribusinesses, and thus climate change projections should be taken into account in the 
due  diligence  for  medium  and  long-term  investments.  Climate  risk  screening  will  be 
incorporated in the ESMS for the PFIs and into the Environment, Social and Governance 
standards for the MSMEs. Notably some MFBs already undertake climate risk screening as 
part of the loan appraisal for smallholders.  The risk screening will be complemented by 
strengthening the service provision for climate risk management advisory services for the 
target  beneficiaries  and  promotion  of  investments  in  climate  smart  technologies  and 
practices. For the SACCOs, the capacity for climate risk screening will have to be developed 
including the monitoring systems and products for building the climate resilience of their 
clients.  The  products  being  offered  by  the  SACCOs  will  also  be  assessed  to  incorporate 
climate  change  resilience  building.  Larger  PFIs  already  provide  loans  for  new  irrigation 
systems and water storage reservoirs in water stressed areas, improved inputs such as 
drought  tolerant  seed  varieties  as  well  as  offer  weather  index-based  insurance.  Other 
products include green houses, biogas, and solar energy that contribute to GHG emissions 
reduction. 
6. Recommendations for project design and implementation 
To  ensure  the  “do  no  harm’’  approach  RK-FINFA  will  ensure  the  following 
38. 
recommendations into the three mutually reinforcing components:  
(a) Component 1: Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS); Sub-component 
1.1: On PFI Capacity Building for Rural Outreach and Innovation will improve the 
capacity  PFIs  to  provide  financial  services  to  rural  agricultural  chain  actors  and 
provide capacity in form of financial literacy and Business Development Services 
targeting  men,  women,  youth  and  marginalized  groups.  PFIs  will  also  require 
capacity  building  to  establish  or  improve  Environment  and  Social  Management 
Systems. The ESMS will have to incorporate climate risk management and capacity 
also  provided  for  this  including  for  PFIs  to  provide  adequate  advisory  services. 
Specific climate change adaptation options will need to be articulated based on the 
climate  risks  identified  for  the  investments  that  will  be  made  by  the  target 
beneficiaries.  Options  such  as  insurance  services  could  be  provided  for  extreme 
events  such  as  droughts  and  floods,  which  are  projected  to  occur  in  all  regions. 
Monitoring  and  reporting  systems  of  the  PFIs  for  specific  portfolios  will  also  be 
improved.  
(b) Component 2: The RK-FINFA will operate with two Rural Investment Instruments: 
(i)  a  Rural  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  (R-CGS),  and  (ii) a  Green  Financing 
Facility  (GFF).  Both  the  R-CGS  and  the  GFF  will  be  designed  as  sustainable 
financing vehicles, which can utilize resources from the GoK and from interested 
international financiers to unlock private investment into Kenya’s agricultural and 
agribusiness  sector  at  attractive  market  terms  through  Kenyan  financial 
institutions. The project has a strong focus on women empowerment at 50 per cent 
and 30 per cent youth and therefore these instruments targets will seek to achieve 
these.  The  Green  Financing  Facility  will  support  small-scale  farmers  and  micro-
firms  to  invest  in  climate-smart,  labour  saving  and  environmentally  friendly 
activities.  The  GFF  also  provides  opportunities  to  enhance  low  emission,  climate 
resilient agricultural development. The financial resources enable the access to and 
adoption of climate smart technologies for smallholders as well as the MSMEs. In 
addition  to  technologies,  specific  financial  products  will  also  be  developed  and 
disseminated  to  support  smallholders  in  climate  change  risk  management. 
Environmental  degradation  can  be  minimised  through  improved  practices  and 
degraded  lands  rehabilitated  through  investments  by  the  target  beneficiaries. 
Extreme events such as destructive flooding events and landslides are particularly 
relevant  hazards  to  be  monitored  and  analysed  for  agricultural  productivity,  as 
these may have detrimental effects on value chains. The adverse impacts extend 
to disrupting cooling and transportation systems and networks for the agricultural 
produce. 
(c) Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination. This 
will support policy engagement and project coordination. On policy engagement, 
the project could review the challenges of applying alternative collateral for women 
and  youth.  Support  to  regulations  and  actions  to  include  the  larger  non-deposit 
taking SACCOs and the SACCOs with digital service platforms under the regulation 
and supervision of SASRA (which would qualify them as candidates as wholesale 
borrowers from Green Financing Facility) – to reach more women and youth in the 
rural areas.  
39. 
RK-FINFA  will  undertake  detailed  gender  and  youth  assessments  at  baseline  or 
start-up  to  ensure  the  development  of  a  Gender  Equality  Youth  and  Social  Inclusion 
Strategy  early  on  in  the  project.  The  project  design  includes  gender  transformational 
approaches  such  as  the  use  of  the  GALS  and  household  methodologies  to  shape  intra-
representation  quotas  at  50  per  cent  women  and  30  per  cent  youth  and  targeted 
interventions focusing on women and youth such as financial literacy as well as tailored 
product development to meet their needs. The PFIs, other implementing partners and the 
PMU will require training on gender transformational and youth  sensitive approaches as 
well as review of their policies and practices to include women empowerment and youth 
actions. 
40. 
Climate financing was explored for RK-FINFA to access resources from the Green 
Climate  Fund’s  Private  Sector  Facility.  However,  based  on  the  size  of  the  project, 
processing timelines, these resources would be accessed at a later date through a regional 
financing facility.  
7. Further studies needed 
41. 
Given that most of the end line investments of the RK-FINFA are unknown during 
design, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed to 
guide implementation. The ESMF will be developed as part of the design and is therefore 
already included in the design costs. It will focus on the criteria for the GFF investments 
and outlining steps for the establishment or strengthening of the ESMS. It will also include 
an elaborated Grievance Redress Mechanism and Stakeholder Engagement Plan. The costs 
of its implementation will be included in the project budget.  
8. Monitoring and evaluation 
42. 
The  project  target  group  engagement  will  take  place  at  different  levels 
encompassing the PFIs and the target groups. The community engagement will be through 
sensitisation  meetings  of  the  project  activities  and  through  meetings  and  consultations 
with  PFIs  that  will  provide  the  loan  products  and  financial  services.  The  sensitization 
meetings  will  take  the  form  of  community  level  public  meetings  to  convey  the  project 
objectives, presenting PFIs and criteria and expectations for participation in the project. 
These  meetings  will  be  conducted  in  local languages  and  at  times  that  allow  maximum 
participation of different groups, women, men, youth, indigenous peoples, persons  with 
disabilities  and  other  vulnerable  and  minority  groups.  Further  engagement  will  be  done 
through  PFI  officers  and  community  agents  comprising  of  women  and  youth  to  ensure 
successful  outreach.  These  monitoring  sessions  will  also  provide  an  opportunity  for 
feedback on the project services and challenges being faced. The feedback will be used in 
realignment  of  the  project  to  ensure  achievement  of  targets  especially  on  women  and 
youth.  RK-FINFA  has  nutrition  linkages  of  contributing  to  increased  incomes  leading  to 
more diversified diets but is not considered nutrition sensitive. 
RK-FINFA  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  will include  specific  responsibility  for 
43. 
monitoring targeting performance, beneficiary tracking, and targeting gender, youth and 
vulnerable groups related aspects of project implementation.  All people centred indicators 
will be disaggregated by sex and age and vulnerability where relevant while the project 
will track the  Empowerment  Index at baseline, midterm and end line surveys.  Sspecific 
indicators  for  the  mainstreaming  themes  have  been  included  in  the  logical  framework 
based on the IFAD core indicators. In addition to these, more indicators can be included 
in  the  project’s  M&E  system  such  as  (i)  amount  of  funds  accessed  for  climate  resilient 
practices (ii) the number of ESMS established/strengthened, and (iii) amount of resources 
invested in environmentally friendly technologies. The PFIs can also report on number or 
volume of clean energy (renewable energy and energy efficiency) loans disbursed; number 
or volume of sustainable and climate smart agriculture loans disbursed;  and number or 
volume  of  other  green  (clean  transport;  afforestation/  reforestation;  climate  resilient 
infrastructure)  loans  disbursed.  At  the  end  use  level,  indicators  can  include  water 
availability (quality and quantity); agricultural productivity levels; and ecosystem services 
being provided.  
9. References 
1.  https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/empowering_women_in_agribusiness_thr
ough_social_behaviour_change_kenya_vietnam.pdf 
2.  https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/kenya-country-gender-note-for-kenya-in-the-
context-of-the-bank-csp-2014-2018-mid-term-review-is-gender-a-number-one-poverty-issue-107493 
3.  World Bank Data Atlas 
4.  2019 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) National Census 
5.  2017 Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy 
6.  https://www.iwgia.org/en/kenya 
7.  Kenya Health Demographic Survey (KDHS) 2014 
8.  World Health Organization, & The World Bank, 2012 
9.  KeLCoP Environmental and Social Management Framework  
10.  KECEP-CRAP Environmental, Social and Climate Risk Assessment 
11.  Bugoma County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
12.  Busia County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
13.  Embu County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
14.  Kakamega County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
15.  Kirinyaga County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
16.  Kisii County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
17.  Machakos County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
18.  Meru County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
19.  Nakuru County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
20.  Nandi County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
21.  Nyeri County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
22.  Siaya County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
23.  Tharaka Nithi County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
24.  Trans-Nzoia County Government, County Integrated Development Plan, 2018-2022. 
Group meeting consultations (virtual) with preselected beneficiaries of IFAD ongoing projects  
BENEFICIARY NAME 
CONTACT DETAILS 
PROJECT 
AGE 
SEX 
County 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Roselydia 
o724464182 
Jane Wanjiru Ndungu  
O720110928 
UTaNRMP  
UTaNRMP  
O768856868 
ABDP 
Samwel Musyoka 
Kimuyu 
Kassim Masouda 
Kiwaka 
Lawrencia Wanja Ireri 
O721568061 
Samuel Ndirangu 
Gachoka 
Elizabeth Mwelu Mulei    O724591696 
o721457828 
O714566632 
KCEP-CRAL 
57 
Job Mawira Gatobu 
O704690446 
ABDP 
UTaNRMP  
UTaNRMP 
KCEP-CRAL 
38 
35 
52 
35 
F (PWD) 
Embu 
M (YOUTH)  Nyeri 
Machakos 
M (YOUTH)  Meru 
35 
55 
48 
F 9YOUTH) 
Embu 
F 
M 
M 
Kirinyaga 
Machakos 
Kwale 
i Swahili word meaning ‘Enabling’ 
ii Swahili word meaning ‘Business’ 
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
18 months Annual Work Plan and Budget
Project Name: Rural Kenya Financial 
Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
Principal Recipient: Republic of Kenya
Currency: US$
# Budget line by Component, sub 
component and Activity 
Unit of 
Measure
Unit Cost
Year 1 
QTY
Yr 2 QTY
Per/Year
Per/Year
Per/Year
Per/Year
Component 1.1. PFI Capacity Building
1.1.1. TSIS Coordination, M&E and Knowledge 
Management
1.1.2. Bank Services
1.1.3. MFB Services
1.1.4. SACCO Services
Component 1.2. BDS To Borrowers
1.2.1. Agribusiness BDS Services
1.2.2. Small holder Fin Literacy
Component 2.1. Credit Guarantee Scheme
2.1.1. IFAD Financing
2.1.2. Government financing
2.1.3. CGS supported loans USD (by PFIs)
Component 2.2. Green Financing Facility
2.2.1. Green Financing Facility Investment Capital Per/Year
Component 3.1. Enabling Rural Finance 
Enviroment
3.1.1. Research reviews documentation
3.1.2. Workshops thematic events information 
dissmination
Per/Year
Per/Year
Per/Year
Per/Year
Per/Year
Per/Year
Per/Year
Component 3.2. Project Coordination
3.2.1. Vehicles, Office and equipment
1. 2 Vehicles
2. Vehicle operation and maintainance
3. Office equipment and furniture
4. Office rent  (GoK costs)
5. Utilities
6. Laptops
7. Mobile phones
8. Mobile phone airtime
3.2.2. M&E, KM and key workshops
1. M&E systems and costs
2. Baseline
5. Knowledge management
6. Start up workshops
7. Annual supervision support costs
10. Project Steering Committee Expenses 
3.2.3. Staff costs
1. Project coordinator
2. Financial and Administration Manager
3. Senior rural finance specialist
4. Procurement specialist/contract manager
5. Monitoring & Evaluation Specialists
6. Value chain finance officer
Per/Vehicle
Per/Year
Lumpsum
Per/month
Per/month
Per PC
Per phone
Per/Year
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Per/Year
Lumpsum
Per/Year
Per/Year
Per/month
Per/month
Per/month
Per/month
Per/month
Per/month
300 000
93 750
112 500
455 000
300 000
270 000
1 666 667
3 750 000
20 000 000
6 666 667
300 000
83 333
35 000
6 000
10 000
1 000
500
1 200
450
15
28 700
50 000
20 000
10 000
10 000
1 500
6 000
5 000
4 500
4 000
4 000
3 000
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
12
12
10
10
120
1
1
1
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
12
12
120
12
12
12
12
12
12
7. Rural finance officer
8. Social inclusion officer
9. Accountant
10. Administrator/programme assistant
11. Two drivers
Totals
Per/month
Per/month
Per/month
Per/month
Per/month
3 000
3 000
3 000
1 000
750
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
Allocation per Quarter
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q1
Q2
Q3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
0
0
2
0
1
3
3
1
3
3
30
30
30
30
30
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 000
1 500
12 000
4 500
450
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18 000
15 000
13 500
12 000
12 000
9 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
150 000
46 875
56 250
227 500
-
150 000
135 000
-
833 334
1 875 000
10 000 000
-
3 333 334
-
75 000
20 833
-
-
-
70 000
1 500
10 000
3 000
1 500
-
-
450
-
-
-
10 000
-
-
-
-
18 000
15 000
13 500
12 000
12 000
9 000
-
75 000
20 833
-
-
-
-
1 500
-
3 000
1 500
-
-
450
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18 000
15 000
13 500
12 000
12 000
9 000
3
3
10
10
30
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
9 000
9 000
9 000
3 000
2 250
133 200
9 000
9 000
9 000
3 000
2 250
304 033
9 000
9 000
9 000
3 000
2 250
17 021 325
Q4
Q5
Q6
Total 
Amounts 
(USD)
IFAD 
Amounts
PFI Amounts Partners
GoK
150 000
46 875
56 250
227 500
-
150 000
135 000
-
150 000
46 875
56 250
227 500
-
150 000
135 000
-
833 334
1 875 000
10 000 000
833 334
1 875 000
10 000 000
-
-
3 333 334
3 333 334
-
-
150 000
150 000
41 667
-
-
-
-
3 000
-
3 000
1 500
-
-
450
-
-
-
10 000
-
10 000
1 500
-
18 000
15 000
13 500
12 000
12 000
9 000
41 667
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 000
1 500
-
-
450
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18 000
15 000
13 500
12 000
12 000
9 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 000
-
3 000
1 500
-
-
450
-
-
-
10 000
-
-
-
-
18 000
15 000
13 500
12 000
12 000
9 000
450 000
140 625
168 750
682 500
-
450 000
405 000
-
2 500 001
5 625 000
30 000 000
-
262 582
64 688
84 562
341 250
-
105 000
288 000
-
2 500 001
-
-
-
-
15 937
16 875
68 250
-
78 750
48 000
-
-
-
30 000 000
-
10 000 001
5 000 000
2 506 400
-
-
450 000
180 000
125 000
-
-
-
70 000
9 000
10 000
18 000
9 000
12 000
4 500
2 700
-
-
-
30 000
-
10 000
1 500
-
108 000
90 000
81 000
72 000
72 000
54 000
45 972
-
-
-
35 000
-
8 000
-
-
12 000
-
-
-
-
-
30 000
-
7 400
-
-
108 000
90 000
81 000
72 000
72 000
54 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
187 500
-
-
-
-
225 020
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
60 000
67 313
273 000
-
135 000
121 500
-
-
5 625 000
-
-
2 493 600
-
162 500
107 500
37 500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
41 528
-
-
-
35 000
9 000
2 000
18 000
9 000
-
4 500
2 700
-
-
-
-
-
2 600
1 500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 000
9 000
9 000
3 000
2 250
17 140 159
9 000
9 000
9 000
3 000
2 250
17 115 659
9 000
9 000
9 000
3 000
2 250
129 700
54 000
54 000
54 000
18 000
13 500
51 844 076
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 441 455
32 734 213
612 520
54 000
54 000
54 000
18 000
13 500
9 202 240
Allocations as per Costab
IFAD
PFI
Partners GoK
42%
0%
0%
0%
50%
0%
58%
46%
50%
50%
23%
71%
100%
0%
11%
10%
10%
18%
12%
100%
50%
25%
40%
37%
36%
30%
0.5
0
0.8
0
0
1
0
0
0%
100%
100%
0%
74%
0%
1
1
1
1
1
1
0%
43%
40%
40%
30%
30%
100%
25%
24%
33%
0.5
1
0.2
1
1
0
1
1
100%
0%
0%
100%
26%
100%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Guidance Note
Procurement Plan SUMMARY
Country:
Kenya
Project Name:
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
Project ID:
Version
1.0
Version Date
15-May-21
Prepared by:
Nelson Oluoch
Approved by:
n/a
Procurement 
Activities
Plan
Actual
Currency
USD
LCU
USD
LCU
Goods
Works
Consulting 
Services
Non-Consulting 
Services
TOTAL
96 500.00 
-
50 000.00 
9 000.00 
155 500.00 
Prior Review Thresholds
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Thresholds
Goods
Works
Firms - Consulting 
Services
Individuals - 
Consulting Services
Prior Review
All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are  Prior Review  (in alignment with IFAD 
Procurement Handbook), or based on the thresholds stipulated in the LTB
> US$ 150,000.00
> US$ 60,000.00
> US$ 70,000.00
> US$ 30,000.00
The exchange rate at time of submission will be used for reviews.
Procurement Method Thresholds
NCB
Shopping
ICB
Goods and goods-
related Non-
consulting 
services
Works and works-
related non-
consulting 
services
Consulting 
services and 
related non-
consulting 
services
< US$ 70,000.00
> US$ 70,000.00 to < 
US$ 200000.00
> US$ 200,000.00
< US$ 190,000.00
> US$ 190,000.00 to 
< US$ 800,000.00
> US$ 800,000.00
CQS
QBS/LCS/FBS
QCBS
< US$ 70,000.00
> US$ 70,000.00 to < 
US$ 100,000.00
> US$ 100,000.00
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 10
Printed on: 21/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Goods
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Approved by: n/a
USD
LCU
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
105 500.00
0.00
9 000.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Version
1.0
15-May-21
Basic Data
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
3.2.1.1
3.2.1.2
3.2.1.3
3.2.1.6
3.2.1.7
1
2
3
4
5
4x4 vehicles (2)
IFAD, GoK
Motor Vehicle Maintenance
Yes
Yes
GoK
Office Equipment and Furniture
IFAD, GoK
Laptops
Mobile Phones
IFAD
GoK
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
1
1
1
1
1
70 000.00 
-
9 000.00 
-
10 000.00 
-
12 000.00 
-
4 500.00 
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jan-22
8-Jan-22
9-Jan-22
23-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
30-Jan-22
6-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Feb-22
N/A
2-Feb-22
16-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
23-Feb-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jan-22
N/A
2-Jan-22
16-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
23-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jan-22
N/A
2-Jan-22
16-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
23-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jan-22
N/A
2-Jan-22
16-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
23-Jan-22
N/A
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Date
Contract
Award
8-Feb-22
Date
Contract
Signature
10-Feb-22
6-Feb-22
23-Feb-22
25-Feb-22
27-Feb-22
23-Jan-22
25-Jan-22
27-Jan-22
23-Jan-22
25-Jan-22
27-Jan-22
23-Jan-22
25-Jan-22
27-Jan-22
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 3 of 10
Printed on: 21/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Approved by: n/a
Version
1.0
15-May-21
Basic Data
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
Non
Consulting
Funding
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
3.2.2.2
1
Baseline
IFAD
PMU
Plan
Actual
Yes
Post Review
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 4 of 10
Printed on: 21/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Approved by: n/a
Version
1.0
15-May-21
USD
LCU
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
50 000.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
Procurement 
Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection 
Date
3.2.2.2
1
Baseline
QCBS
50 000.00 
Plan
21-Jan-22
N/A
-
-
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 5 of 10
Printed on: 21/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Approved by: n/a
Version
1.0
15-May-21
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
3.2.2.2
1
Baseline
23-Jan-22
6-Feb-22
20-Feb-22
N/A
24-Feb-22
N/A
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 6 of 10
Printed on: 21/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Approved by: n/a
Version
1.0
15-May-21
Proposal Process
Evaluation
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
3.2.2.2
1
Baseline
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
26-Feb-22
12-Apr-22
26-Apr-22
N/A
10-May-22
N/A
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 7 of 10
Printed on: 21/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Approved by: n/a
Selection Methods
QCBS: Quality and Cost-Based Selection
QBS: Quality-Based Selection
CQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications (shortlist is required for this method) 
LCS: Least-Cost Selection
FBS Fixed Budget Selection
ICS: Individual Consultants Selection
SSS: Sole Source Selection
Version
1.0
15-May-21
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract 
and MoN
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
3.2.2.2
1
Baseline
Plan
Actual
22-May-22
12-Jun-22
16-Jun-22
N/A
18-Jun-22
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 8 of 10
Printed on: 21/09/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA)
CQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications (shortlist is required for this method) 
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Approved by: n/a
Version
1.0
15-May-21
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
3.2.2.2
1
Baseline
Date
Contract
Signature
25-Jun-22
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 9 of 10
Printed on: 21/09/2021
Day Ranges These tables provide estimated timelines by procurement methods, based on experience and guidance in the Procurement Handbook where specified.
The approximate number of days are used in the default Procurement Plan Formulas. Timelines in the Approx fields/Formulas  are not prescriptive, and may be modified by the project.
Approx figures entered will be highlighted/flagged, if below the Minimun number of days. Zero indicates steps that are not applicable to the method, and are indicated as N/A in the Formulas.
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
Submission of PreQual docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt/Bid Evaluation Report
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
7
7
5
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
30
45
45
30
45
45
7
30
45
45
30
45
45
21
45
70
70
45
70
70
30
45
70
70
45
70
70
14
45
45
45
45
45
45
14
45
45
45
45
45
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
21
21
14
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
3
3
3
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
14
21
21
14
21
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
1
7
7
7
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
3
14
14
14
5
5
5
14
14
14
14
5
5
5
2
7
7
7
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
5
5
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
24
68
83
83
110
125
123
34
78
93
93
120
135
135
60
130
155
155
206
231
231
96
147
172
172
223
247
247
40
96
103
103
164
171
171
45
99
117
117
178
185
185
Approx 
Months/Days
1m 9d 
3m 5d 
3m 12d 
3m 12d 
5m 12d 
5m 19d 
5m 19d 
1m 14d 
3m 8d 
3m 26d 
3m 26d 
5m 26d 
6m 3d 
6m 3d 
Selection Method
Submission of REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission Deadline
Submission of Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Submission of RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Proposal submission deadline
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of CER
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Negotiations completed
Submission of Draft Contract and MoN
No-objection
Date
Date Contract Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx Min Max Approx Min Max Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
SSS
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
14
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
5
5
7
5
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
45
45
45
21
14
14
45
14
21
21
7
60
60
60
60
30
30
60
30
30
60
30
45
45
45
45
21
21
45
21
25
45
30
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
7
7
14
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
7
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
21
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
14
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
7
10
10
10
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
10
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
7
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
0
14
14
14
14
7
7
14
14
14
14
7
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
21
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
170
170
170
132
118
118
126
88
95
88
49
283
283
283
259
220
220
205
173
175
181
136
197
204
204
183
152
152
149
125
129
128
101
Approx 
Months/Days
6m 15d 
6m 22d 
6m 22d 
6m 1d 
4m 31d 
4m 31d 
4m 28d 
4m 4d 
4m 8d 
4m 7d 
3m 10d 
NOTE
1. Some procurement methods for low-value processes might require No Objections based on the Prior Review Thresholds. Where they do not require, No Objection number of days should be zero.
2. RFP: Request for Proposals: standard procurement document used for Services.
3. RCQ: Requests for Consultants Qualifications: Procurement document used for CQS and LCS. The RFP is used for all other procurement methods
4. Consulting services and Good/Works methods could either be used for Non-Consulting Services
5. All days are calendar days
10
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
RURAL KENYA FINANCIAL INCLUSION FACILITY  
(RK-FINFA) 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Section 
Project Purpose, Operational Area and Targeting 
SACP Rationale, Objectives and Structure 
Geographic Targeting 
Project Target Group and Overall Targeting Strategy  
Social Inclusion Strategies 
A)  Environmental and CC Targeting Strategy 
B)  Gender Strategy 
C)  Youth Strategy 
D)  RK-FINFA Nutrition Linkages 
Lessons Learnt 
Project Institutional Arrangements and Responsibilities 
Lead Agency and Programme Oversight 
Project Management and Staff 
Facilitation for Effective RK-FINFA Start-up 
Key RK-FINFA Partnerships and Operational Cooperation Parties 
TOR of Key RK-FINFA Staff 
Detailed Implementation Modalities:  
Component 1: Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS)  
Sub-Component 1.1: Support PFIs 
Sub-Component 1.2: Support to MSMEs/Farmers 
Detailed Implementation Modalities: Component 2: Rural 
Investment Instruments 
Sub-Component 2.1: R-CGS Support 
Sub-Component 2.2: Green Financing Facility 
Detailed Implementation Modalities: Sub-Component 3.1: 
Support to Operational Environment 
Planning, M&E, KM and Grievance Redress Procedures 
Planning and M&E Process 
Knowledge Management and Communications 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Draft RK-FINFA Procurement Guidelines 
RK-FINFA Accounting and Financial Management Arrangements 
Appendix 1: Operational Manual - MSME Credit Guarantee Scheme 
Appendix 2: Mapping of Kenyan Rural Financial Institutions 
Appendix 3: Environmental, Social and Climate Change 
Management for RK-FINFA 
Separate 
File 
Separate 
File 
Separate 
File 
2 
PROJECT PURPOSE, OPERATIONAL AREA AND TARGETING 
RK-FINFA Rationale, Objectives and Structure 
Rationale.  The  main  rationale  for  investment  in  RK-FINFA  derives  from  the  core 
development objectives that IFAD and the GoK share on rural and agricultural development 
in Kenya. The Government's strategy to improve agricultural performance and productivity 
as expressed ASTGS 2019-2029 aims at (i) increasing small-scale farmer, pastoralist, and 
fisher  incomes;  (ii)  increasing  agricultural  output  and  value  addition;  and  (iii)  boosting 
household  food  resilience.  These  goals  would  be  achieved  particularly  through  (i)  a 
substantially  increased  private  sector  focus  in  the  development  and  investments  of  the 
sector;  and  (ii)  improvements  in  the  productivity  of  smallholder  operations  through 
modern  cultivation  methods  and  climate  smart  technologies,  linking  farmers  to  well-
operating  value  chains  and  building  farmer  capacity  to  increase  their  readiness  for 
innovation  and  diversification.  IFAD’s  COSOP  2020-2025  is  largely  built  on  these  same 
premises to develop the rural and agricultural sector in Kenya. 
In  both  the  GoK  and  IFAD  visions,  to  develop  the  rural  sector  successfully  and  in  a 
sustainable  manner,  private  sector  financial  institutions  (particularly  commercial  banks, 
SACCOs  and  MFIs)  would  need  to  play  a  central  role  in  the  financing  of  the  rural 
transformation process. Development funding would be used to pro-actively stimulate the 
interest  of  the  FIs  to  expand  the  volumes  and  outreach  of  their  agricultural  and  rural 
operations. The proposed RK-FINFA would be one of the instruments aiming to ensure that 
appropriate  and  adequate  financial  services  would  be  available  for  the  planned 
transformation and growth of the rural economy in Kenya. In the wake of COVID-19, the 
need  for  this  strategic  development  support  is  even  greater,  to  initially  improve  the 
chances of fast rural recovery and then later boost the sustained growth of the sector. At 
the  same  time,  to  respond  to  Government’s  and  IFAD’s  agendas  on  climate  change 
adaptation/mitigation and improve environmental management and efficiencies in the use 
of natural resources, RK-FINFA would pro-active  encourage the mainstreaming of green 
finance activities when sustainably transforming the rural sector in Kenya.    
IFAD is strongly positioned to provide solutions to the obstacles for rural finance market 
development in Kenya, due to its: (i) long experience in supporting Kenya’s rural finance 
sector;  (ii)  strong  global  capacity  of  acting  as  a  broker  between  the  financial  sector 
operators, smallholder farmers and companies in the rural value chains; (iii) track record 
in  supporting  the  development  of  innovative  financial  instruments;  and  (iv)  growing 
experience  with  green  financing  with  innovative  technological  solutions,  targeted  at 
smallholder  farmers  and  agricultural  value  chains.  In  addition,  RK-FINFA  would  work 
closely with the participating households of the four on-going IFAD-supported value chain 
programmes  (KeLCoP,  ABDP,  UTaNRMP  and  KCEP-CRAL),  with  the  aim  of  effectively 
connecting  the  farmers  trained  by  these  projects  to  the  financial  institutions  and  the 
financial services supported by RK-FINFA.     
Following IFAD’s current overall approach, RK-FINFA is designed based on a longer-term 
programming approach and the development of financing facilities that can operate on a 
sustained  basis,  beyond  the  duration  of  the  planned  project  period.  If  the  RK-FINFA 
strategies  and  implementation  approaches  prove  successful,  they  can  provide  an 
appropriate  framework  for  the  interventions  when  designing  future  IFAD-supported 
operations in Kenya. Furthermore, the two key investment instruments of the project (the 
Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme and the Green Financing Facility) are designed basically 
as long-term support facilities into which international and bilateral development partners 
sharing the same strategic views can invest without spending additional funds on design, 
implementation,  and  management  costs.  Based  on  experience  in  other  countries,  this 
feature can significantly increase the returns justifiable to add to the direct returns from 
the now proposed, original RK-FINFA investment. 
3 
Objectives.  The  project  goal  of  the  proposed  RK-FINFA  is:  “poverty  reduction,  climate 
change  resilient  and  improved  livelihoods  in  rural  areas”.  The  Project  Development 
Objective (PDO) of RK-FINFA is: “increased rural financial inclusion and green investments 
by agriculture value chain stakeholders, leading to equitable employment opportunities, 
innovative and resilient production systems, and increased incomes for smallholders, poor 
and marginalised rural households, women and youth”. 
Overall RK-FINFA Structure.  To achieve the RK-FINFA Project Goal and Development 
Objective, the project activities are structured into three mutually reinforcing components: 
(a) Component 1: Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS); (b) Component 2: 
Rural  Investment  Instruments;  and  Component  3:  Enabling  Rural  Finance  Environment 
and Project Coordination. The TSIS operations of the first component will start with each 
PFI, prior to allocation of investment resources through the second component. Diagram 
1  presents  the  overall  structure,  the  relationship  between  the  different  activities  and 
stakeholders and the expected results. 
Diagram 1: RK-FINFA Technical Components and Expected Results 
A. 
RK-FINFA Operational Area and Targeting Approach  
Geographic area of intervention 
The geographic coverage of RK-FINFA, once fully operational, will be nationwide. However, 
for an effective project start-up, the geographic targeting will operate in two phases. First, 
the  entry point for the  RK-FINFA  outreach  will be the 14  counties in  which at least two 
IFAD-supported projects operate with agricultural value chains. These counties are: 
  Bungoma  
  Busia 
  Embu  
4 
  Kakamega  
  Kirinyaga  
  Kisii 
  Machakos  
  Meru  
  Nakuru  
  Nandi  
  Nyeri  
  Siaya  
  Tharaka Nithi 
  Trans-Nzoia. 
The RK-FINFA capacity building will start in these counties (see below Component 1), and 
the first round of investment instrument roll out (see below Component 2) will take place 
in this target area. With this approach, RK-FINFA and its Participating Financial Institutions 
(PFIs)  will  benefit  from  synergies  with  earlier  IFAD-supported  value  chain  development 
activities, and the financing can be focused on diversified value chains. 
Second,  after  the  RK-FINFA  capacity  building  and  initial  financing  cycle,  the  PFIs  can 
expand their targeted area of investments with RK-FINFA resources to any rural county in 
Kenya. The PFIs will identify these expansion areas based on their market opportunities 
and capabilities while continuing to apply the agreed targeting principles of the project. 
For the 14 counties selected as initial area for RK-FINFA implementation, detailed data is 
presented in tables below. Table 1 shows the IFAD-supported VC projects in each county, 
with the targeted key crops. Table 2 present a detailed list of the key agricultural values 
chains  in  these  counties.  Table  3  provides  the  demographic  details  on  initial  RK-FINFA 
target counties. Table 4 shows the presence of farmer-based DT-SACCOs and MFBs in the 
initial RK-FINFA target counties. Table 5 provides data on the distribution of land in the 14 
counties.  In addition, Appendix 2 to this PIM provides a comprehensive mapping of the 
financial systems and institutions that serve the rural finance clientele targeted by the RK-
FINFA interventions. 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Table 1: Counties Targeted and IFAD-supported VC Projects  
No.  Region 
County 
(1) 
IFAD- Supported VC Projects 
 Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme- Climate 
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)  
(2)  Upper Tana Natural Resource Management Project 
(UTaNRMP) 
(1)  Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme- Climate 
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL) 
Maize, sorghum, millet, pulses 
Value Chains 
This is a Natural Resource Management Project, not 
a Value Chain Project. However, it has income 
earning activities through which beneficiaries 
produce cow and goat milk, poultry, fish, and 
horticulture crops.   
Maize, sorghum, millet, pulses 
(2)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
Fish 
(ABDP) 
Embu 
Mackakos 
EASTERN 
Meru 
(1)  Upper Tana Natural Resource Management Project 
(UTaNRMP)  
(2)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
(ABDP) 
This is a Natural Resource Management Project, not 
a Value Chain Project. However, it has income 
earning activities through which beneficiaries 
produce cow and goat milk, poultry, fish, and 
horticulture crops.   
Fish 
(1)  Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme- Climate 
Maize, sorghum, millet, pulses 
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL) 
(2)  Upper Tana Natural Resource Management Project 
(UTaNRMP) 
Tharaka 
Nithi 
(3)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
(ABDP) 
This is a Natural Resource Management Project, not 
a Value Chain Project. However, it has income 
earning activities through which beneficiaries 
produce cow and goat milk, poultry, fish, and 
horticulture crops.   
Fish 
6 
CENTRAL 
Kirinyaga 
Nyeri 
(1)  Upper Tana Natural Resource Management Project 
(UTaNRMP),  
(2)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
(ABDP) 
(1)  Upper Tana Natural Resource Management Project 
(UTaNRMP)  
(2)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
(ABDP) 
This is a Natural Resource Management Project, not 
a Value Chain Project. However, it has income 
earning activities through which beneficiaries 
produce cow and goat milk, poultry, fish, and 
horticulture crops.   
Fish 
This is a Natural Resource Management Project, not 
a Value Chain Project. However, it has income 
earning activities through which beneficiaries 
produce cow and goat milk, poultry, fish, and 
horticulture crops.   
Fish 
(1)  Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme- Climate 
Maize, sorghum, millet, pulses 
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL) 
Nakuru 
(2)  Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KELCOP) 
(3)  Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Project (SCDP) 
Livestock: Sheep and Goats meat, goat milk, 
poultry, honey 
Cow and goat milk 
5 
6 
7 
8 
RIFT VALLEY 
Nandi 
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)  
(2)  Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Project (SCDP) 
Cow and goat milk 
(1)  Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme- Climate 
Maize, sorghum, millet, pulses 
(1)  Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme- Climate 
Maize, sorghum, millet, pulses 
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)  
9 
Trans Nzoia 
(2)  Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KELCOP) 
(3)  Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Project (SCDP) 
Livestock: Sheep and Goats meat, goat milk, 
poultry, honey 
Cow and goat milk 
10  WESTERN 
Bungoma 
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)  
(2)  Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KELCOP) 
Livestock: Sheep and Goats meat, goat milk, 
poultry, honey 
(1)  Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme- Climate 
Maize, sorghum, millet, pulses 
7 
(3)  Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Project (SCDP) 
Cow and goat milk 
11 
Busia 
(2)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
(ABDP) 
poultry, honey 
Fish 
(1)  Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KELCOP)   Livestock: Sheep and Goats meat, goat milk, 
(1)  Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme- Climate 
Maize, sorghum, millet, pulses 
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL) 
(2)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
Fish 
12 
Kakamega 
(ABDP) 
(3)  Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KELCOP) 
(4)  Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Project (SCDP 
Livestock: Sheep and Goats meat, goat milk, 
poultry, honey 
Cow and goat milk 
13 
14 
NYANZA 
Kisii 
Siaya 
(1)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
Fish 
(ABDP)  
(2)  Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Project (SCDP) 
Cow and goat milk 
(1)  Aquaculture Business Development programme 
Fish 
(ABDP)  
(2)  Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KELCOP) 
Livestock: Sheep and Goats meat, goat milk, 
poultry, honey 
8 
Table 2: Main Agricultural Value Chains by Target Counties 
No.  County 
1  Bungoma 
2  Busia 
3  Embu 
4  Kakamega 
5  Kirinyaga 
6  Kisii 
7  Mackakos 
8  Meru 
9  Nakuru 
10  Nandi 
11  Nyeri 
Crops  
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, wheat, green grams, bananas, vegetables, 
groundnuts, watermelon, sugarcane, cotton, dairy cattle, beef 
cattle, sheep, goats, donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, 
fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, rice, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, green grams, bananas, vegetables, groundnuts, 
watermelon, sugarcane, cotton, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, 
goats, donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, green grams, bananas, vegetables, groundnuts, 
watermelon, sugarcane, cotton, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, 
goats, camels, donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, green grams, bananas, vegetables, groundnuts, 
watermelon, sugarcane, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goats, 
donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, rice, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, green grams, bananas, vegetables, watermelon, 
sugarcane, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goats, donkeys, 
pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, green grams, bananas, vegetables, groundnuts, 
sugarcane, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goats, donkeys, 
pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, green grams, bananas, vegetables, watermelon, 
sugarcane, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goats, camels, 
donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, wheat, green grams, bananas, vegetables, 
groundnuts, watermelon, sugarcane, cotton, dairy cattle, beef 
cattle, sheep, goats, camels, donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, 
rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, wheat, green grams, bananas, vegetables, sugarcane, 
dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goats, camels, donkeys, pigs, 
chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, wheat, bananas, vegetables, groundnuts, sugarcane, 
dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goats, donkeys, pigs, chicken, 
beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet potatoes, 
wheat, green grams, bananas, vegetables, sugarcane, dairy 
cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goats, donkeys, pigs, chicken, 
beehives, rabbits, fish. 
12  Siaya 
Maize, sorghum, millet, rice, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, green grams, bananas, vegetables, groundnuts, 
9 
13  Tharaka Nithi 
14  Trans Nzoia 
watermelon, sugarcane, cotton, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, 
goats, donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, green grams, bananas, vegetables, groundnuts, 
watermelon, sugarcane, cotton, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, 
goats, camels, donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
Maize, sorghum, millet, potatoes, beans, cassava, sweet 
potatoes, wheat, green grams, bananas, vegetables, 
groundnuts, sugarcane, dairy cattle, beef cattle, sheep, goats, 
donkeys, pigs, chicken, beehives, rabbits, fish. 
10 
Table 3: Demographic details on initial RK-FINFA target counties1 
County 
No. 
Kenya  
Counties 
Population  Number of 
Households 
12,143,913 
47,564,296 
1  Bungoma 
1,670,570 
358,796 
2  Busia 
3  Embu 
893,681 
198,152 
608,599 
182,743 
4  Kakamega 
1,867,579 
433,207 
5  Kirinyaga 
610,411 
204,188 
6  Kisii 
1,266,860 
308,054 
7  Machakos 
1,421,932 
402,466 
8  Meru 
1,545,714 
426,360 
9  Nakuru 
2,162,202 
616,046 
10  Nandi 
11  Nyeri 
12  Siaya 
885,711 
759,164 
199,426 
248,050 
993,183 
250,698 
13  Tharaka Nithi 
393,177 
109,860 
14  Trans Nzoia 
990,341 
223,808 
Household 
Size 
Land Area  
(Sq. Km) 
Population 
Density 
Poverty 
Index 
(%)   
Percentage2 
Rural 
Population 
Rural 
Population 
Rural 
Youth 
Population 
% Youth 
to Rural 
Population 
3.9 
580,876 
82 
45.2 
72.0  34,246,293 
4.6 
4.5 
3.3 
4.3 
3.0  
4.1 
3.5 
3.6 
3.5 
4.4 
3.0  
3.9 
3.6 
4.4 
3,024 
1,696 
2,821 
3,020 
1,478 
1,323 
6,043 
7,006 
7,462 
2,856 
3,325 
2,530 
2,564 
2,495 
552 
527 
216 
618 
413 
958 
235 
221 
290 
310 
228 
393 
153 
397 
47.3 
60.4 
35.3 
49.2 
25.2 
51.4 
24.1 
31.0 
33.5 
40.7 
27.6 
38.2 
41.0 
52.8 
88.6 
1,480,125 
508,873 
87.3 
87.5 
780,184 
270,310 
532,524 
183,966 
90.1 
1,682,689 
562,951 
77.7 
474,289 
154,258 
88.0 
1,114,837 
385,983 
70.9 
1,008,150 
341,565 
91.0 
1,406,600 
496,628 
51.6 
1,115,696 
415,829 
93.3 
80.1 
91.4 
91.7 
82.0 
826,368 
306,008 
608,090 
907,769 
184,772 
302,968 
360,543 
121,531 
812,080 
279,758 
34.4 
34.6 
34.5 
33.5 
32.5 
34.6 
33.9 
35.3 
37.3 
37.0 
30.4 
33.4 
33.7 
34.4 
1 Kenya 2019 Population Census 
2 https:www.citypopulation.de/en/Kenya/admin/eastern/16_embu (“the county”) – 2019 
11 
Table 4: Agricultural DT-SACCOs and MFBs Present in 14 Initial Target Counties 
No  
County  
Banks 
MFBs 
DT-Saccos 
Key  AVCs  into  Which 
the FIs Lend 
1 
Bungoma 
2 
Busia 
3 
Embu 
4 
Kakamega 
5 
Kirinyaga 
6 
Kisii 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya  
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya  
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya  
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya  
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya  
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
Ngarisha 
Faridi 
County 
Daima  
Mwietheri 
Nawiri 
Invest and Grow 
Bingwa 
Fortune  
Lainisha  
Kenya Achievas 
Nyamira Tea  
Vision Point  
Wakenya Pamoja 
Coffee, 
horticulture 
tea, 
dairy, 
Coffee, 
horticulture, rice 
tea, 
dairy, 
Coffee, 
horticulture, bananas 
tea, 
dairy, 
7 
Machakos 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
KWFT 
FAULU 
Universal Traders  
Cereals,  pulses,  dairy, 
horticulture 
12 
8 
Meru 
9 
Nakuru 
10 
Nandi 
11 
Nyeri 
12 
Siaya 
13 
Tharaka-Nithi 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
SMEP 
Rafiki 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Rafiki 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
Capital 
Dhabiti  
Golden Pilla 
Nexus 
Nyambene Arimi 
Smart Champion 
Southern Star 
Thamani  
Yetu 
Skyline 
Coffee, 
horticulture,  
tea, 
dairy, 
dairy, 
cereals 
horticulture, 
Kolenge   
Nandi Farmers 
The Apple 
tea,  dairy,  horticulture, 
cereals 
Enea  
Taifa 
Wananchi  
Wakulima Commercial 
Taragi 
Coffee, 
horticulture,  
tea, 
dairy, 
KWFT 
Trans Nation 
Pulses, 
horticulture  
tea, 
dairy, 
13 
14 
Trans Nzoia 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
ABSA Bank 
Co-operative Bank of Kenya 
Equity Bank 
Kenya Commercial Bank  
National Bank of Kenya 
KWFT 
SMEP 
Juhudi Kilimo* 
Trans Counties 
dairy, cereals  
Notes: (a)The 49 farmer-based DT-saccos have no presence in four of the 14 counties – Bungoma, Busia, Kakamega and Siaya; (b) included are 2 non-DT MFIs (Credit-
only), which are very strong in the agriculture and rural space and have many branches in the target counties (Juhudi Kilimo and ECLOF Kenya). 
Table 5: Distribution of Agriculture Land (Hectares) and Farming Household by Purpose and by County 
No 
County 
Bungoma 
Busia 
Embu 
Kakamega 
Kirinyaga 
Kisii 
Machakos 
Meru 
Nakuru 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  Nandi 
11  Nyeri 
Siaya 
12 
Tharaka Nithi 
13 
Trans Nzoia 
14 
Areas of 
Agriculture Land 
(Ha) 
Area of Agriculture Land by Main 
Purpose 
Subsistence 
Commercial 
Total Number of 
Farming 
Households 
No. of Households by Main 
Purpose of Agriculture Production 
Subsistence 
Commercial 
223,269 
116,705 
122,114 
219,776 
80,166 
165,068 
268694 
361,272 
357,968 
211,761 
98,512 
137,462 
147,710 
154,167 
202,494 
111,661 
105,151 
201,093 
52,890 
154,291 
248,201 
310,827 
270,779 
164,111 
81,690 
131,706 
134,102 
105,145 
19,091 
4,232 
16,259 
13,125 
26,670 
9,494 
17,610 
45,753 
83,022 
46,718 
16,107 
4,581 
12,281 
47,750 
280,445 
148,257 
130,990 
335,269 
139,866 
219,853 
231,341 
274,865 
283,652 
148,887 
164,229 
194,362 
85,767 
140,249 
264,247 
143,486 
113,678 
322,193 
96,666 
210,045 
220,575 
238,707 
241,174 
134,498 
140,838 
188,253 
78,456 
21,815 
12,829 
2,892 
15,671 
9,778 
41,035 
7,981 
8,203 
30,109 
37,725 
13,136 
21,590 
3,750 
6,073 
15,884 
14 
The ongoing (or just closed) IFAD-supported value chain projects that RK-FINFA will initially 
be anchored on are: (i) Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KELCOP); (ii) Aquaculture 
Business Development Programme (ABDP); (iii) Kenya Cereals Enhancement Programme  - 
Climate  Resilient  Agricultural  Livelihoods  Window  (KCEP-CRAL);  (iv)  Upper  Tana  Natural 
Resources  Management  Project  (UTaNRMP);  and  (v)  the  recently  closed  Smallholder  Dairy 
Commercialization  Programme  (SDCP).  These  projects  had  already  carried  out  poverty 
analysis in selecting their beneficiaries in order to develop pro-poor value chains, and also 
complement  projects  financed  by  other  partners.  They  are  implementing  activities  to  train 
beneficiaries  in  production,  financial  literacy  and  business  development  and  management, 
and graduating the smallholders to access finance. These beneficiaries will provide a ready 
pipeline for the RK-FINFA with diversified value chains.  
The  population  in  these  counties  is  largely  rural,  ranging  from  51.6  percent  of  the  total 
population  for  Nakuru  county  to  93.3  percent  for  Nandi  County,  with  an  average  of  83.6 
percent for the 14 counties. Except for Nakuru, all other target counties are above 70 percent 
rural.  They  rely  mainly  on  mixed  farming  (growing  rainfed  crops  while  keeping  livestock 
animals  including  poultry  and  bees  and  to  a  small  extent  rearing  fish).  Poverty  levels  are 
moderate as they range from 24.1 percent for Machakos to 60.4 percent for Busia, but there 
are deep pockets of very high poverty in each of these counties. Population density also varies 
among the target counties which ranges from 153 in Tharaka Nithi to 958 in Kisii (the National 
Population  Density is  82)3.  High  population  density is  a  major  cause  of  landlessness,  food 
shortages and food insecurity as the available land is split to very small uneconomical plots 
among  families.    As  regards  environmental  vulnerability,  the  target  area  exhibits  limited 
vulnerability to climate induced hazards, mainly floods and drought4.  
According to the County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs), each county has a number 
of  MSMEs,  dealing  with  agro-based  value  addition  or  and  other  non-agro-based  activities. 
However, the statistical base is weak and micro-firms are not effectively listed by their type 
or size. Some countries do not have statistics on operational MSMEs although large numbers 
of them operate in these rural areas, most of them unlicensed. 
RK-FINFA Projected Outreach  
Based on projection made during the project design, the project will benefit 190,000  rural 
Kenyan  households,  including  both  direct  and  indirect  clients.  This  includes  direct  financial 
and  technical  services  to  68,000  households/MSMEs,  covering:  (i)  an  estimated  66,000 
economically  active  smallholder  households;  and  (ii)  2,000  rural  MSMEs  engaged  in 
smallholder-inclusive  VCs.  Considering  the  average  household  size  of  4.7  persons  in  rural 
Kenya,  this  corresponds  to  319,600  total  household  members.  In  addition,  the  project  will 
engage  with  estimated  five  commercial  banks,  five  MFBs  and  30  SACCOs,  which  are  not 
included  in  the  estimated  number  of  programme  beneficiaries.  In  addition,  the  indirect 
outreach of the project  includes: (i) estimated 32,000 persons through employment in the 
RK-FINFA  supported  agribusinesses  and  farms;  and  (ii)  90,000  smallholder  households 
through participation in the VCs strengthened by the supported agribusinesses. 
Targeting Strategy and Beneficiary Profiles  
The overall RK-FINFA targeting strategy is based on the beneficiary profiles used by the on-
going IFAD-supported value chain projects. The focus is on low-income, economically active 
rural  households,  with  specific  targets  on  women  and  youth  participation  in  both  capacity 
building and financing activities. The PIM of RK-FINFA includes comprehensive strategies for 
gender  and  youth  targeting,  as  well  as  nutrition  linkages  of  RK-FINFA.  Environmental  and 
climate change-related objectives will be integral parts of the project’s general strategy and 
were among the key factors influencing the selection of the RK-FINFA investment instruments. 
The RK-FINFA beneficiary profiles include: 
3 2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census. 
4 Climate Change Vulnerability and Impact Analysis in Kenya, Samuel N. Marigi, American Journal of Climate Change, 2017 
15 
  Smallholders5 and rural microenterprises6  in  the  project  target  areas  with limited  access  to 
financial services and products due to lack of adequate business skills, limited access to markets 
and lack of collateral assets. This category of beneficiaries represents about 90 per cent of the total 
number of beneficiaries, and will include 50 per cent women and 30 per cent youth. The RK-FINFA 
micro- and small financing packages are appropriate to this project core target group, including the 
green finance products to increase climate change resilience. 
  Under-employed rural men, women and youth with no access to land or assets beyond their 
skills and time. The project will support them to seek employment in the VCs as seasonal workers 
in the farms and full time workers in the supported SMEs including service providers, input material 
suppliers,  processers,  logistics  and  sales.  This  group  represents  about  10  per  cent  of  RK-FINFA 
beneficiaries. 
  Agribusiness-SMEs7  that  have  viable  market-oriented  business  models  with  potential  to 
create jobs and opportunities for smallholders.8 Due to risks inherent in the agriculture sector, 
as  well  as  insufficient  business  planning  capacities,  they  have  limited  access  to  finance  to 
expand their operations and employment creation in the VCs. All RK-FINFA supported SMEs 
are involved in and promote smallholder-inclusive value chains and provide employment in 
the RK-FINFA’s targeted rural areas. 
RK-FINFA Social Inclusion Strategy  
Proper  targeting  of  programme  beneficiaries  will  ensure  that  the  RK-FINFA  investments 
promote  inclusive  and  sustainable  rural  transformation  while  reducing  poverty  and  food 
insecurity. Targeting requires an analysis of the rural poverty situation that includes a socio-
economic  assessment  of  the  target  group’s  livelihoods  and  opportunities  so  that  the 
Programme interventions can address identified challenges and be tailored according to the 
country's  goals  and  community  priorities  as  well  as  the  ‘leaving  no  one  behind’  principle. 
Financial  inclusion  refers  to  the  process  by  which  individuals  and  businesses  can  access 
appropriate, affordable, and timely financial products and services through banking or other 
financial intermediaries. Financial inclusion efforts typically target those who are unbanked 
and underbanked and directs sustainable financial services to them beyond merely opening 
a  bank  account.  Inclusive  financial  systems  have  been  linked  to  stronger  and  more 
sustainable economic growth and development, and achieving financial inclusion is a priority 
for Kenya. 
To  ensure  effective  social  targeting,  the  RK-FINFA  strategy  will  apply  a  combination  of 
targeting mechanisms and measures: 
a.  Poverty and community based targeting Participatory social mapping and wealth-ranking 
using PRA/PLA tools during start up and in the early stage of implementation will ensure to: 
(i)  disaggregate  the  communities  along  the  poverty  axis  and  the  social  axis  while  also 
considering  local  perceptions  of  these  factors;  (ii)  identify  benchmarks  against  which  to 
determine how the different groups will be targeted in the project activities; and (iii) ensure 
targeted  project  interventions  on  offer  in  line  with  the  targeted  population’s  interests  and 
livelihoods.  Targeting  will  also  be  validated  through  all  key  stakeholders  including  ongoing 
IFAD project teams, community leaders, local administration, County governments, relevant 
Government Ministries and Directorates of Gender and Youth. 
b.  Direct targeting mechanisms will ensure the identification of key beneficiaries, based on set 
criteria and validation, participation of 50 per cent women, 30 per cent youth, and 5 per cent 
PWDs,  vulnerable  groups,  including  female  and  youth  headed  households.  RK-FINFA  will 
ensure  project  interventions  are  inclusive  and  seek  support  to  address  gender  and  age 
5 For RK-FINFA the definition of “Smallholder” is based on the criteria: (i) engaged in agriculture activity, (ii) main household income from 
agriculture activity, (iii) majority of agriculture work carried out by family members, (iv) the RK-FINFA supported “small loans” and “microloans” are 
appropriate for the household agriculture investments. 
6 According to GoK definition, a microenterprise has 1-9 employees and up to KES 500,000 (about US$ 5,000) annual turnover. 
7 According to GoK definition, a small enterprise has 10-49 employees and up to KES 5,000,000 annual turnover, and a medium enterprise has 50-
250 employees and up to KES 100,000,000 annual turnover. 
8 Profiles of 150 agribusinesses have been collected by the predecessor Kenya RF project PROFIT. These agribusiness profiles are available and 
serve as possible initial pipeline for RK-FINFA support. 
16 
constraints by facilitating linkage to access to finance targeting women and youth. In addition, 
RK-FINFA will promote the economic and social empowerment of female and mixed groups 
through participatory household focused approaches and the use of Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS9) to reach about 30,000 smallholder households.  
c.  Self-targeting  measures  will  ensure  that  project  interventions  respond  to  the  needs  and 
priorities  of  the  target  groups  and  especially  women  as  producers,  agro  dealers,  livestock 
farmer,  fishers  and  those  in  food  processing  and  trading.  The  project  interventions  will  be 
adapted to women and youth needs by tailoring services and loan products to the priorities 
and capacities of the poor, such that the amounts available and/or the conditions attached 
will be considerate of the limitations faced by women and youth.   
Other targeting considerations will include the pre-identification of potential beneficiaries from 
poor  communities  and  social  mobilization  campaigns  using  local  languages,  radio  stations, 
and other community media. 
RK-FINFA  has  a  clear  strategy  for  the  inclusion  of  women,  youth,  smallholder  households, 
PWDs  and  vulnerable  persons.  In  RK-FINFA,  the  target  is  that  women  comprise  50%  of 
beneficiaries,  youth  comprise  30%  and  a  minimum  of  5%  of  beneficiaries  will  be  from 
vulnerable  groups  (including  persons  with  disabilities  and  persons  with  HIV/AIDS).  Key 
strategies to achieve the project’ social targeting objectives are described below. 
Gender Equality Strategy. The key gender transformational approaches and strategies of 
RK-FINFA will include support to: 
(i)Women economic empowerment for enhanced access and control of productive resources, 
affordable  access  to  finance  and  services.  Through  the  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  and  the 
Green Financing Facility, RK-FINFA will (a) provide financial support to women-owned micro 
and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) that have growth potential, through participating 
financial  institutions  including  MFBs/MFIs  and  SACCOs.  This  will  include  considerations  for 
alternative collateral, group lending, longer repayment periods, community outreach/mobile 
services  and  digital  products  to  increase  outreach  to  rural  areas;  (b)  technical  support 
services to build the capacity of women in agribusiness, their groups and associations and to 
build  capacity  of  MFBs,  MFIs,  SACCOs  to  support  the  development  of  women  owned 
agribusiness and financial products. The capacity to increase the orientation of MFBs, MFIs 
and SACCOs towards gender and youth-inclusive strategies will include:  
  Leverage the potential of Women and Youth Savings Groups and individual lending 
  Expand the range of available options in terms of digital financial offers 
  Develop new lending approaches that do not exclusively rely on traditional collateral  
  Foster the expansion of agent banking in the participating Counties 
  Foster women and youth-specific financial offers among formal FIs by promoting internal 
restructuring 
  Tailor and focus the financial offer of formal FIs to the needs of different age of clients 
and  
  Improve data collection practices in the agricultural finance sector in regard to women 
and youth.  
Access to information, knowledge and financial services for women will be through financial 
literacy,  business  development  services,  follow-up  and  training,  and  access  to  digital 
platforms such as through mobile phones. Women will receive 50 percent of the training in 
business  skills.  The  TSIS  Coordinator  of  RK-FINFA  will  integrate  gender  focused  financial 
education and curriculum development of a national curriculum for sustainability using ICT 
and e-platforms. A minimum of 30 per cent  of the business skills training will target young 
9 GALS is a structured community-led empowerment methodology aiming at economic, social and political transformation. 
It gives women, men and youth, more control over their lives to catalyse a movement for gender equality. Hivos (Humanist 
Institute for Cooperation with Developing Countries – an International NGO headquartered in the Netherlands in partnership 
with  Oxfam  is  implementing  an  IFAD  supported  regional  grant  to  scale  up  GALS  in  the  Eastern  Africa  region.  Currently 
implemented by Upper Tana and KCEP-KCRAL projects. 
17 
women and men. In addition, young women and men will be selected and trained as business 
coaches (ToTs) from the Counties and Wards. Business skills training will be delivered to the 
various groups through them. Five per cent of the recipients of financial literacy and business 
skills training will be persons from marginalized groups persons with disability or persons with 
HIV. 
(ii)  Balanced  and  reduced  workloads  for  women.  The  high  workload  and  lack  of  time  for 
productive  work  hinder  women  from  creating  viable  or  more  profitable  agribusinesses.  To 
address this, RK-FINFA will support women to access green  financing for labour and time-
saving technologies such as solar lighting and energy saving cooking stoves, to encourage 
shifts towards equitable sharing of workload burden within the households.  
(iii)  Enhancement  of  women’s  role  in  decision-making  and  leadership  at  household  and 
community level will be implemented through leadership trainings and mentorship of women 
in  farmer  and  agribusiness  groups,  village  savings  and  loan  groups,  associations  and  co-
operatives, and encouraging 50 per cent representation of women in project committees and 
participation  in  all  project  interventions.  Other  gender  related  interventions  such  as 
awareness raising on issues related to prevention of early marriage and GBV, importance of 
adolescent girls' education to curb rising teenage pregnancies, will be integrated through the 
GALS methodology.   
(iv)  The  Gender  Action  Learning  methodology  (GALS)and  Household  methodologies  will  be 
instrumental in enabling gender transformation amongst smallholders in groups and in farmer 
groups to empower women and men towards financial inclusion, more balanced workloads, 
equitable decision making and benefits sharing. GALS tools will be used to have smallholders 
engage  gender-transformative  household  dialogue  sessions  focused  on  understanding  the 
importance  of  starting,  running,  and  developing  agribusinesses  and  facilitate  changes  in 
contemporary society and adoption of labour and energy saving technologies to increase time 
efficiency in relation to reproductive and productive work.  GALS facilitators selected as GALS 
champions to train other community persons will be 60 per cent women and 40 per cent men 
to facilitate gender dialogues. Use of visual maps which make women and youth’s division of 
labour visible helps groups develop a common inclusive and gender equitable vision maps. 
GALS  exchange  learning  visits  amongst  groups  and  with  other  IFAD  projects  will  be 
encouraged  to  provide  women  with  an  opportunity  to  exchange  and  connect  with  other 
women across Counties, dialogue with other key actors and enhance opportunities to learn 
from each and develop a collective voice and vision. Smallholder households will be the focus 
of the GALS intervention, encouraging females and males as partners to participate.   
Youth  Targeting  Strategy.  RK-FINFA  will  encourage  creation  of  jobs  by  and  for  young 
people  and  increasing  their  employment  opportunities  along  the  different  value  chains 
through  increased  access  to  finance.  The  current  population  growth  and  the  trends  in 
agribusiness present an opportunity for young people to set-up and establish businesses that 
include  value  addition,  processing,  marketing,  and  the  transport  of  agro-products. 
Specifically, RK-FINFA will support young women and people through: 
i)  Access  to  affordable  finance  and  productive  assets.  RK-FINFA  will  support  youth-  sensitive 
financing  modalities  in  order  to  address  the  challenges  youth  face  in  accessing  financial 
products and services as well as consider financing options for productive assets. These will 
include encouraging wholesale lending to MFB, MFIs and SACCOs that have experience and 
policies  geared  towards  youth;  youth  cooperatives  and  savings  groups  to  reduce  risks; 
product  development  targeting  youth;  and  start-up  lending  with  flexible  guarantees  with 
alternative collateral requirements, extended repayment periods and timely approvals. The 
programme will collaborate with FIs to stimulate financial service providers to pilot and design 
appropriate  financial  products  incentivize  youth.  Such  products  may  minimize  age 
restrictions, be more flexible on identification and collateral requirements and flexible know-
your-customer requirements for youth-specific products. Special loans may be provided for 
youth that want to develop businesses in value chains that have fewer youth participating but 
show high development potential. 
ii)  Digital solutions – RK-FINFA will leverage on the private sector to pilot and scale-up digital 
solutions  that  will  positively  impact  rural  young  women  and  men.  The  programme  will 
approach  FSPs  and  supporting  players,  in  terms  of  expansion  and  sustainability  of  their 
18 
business models to consider digital solutions for digital finance  – for example using mobile 
money services to rural areas to increase access for rural youth. Consequently, other digital 
innovations will be considered to increase access to information and rollout of digital financial 
literacy and BDS making agribusiness a more appealing activity for the youth. 
iii)  Capacity building on financial literacy and business development training, business skills to 
equip youth with tools for mindset change and confidence to make sound financial decisions, 
in turn enabling them to manage financial services and helping the Gender Youth, Nutrition 
and  Social  Inclusion  m  work  towards  positive  mindset  shifts  will  be  key.  The  project  will 
undertake a detailed youth needs assessment will be incorporated into the baseline or initial 
project studies to determine the differential needs and required skills to be trained on. RK-
financial  education  and  an 
FINFA  TSIS  Coordinator  will  integrate  youth  focused 
entrepreneurship curriculum into the national curriculum for sustainability using ICT and e-
platforms. Short trainings and exposure fairs and visits can be organised at a communal level 
with assistance of implementing partners or by institutions in form of field internships. 
iv) 
Increasing  youth  participation  and  leadership  through  representation  quotas  in  project 
committees and activities. The project will aim to work with financial institutions and service 
providers  that  have  a  youth  focus.  RK-FINFA  will  encourage  the  use  of  youth  as  financial 
agents and educators in project activities to empower their leadership skills and include youth 
sex disaggregated data to monitor their participation.  
Nutrition  linkages.  Investments  in  agriculture  and  rural  development  have  an  important 
role in fighting hunger and malnutrition by ensuring that nutritious, safe and diverse foods 
are made available and affordable for all people at all times, either from the market or from 
farmers’ own production. RK-FINFA seeks to contribute to increased household food security 
and consumption of nutritious foods. Specifically, the programme will contribute to nutrition 
outcomes in the following ways:  
(i) 
(ii) 
Increased food production for own consumption and local markets through increased access 
to  finance  and  productive  assets  in  agriculture  value  chains.  Support  to  farmers  aims  to 
increase the growing nutrient-rich crops (including fruits and vegetables), fisheries (small-
scale or commercialized) or rearing animals (for meat, eggs and dairy products) will increase 
and diversify food consumption and income sources. 
Through  increased  access  to  finance  and  proactive  assets  leading  to  increased  income 
generation,  the  project  will  aim  at  increased  consumption  of  nutrient-rich  and  nutritious 
foods,  such  as  fruits  and  vegetables;  and  increase  consumption  of  animal-sourced  foods 
among small holder households. 
(iii)  Women’s  education,  empowerment  and  control  over  resources  will  improve  nutrition 
outcomes not only for women themselves, but for their families and communities at large. 
Understanding  how  gender  roles  affect  time  and  labour  division,  access  and  control  over 
resources and decision-making at the household level, and how these factors influence the 
nutrition situation of women and their children, will contribute to improved nutrition. Green 
and  labour-saving  technologies  in  agriculture,  particularly  supported  by  RK-FINFA’s  Green 
Financing Facility, can help reduce women’s workload and increase time available for selfcare, 
childcare and self-development.  
With  the  above  approaches,  the  Gender,  Youth,  Nutrition  and  Social  Inclusion  strategy 
provides  strategic  guidance  to  RK-FINFA  staff  to  mainstream  gender  equality,  youth 
empowerment,  nutrition, and social inclusion. To  operationalise the strategy, a baseline or 
assessment will be undertaken at start-up to inform the review of the Gender Youth, Nutrition 
and  Social  Inclusion  (GYNSI)  strategy  and  develop  an  action  plan  for  integrating  gender 
equality,  youth,  and  social  inclusion  strategies  for  the  project.  The  action  plan  will  include 
targeted interventions for each year and inform the AWPBs. Activities under the action plan 
will  be  regularly  assessed  against  this  GYNSI  strategy’s  objectives  using  the  logframe 
indicators. At the end of the financial year, the annual GYNSI action plan will be evaluated 
with lessons learned taken into account to inform any revisions for the next financial year. In 
19 
addition, RK-FINFA will monitor and integrate evaluation of the implementation of the GYNSI 
strategy, at baseline, Mid-Term, and End-Term evaluations. 
These  social  targeting  approaches  will  influence  the  RK-FINFA  implementation  process  as 
follows:  
(i)  Establishing targeting quotas for capacity building of those smallholders who would otherwise 
not be reached; identification of outreach interventions to cater to the needs of each social 
group at different levels. 
(ii)  Ensuring that all activities at local level start with obtaining buy in from local structures, and 
specifically, support towards social inclusion. Specific issues to be highlighted in that process 
include:  
  Participatory socio economic, gender and youth analysis at community level at the start of 
the project or baseline 
  Agreed  criteria  for  selection  of  beneficiaries  who  will  receive  different  financial  products 
promoting meaningful participation of youth and women in project and governance processes  
  Mechanisms to ensure project information can be disseminated at flexible timings to ensure 
 
that women, men and young people and other vulnerable groups receive project information    
Inclusion of all key groups in project related processes i.e. young men and women of different 
socio-economic groups, gender, ethnicity, and age    
  Participatory assessment of other common social risks and barriers identified in project design 
that could compromise their participation in project activities; and  
  Development of a project grievance mechanism for project beneficiaries know where to go 
for help and provide feedback on services as well as any challenges they face in participating 
in project activities 
iii)  Participatory planning and monitoring throughout the lifetime of the project, inclusive data 
collection,  analysis  and  dissemination  use  of  disaggregated  data  by  socio-economic  group, 
gender, and age.  
iv)  Monitoring intended and unintended changes in in the project implementation in relation to 
gender inequality, youth, and social cohesion.  
v)  Allocation of funds in the Annual Work Plans and Budgets for targeted interventions for youth, 
women, and vulnerable groups   
vi)  Production of knowledge and sharing lessons learnt in the social inclusion aspects within the 
project and with stakeholders. 
vii)  At institutional and project levels, the project will ensure: 
  Equal opportunity policies and affirmative actions to achieve parity in employment of women, 
men and young people at the PMU and technical service providers and financial agents hired 
for RK-FINFA activities 
  Training of all project staff at national level, implementing agencies and relevant stakeholders 
on social analysis, as well as youth and gender transformative programming.   
  RK-FINFA  human  resource  policies  and  procedures  to  be  gender  sensitive,  attract  young 
people, have zero tolerance to gender-based violence and prevent child labour. 
  RK-FINFA  partners  and  associates  uphold  social  inclusion  principles  through  policies  and 
mechanisms of operation. 
Relevant lessons learnt for the implementation of RK-FINFA 
The  RK-FINFA  design  process  was  informed  by  lessons  learned  and  best  practices  from: 
(a) previous IFAD experiences in Kenya; (b) results from IFAD projects in other countries of 
the region; and (c) similar projects financed by the Government or other develop partners in 
the country. Particularly relevant have been the experiences from the implementation of the 
IFAD-supported and recently closed Programme for Rural Outreach of Financial Innovations 
and Technologies (PROFIT). The  key lessons from past and ongoing operations for the RK-
FINFA design can be summarised as: 
  The provision of technical support services (TSS) to PFIs should start immediately after the 
PFI selection, to ensure that the actual portfolio financing and guaranteeing operations fully 
20 
benefit from the TSS. Furthermore, the TA functions need to be aligned and well targeted so 
that TA to PFIs, MSMEs and farmers are provided in synergy.10 
  RF  Project  Management  Unit  and  the  implementing  partners  must  have  adequate  capacity 
and assigned institutional roles for the designed RF instruments.11 RK-FINFA should build on 
existing  progress  of  institution-building  in  the  National  Treasury  and  embed  all  project 
elements  into  existing  public  and  private  organizations,  which  have  RK-FINFA-aligned 
mandates. 
  Appropriate  eligibility  criteria  for  both  PFIs  and  final  borrowers  in  the  RK-FINFA  financed 
operations  should  be  included  in  the  design,  to  ensure  both  (a)  the  smooth  start-up  of 
financing  operations  and  (b)  adequate  emphasis  on  IFAD  mainstreaming  themes,  climate 
smart agriculture and climate change resilience, gender, and youth empowerment.12 
  The key investment instruments should be implemented through specialized intermediaries, 
based  on  operational  guidelines  to  enable  both  the  smooth  operations  of  the  facilities  and 
appropriate  controls  and  reporting  through  IT-based  reporting  solutions,  supported  by 
systematic field verification visits.13 
  Targeting framework should be drafted and agreed upon at the design stage of the project, 
and at start-up confirmed through subsidiary agreements with the PFIs. For appropriate social 
targeting, a RF project and its PFIs should apply criteria in line with IFAD and Government 
priorities,  including  focus  on  reaching  women  and  youth.  For  geographical  targeting,  most 
ESA RF projects are implemented nationwide in rural areas, while more specific geographical 
focus is agreed upon with individual PFIs.14 
  PFI reporting should be based on indicators that the financial institutions collect as a part of 
their standard operations, focusing on detailed transaction and portfolio data. The evaluations 
of the project impact on benefiting households should be organised separately by the PMU 
and carried out on a sample basis by specialist institutions/NGOs, based on experiences from 
similar projects elsewhere.15 
  Operating with a large number of different types of PFIs (banks, SACCOs, MFBs) with different 
types of clientele in different types of environments, appropriate flexibility should be allowed 
concerning  particularly  the  terms  that  the  different  PFIs  apply  in  their  lending  to  final 
customers.16 
  To ensure an effective exit strategy for the project and a long-term impact of its investments, 
the project design and loan negotiations should cover in detail the longer-term sustainability 
aspects  of  the  supported  facilities  and  make  appropriate  provisions  for  the  entry  to  the 
facilities of new public and private development investors to these rural support facilities. 17 
Particular Lessons Learned emerged and adopted from PROFIT programme: 
  Agricultural  sector  lending  works  best  following  a  step-by-step  systematic  approach  that 
builds up from the strategy to the final delivery of products to the client. Even though this 
approach requires time to build, once institutionalized it becomes a systematic process which 
can be applied easily.  For RSF and CF subcomponents, the key lessons were as follows:  
  Technical  assistance  support  needs  to  precede  financial  support  to  ensure  effective  and 
sustainable use of credit lines provided and the demand side BSS could have been used more 
strategically to improve value-chain inclusivity. Participating financial institutions key motive 
for lending is loan recovery and profitability and not monitoring of the socio-economic impact 
of the lending.  
10 IFAD ESA Rural Finance Stocktake including review of ongoing projects PROFIT/Kenya, MIVARF/Tanzania, RUFIP II/Ethiopia, 
RUFEP/Zambia, PROFIRA/Uganda, PAIFAR-B/Burundi, FARMSE/Malawi, REFP/Mozambique, FINCLUDE/Eswatini and RUFIP III/Ethiopia 
11 See experiences of PROFIT at Mid Term Review report 2014, Supervision reports 2015-2019, IFAD 
12 Ibid 
13 Principles for Public Credit Guarantee Schemes for SMEs, 2015, World Bank Group 
14 See targeting structures of IFAD ESA RF projects PROFIT/Kenya, MIVARF/Tanzania, RUFIP II/Ethiopia, RUFEP/Zambia, 
PROFIRA/Uganda, FARMSE/Malawi, REFP/Mozambique and RUFIP III/Ethiopia 
15 PROFIT Completion Report, 2019 
16 IFAD Decision Tools for Rural Finance, 2010 
             17 PROFIT Completion Report, 2019 
21 
  Complementary  support  systems  are  needed  to  support  the  lending  partners  (banks)  to 
monitor,  assess  and  document  the  on-going  progress  of  interventions  through  a  different 
entity (independent agency or development body). 
  PROFIT has very limited information and evidence on how smallholders have benefited from 
RSF and CF through the Agribusiness anchor or wholesale loans.   
  The Monitoring and Evaluation System and annual outcome surveys are an integral part of 
tracking  and  monitoring  progress  and  assessment  of  the  impact  that  the  respective  sub-
components had on the smallholder farmers.  
  The  demand  side  BSS  applied  more  strategically  would  have  led  to  improve  value-chain 
inclusivity.  
  The PROFIT design had relatively complex and ambitious targets comprising different credit 
mechanisms,  nationwide  scope,  a  wide  number  of  implementation  partners  ranging  from 
commercial banks, micro-finance banks (MFBs), technical service providers (TSPs) and non-
government organizations (NGOs).  
  PROFIT design was not very clear in terms of how commercial banks, under the risk sharing 
facility  (RSF),  would  have  the  capacity  and  incentives  to  reach  the  rural  poor  targeted  by 
IFAD.  The  Programme  was  designed  to  reach  the  rural  poor  through  partnerships  with 
commercial  banks,  micro-finance  banks  and  rural  Savings  and  Credit  Cooperative 
Organizations (SACCOs) to increase access to finance.  
  The effectiveness of PROFIT would have better pronounced and resulted in clearer results of 
outcomes and impact, if the disbursement had taken place in a timely manner, as planned in 
the design. The low rate of disbursement in the first 6 years indicated that the design had 
not fully analysed the capacity and resources required to implement PROFIT. The assumptions 
of public sector staff could cross over to support the technical needs of the programme proved 
to be wrong along with the proposed structure of the PCU. 
  Financial Management Systems and Reporting: The key lessons learnt was that the failure to 
establish  dedicated  arrangements  in  terms  of  the  financial  team  and  accounting  software 
capacities contributed to less than effective and efficient financial Management and reporting. 
The mission concludes that the systems as established in 2018/19 are the best arrangement. 
Future  project  implementations  should  ensure  that  this  ideal  model  of  a  dedicated 
professional team, accounting software and the requisite working systems are established at 
the project inception.  
Detailed recommendations emerged and adopted from PROFIT programme: 
 
 
In  future  interventions,  the  joint-supervision  missions  should  focus  on  identifying  and 
addressing challenges and bottlenecks to implementation early in the project cycle.  Issues 
related to contractual arrangements should be examined thoroughly in the first year along 
with time bound remedial measures. Extension to long-term projects such as PROFIT should 
prioritize sustainability of results when giving consideration to project extensions. From an 
EFA point, the targets on beneficiaries were over-ambitious but this was solved at the MTR.  
IFAD  and  the  GOK  must  carry  out  an  in-depth  assessment  of  the  capacity  and  resources 
available against defined needs, from targeted key partners (such as the PCU and AGRA - as 
the key partners), to not just implement but to also effectively coordinate and monitor results 
achieved  from  targeted  Programme  beneficiaries.  The  organization’s  past  experience  in 
designing  and implementing  M&E  system  to  measure  benefits  at  the  outcome  level  and  in 
carrying out assessments /evaluations and studies to assess the results at the outcome during 
implementation. All selected stakeholders should be contractually required to collected data 
on  the  agricultural  value  chains  in  which  they  invested  as  well  as  on  the  borrower  /  rural 
beneficiary.   
 
Interventions should allocate appropriate time for building capacity by service providers as 
timelines  should  be  commensurate  with  the  specific  needs  of  the  targeted  beneficiaries. 
Introduction and roll-out of innovative products and building capacity require piloting, testing 
and refining for expansion and knowledge sharing with respective partners.  
22 
  Start-up planning processes should be reviewed in the first six months after the launch of the 
Programme to ensure that preparedness as early as possible as they are crucial to defining 
logistics  and  checking  resource  availability  needed  to  efficiently  operationalize  the 
intervention’s initiatives in a timely and cost-effective manner. Now that PROFIT benefits are 
starting to show benefits, the  GoK has to maintain the mechanisms put in place to assure 
that benefits will continue to be generated as a result of these investments even after PROFIT 
closure. 
  Benefits generation should be sustained even after PROFIT closure.  As the Net Present Value 
of KES 886.9 million is not insignificant at a discount rate of 12% but could have been higher 
if implementation time/ generation of benefits was not lost in the initial 6 years. From the 
actual investment funds: (i) the risk sharing facility and (ii) the credit facility, at least 70% 
will revert back to government to continue the scheme if GoK desires this in perpetuity.  GoK 
should ensure that the two funds are ploughed back in the PROFIT kind of scheme even after 
PROFIT closure. Without this exit measure, the ERR of 22% as estimated at PCR may drop 
significantly costing GOK resources to repay the loan from IFAD instead of using incremental 
tax revenues arising from the investments under the scheme. 
  The financiers were timely and therefore efficient in the disbursement of funds and making 
of the contribution support. The good practice should be adopted for the future programmes.  
Consequently, the disbursement of IFAD loan and Grant has been efficient and effective, and 
the practice should be adopted for future projects.  
 
In any future interventions, technical assistance support should precede financial support to 
ensure effective and sustainable use of credit lines provided.  Simultaneously, the demand 
side  capacity  of  SHFs  and  SHFGs  should  be  strategically  built  to  improve  value-chain 
inclusivity.  
  Priority should be given to selecting participating financial institutions whose mandate social 
development  and  are  not  only  focused  on  loan  recovery  and  profitability.  The  institutions 
should  agree  to  work  with  the  selected  service  provider  to  collect  or  help  to  collect  the 
required monitoring data on the socio-economic impact of the lending.  
 
IFAD supervisions in future should put emphasis on progress towards achieving EFA based 
targets (consistent to the log frame). This would have entailed demanding for gross margin 
models  for  the  ultimate  beneficiaries  (smallholder  farmers)  progressively  mission  after 
mission, year after year. At PCR it becomes a difficult to re-run the EFA if this was not being 
emphasised through supervision missions. 
23 
K-FINFA INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
A.  Project Governance and Management Structures 
Lead Agency and Project Oversight 
RK-FINFA Lead Implementing Agency will be the Directorate of Budget, Fiscal and Economic 
Affairs (DBFEA) in the National Treasury and Planning (NT&P). The Directorate is headed by 
a Director General who is answerable to the Principal Secretary of the NT&P. Below the DBFEA, 
the  Financial  and  Sectoral  Affairs  Department  (FSAD)  that  will  have  the  day-to-day 
coordination and supervision mandate of the project.  
A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established with representation, at senior level, 
from  the  ministries  and  private  and  public  agencies  that  will  play  key  roles  in  the 
implementation  of  RK-FINFA.  The  public  sector  membership  in  the  PSC  will  include  the 
representatives  from  the  National  Treasury  and  Planning;  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya;  the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries; the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Enterprise 
Development; the Ministry of Public Services, Youth and Gender; the Ministry of Environment 
and  Forestry;  the  Ministry  of  Information,  Communication  and  Technology;  the  Ministry  of 
devolution  and  ASALs;  and  SASRA.  The  private  sector  members  would  be  from  the  apex 
organisations  of  commercial  banks,  MFBs/MFIs  and  SACCOs.  Other  institutions  will  be 
incorporated into the PSC as required. The PSC will be chaired by the PS of NT&P or his/her 
representative. The key tasks of the PSC include: (a) provide oversight and strategic guidance 
to  the  project  implementation;  (b)  oversee  planning  of  project  activities;  (c)  review  and 
approve annual workplans and budgets (AWPBs) prior to submission to IFAD; and (d) review 
RK-FINFA implementation progress and impact.  
The PSC will meet two times a year or as otherwise required. Minutes of the PSC meetings 
will  be  included  in  the  project  progress  reports  for  review  by  IFAD.  The  PMU  will  act  as  a 
secretariat to the PSC meetings.  
Project Management and Staff 
The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established at the NT&P, housed in the Financial 
and  Sectoral  Affairs  Department  of  the  DBFEA.  The  PMU  will  be  lean  comprising  of  8 
professional  staff  and  3  support  staff  all  to  be  based  in  Nairobi.  These  are:  Project 
Coordinator,  Financial  Controller,  Senior  Rural  Finance  Specialist,  Rural  Finance  Officer, 
Procurement  Specialist/Contract  Manager,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Officer,  Value  Chain 
Finance  Officer,  Social  Inclusion  Officer,  Environment  and  Climate  Change  Officer, 
Accountant, 2 Drivers and an Administrator/Programme Assistant. All the PMU staff will be 
competitively  recruited  and  paid  with  project  funds.  Draft  TORs  for  all  PMU  officers  are 
provided at the end of this Section of the PIM.  
The PMU will report directly to the PSC and will be responsible for the day-to-day management 
of the project activities. Its responsibilities will include but not be limited to: (i) financial and 
administrative management of the project resources; (ii) planning of the project activities, 
preparation  of  the  AWPBs  and  their  execution;  (iii)  monitoring  credit  flow  to  final 
beneficiaries;  (iv)  procurement  and  contracting    of  goods  and  services  for  the  PMU;  (v) 
coordination of the various project activities; (vi) supervision of activities’ implementation; 
(vii) setting up and maintaining a flexible and effective M&E system to monitor and record 
project activities, outcomes and impact; and (viii) preparation of progress reports. The PMU 
will  ensure  that  the  project  is  implemented  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  Financing 
Agreements between the GoK and IFAD. 
At the County level, each of the ongoing IFAD value chain projects have well-staffed PMUs, 
supported  by  County  Project  Facilitation  Teams  (CPFTs)  and  Sub-County  Project  Technical 
Teams (SCPTTs), which are composed of subject matter specialists. These PMUs will, jointly 
24 
with the  CPFTs  and  SCPTTS,  sensitize  those  beneficiaries  who  they  have  trained  to  access 
financial services and apply for the RK-FINFA-supported resources through the PFIs. The VC 
projects will also support in following-up of loan utilisation and their outcomes and impact, 
as  part  of  monitoring  undertaken  for  the  ongoing  VC  projects.  The  illustration  of  the  full 
organisation of RK-FINFA is shown in Figure 1 below. 
Figure 1: RK-FINFA Implementation Organogram 
Office facilities for RK-FINFA PMU. The NT will avail sufficient office space for RK-FINFA 
PMU,  to  be  housed  preferably  in  the  Treasury  building  or  any  other  building  conveniently 
located for regular consultation between the PMU and Treasury, for the full duration of the 
Project implementation. The office will accommodate all the PMU staff and its operations and 
should have good internet connectivity and other utilities. The office should also have room 
for visiting supervision missions of the Project.  
Finalisation of Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The PMU will organise a 
workshop to review and finalise this PIM and will submit the final version to IFAD for 
approval.  
Finalisation of the First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), and the Procurement 
Plan. The PMU – once established – will prepare, finalize and submit to IFAD for prior review 
its first 18-Months Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), and its 18-months Procurement 
Plan (PP). The approved AWPB and PP are conditions for the first disbursement.  
National  Start-up  Workshop.  The  PMU,  once  in  place,  will  hold  a  national  start-up 
workshop for RK-FINFA. The objective of the workshop is to obtain a full buy in from all the 
project  stakeholders.  The  workshop  will  be  organised  with  the  support  of  the  FSAD.  In 
addition to launching of the project, the workshop will also: 
Introduce the Project to its key stakeholders to raise awareness  
 
  Explain  the  project  scope,  the  activities,  and  the  role  of  stakeholders  in  the  project 
implementation 
  Explain the project coverage, and the selection criteria of the beneficiaries  
25 
  Take stock of preparatory activities carried out 
  Present, explain and discuss the implementation procedures as captured in the PIM 
  Present the project management and key implementation partners. 
The  outcome  of  the  workshop  will  be  a  common  understanding  among  the  RK-FINFA  staff 
and its stakeholders on the:  
  RK-FINFA objectives, activities, expected outcomes of the project and its contribution to the 
Kenyan Economy 
  Their roles and responsibilities in the implementation of the project 
 
Implementation and coordination mechanisms of the Project  
  Administrative and financial procedures underpinning the management of RK-FINFA.  
B.  Other Implementing Agencies and Partnerships 
When implementing its various project components and activities, RK-FINFA will work closely 
with the following national and county related implementing agencies/partners: 
  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  licenses,  regulates  and  supervises  financial  institutions  including 
commercial banks, microfinance banks, forex bureaus and representative offices of foreign 
banks; 
 
the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries has the mandate to ensure the country’s 
food and nutrition security, and to improve the livelihoods of rural Kenyans by transforming 
the sector to be competitive, commercially oriented and responsive to the economic needs; 
  the  Ministry  of  Industry,  Trade  and  Enterprise  Development 
for 
promoting industrialization and enterprise development in the country through development 
of micro, small and medium enterprises; 
is  responsible 
  the  Ministry  of  Public  Services,  Youth  and  Gender  coordinates  gender  mainstreaming  in 
national  development  planning  and  promotes  equitable  political  and  socio-economic 
development for women, men, girls and boys; 
the  Directorate  of  Environment  and  Climate  Change  in  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and 
Forestry provides policy guidance, coordination, supervision and advises on issues relating to 
the  environment  and  climate  change,  as  well  as  technical  oversight  and  coordination  of 
programmes and projects; 
the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology has the  mandate to formulate 
policies  and  laws  that  regulate  standards  and  services  in  the  Information,  Communication 
and  Technology  (ICT)  sector,  Telecommunications  and  the  Media  industry,  as  well  as 
administering ICT standards; 
the  Ministry  of  Devolution  and  ASALs  is  responsible  for  capacity  building  and  technical 
assistance to  counties,  facilitation of intergovernmental relations between the national and 
county  governments  and  among  county  governments,  and  tracking  of  programme 
implementation in counties;  
 
 
 
  SACCO  Societies  Regulatory  Authority  (SASRA)  licenses  SACCO  Societies  to  undertake 
deposit-taking activities and supervises and regulates such SACCOs. 
RK-FINFA will collaborate with the PMUs of the ongoing IFAD financed VC projects that will 
assist  to  identify  the  initial  RK-FINFA  pipeline.  These  projects  have  identified  and  selected 
poor women, men and youth for their capacity building activities and have readied them for 
access to credit.     
26 
Other  possible  co-financiers/implementation  partners  of  RK-FINFA  may  include:  (i)  the 
Financial Sector Deepening Africa (FSDA) in the implementation of the Enabling Rural Finance 
Environment sub-component; (ii)   collaboration with the World Bank’s SAFER project in the 
implementation of the two RK-FINFA financial sector development instruments (R-CGS and 
GFF);  (iii)  The  UN  Resident  Coordinator  Office  in  Kenya  to  regularly  announced  RK-FINFA 
investment  opportunity  investors  and  other  possible  private  sector  partners;  (iv)  Finland-
Kenya ODA programme 2021 TA project for employment creation through SME development; 
(v)   European  Investment Bank and  KFW  who are interested in investing through the RK-
FINFA investment instruments; (vi)  Green Climate Fund’s Private Sector Facility to scale up 
the  Green  Financing  Instrument  to  a  regional  level;  (vii)  Sweden/SIDA  Guarantee  Fund 
programme to partner in the scaling up of the Green Financing Facility; (viii)    Agribusiness 
Market Ecosystem Alliance (AMEA), could to partner with RK-FINFA through identifying and 
building capacity of potential Farmer Organizations to enter investment pipeline of RK-FINFA; 
(ix)  Land  o’Lakes  enterprise  project  called  Dairy  Nourishes  Africa  (DNA)  could  support  in 
building  capacity  of  dairy  sector  stakeholders  to  enter  investment  pipeline  of  RK-FINFA; 
(x)  the  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB)  will  coordinate  with  IFAD  in  rural  finance 
development, through its Youth Agrifinance project, being implemented by the AFC; (xi) the 
European Union AgriFi and AgriBiz projects will provide viable agribusiness investees through 
its agri–enterprise development programme. 
RK-FINFA Co-Financing and Implementation Partnership Approach 
Partnering Functions  
Partners/Networks/  
Platforms  
Mobilizing co-financing   National Treasury  
AGRA/AMEA 
PFIs 
PFIs 
Strengthening  private 
sector engagement  
National Treasury 
Commercial Banks, MFBs, 
SACCOs 
Engaging in policy and 
influencing 
Development agendas  
GoK 
Results 
Specific 
Outcomes 
Partnership  
and 
from 
Justification for  
Partnership   
Agreed co-investment and 
finance plan; monitoring 
repayments and arrears 
settlement; counterpart 
contributions 
Capacity building of PFIs, 
smallholder farmers and 
MSMEs to increase their 
ability to participate in the 
RK-FINFA  
Leveraging lending 
resources with R-CGS and 
GFF. 
the 
Contributing 
capacity  building  of  their 
staff involved in RK-FINFA 
to 
Establishment  the  Rural 
Credit Guarantee Scheme 
 Borrower and 
 delegated 
 agencies 
Reduce loan financing 
burden by funding part of 
the TA cost with grant  
Expand lending to poor 
rural population 
Commitment to the 
project 
Encourage Private Lending 
Institutions to increase 
their lending to agriculture 
sector 
Enhanced Understanding 
in dealing with green 
financing and agriculture 
value chains operators 
Help the private sector 
understand and 
appreciate the agriculture 
sector 
Improved and streamlined 
rural finance policies and 
strategies  
Need to attract more rural 
finance participants.  
Financial 
Deepening Africa (FSDA) 
Sector 
Improved financial sector 
investment environment  
Experience in 
strengthening Africa’s 
financial markets 
27 
Partnering Functions  
Partners/Networks/  
Platforms  
Results 
Specific 
Outcomes 
Partnership  
and 
from 
Justification for  
Partnership   
Enabling  coordinated 
country-led processes   
GoK 
Strong and well-
functioning Government-
led Credit Guarantee 
Scheme 
Ownership of the process. 
28 
C.  TOR for Key RK-FINFA Staff 
Below, the draft TOR for all RK-FINFA professional staff in the PMU are presented. 
29 
Draft Terms of Reference: Project Coordinator 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Kenya  (GoK).  RK-FINFA  supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture 
sector  through  private  sector-led  development  by  improving  the  access  of  the  smallholder 
farmers and rural micro, small and medium enterprises to appropriate financial services. The 
Project  will  operate  nationwide  in  Kenya.    It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  (a) 
Component 1:  Technical  Support  and  Innovation  Services  (TSIS);  (b)  Component  2:  Rural 
Investment Instruments; and Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project 
Coordination.  
RK-FINFA is in the process of recruiting officers for its Project Management Unit (PMU) to be 
based in Nairobi. While the lead agency of the project is the National Treasury, all RK-FINFA 
activities  include  pro-active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  financial 
institutions,  the  farming  community  as  well  as  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and 
larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value chains. 
Position: Project Coordinator 
Duty Station: Nairobi 
Overall Scope of Work  
The Project Coordinator (PC) will head the PMU and will provide the overall leadership in the 
project implementation. S/he will coordinate the day-to-day planning and execution of the 
project  activities  and  ensure  timely  achievement  of  intended  results.  The  PC  will  be 
answerable  to  the  Project  Steering  Committee  and  will  work  closely  with  the  NT  Team 
assigned to the project. The PC assures that RK-FINFA is implemented along the guidelines 
provided  by  the  financing  agreement,  design  report,  implementation manual  and  following 
the guidance given by the lead ministry, the Steering Committee and supervision missions. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
Specific responsibilities of the PC include but are not limited to the following: 
c) 
b) 
a)  Oversee and manage project implementation activities in accordance to agreed plans and 
report on progress and outcomes in a methodological manner, including technical reports 
and financial reporting 
Co-ordinate and work with participating FIs, relevant Government ministries and 
departments, implementing partners, and service providers to ensure smooth execution of 
the project activities 
Ensure timely preparation, clearance, and approval of consolidated AWPBs and Procurement 
Plans, and their execution in accordance with the overall RK-FINFA objectives 
Supervise the work of the PMU staff and undertake their performance evaluation in a timely 
manner 
Promote conducive work environment that promotes knowledge sharing and learning from 
experiences among members of the Project staff, GoK teams and implementing partners 
Ensure full inclusion of women, youth, and vulnerable groups among the beneficiaries of the 
project, according to the agreed social targeting approach of the project 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g)  Oversee and guide the procurement process of all goods and services, adhering to the 
h) 
agreed IFAD and GoK rules and procedures 
Facilitate and support the joint IFAD/GoK supervision and implementation support missions 
and follow-up, midterm, and completion missions, and ensure that their recommendations 
are fully implemented 
i)  Work pro-actively to fundraise more resources to scale up the operations of the RK-FINFA 
core investment components 
30 
j) 
k) 
Build and maintain strong collaborative relationships with all project stakeholders and local 
networks and partner organizations, engaging them on a regular basis to integrate their 
feedback into the implementation and progress of the Project 
Represent the project in relevant public events and organise knowledge managements 
events of RK-FINFA achievements through different media. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A  university  degree  in  Project  Management,  Finance,  Agricultural  Economics,  or  related 
discipline  relevant,  with  sound  knowledge  of  contemporary  issues  in  the  rural  economy  of 
Kenya 
  Good understanding in banking and rural finance operations   
  Excellent  analytical  skills,  sound  judgment,  resourcefulness,  ability  to  take  initiatives, 
capacity to self-manage and ability to create a team-based, participatory work environment  
  Sound understanding of the Kenya’s multi-level government systems (National and County 
Governments) and their governance and administration modalities 
  Good skills in strategic planning and partnership building  
  Fluent in English (written and spoken) and Kiswahili languages  
  Excellent communication skills  
  Relevant IT skills. 
Required Work Experience 
Relevant professional work experience of at least 10 years in project management, project 
financial  administration  and  budgeting,  including  leadership  of  multi-disciplinary  team  of 
experts.  Experience  in  managing  projects  financed  through  international  development 
partners will be an added advantage. 
Type and Duration of Contract 
Three-year  contract,  with  3  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on  agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
31 
Draft Terms of Reference: Financial Controller 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Kenya.  RK-FINFA  supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture  sector 
through private sector-led development by improving the access of the smallholder farmers 
and rural micro, small and enterprises to appropriate financial services. The Project operates 
nationwide in Kenya.  It consists of three interlinked components: (a) Component 1: Technical 
Support Services (TSS); (b) Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments; and Component 
3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination.  
RK-FINFA  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  for  its  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  in 
Nairobi. While the lead agency of the project is the National Treasury, all RK-FINFA activities 
include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including financial institutions, the 
farming  community  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and 
marketing companies in key agricultural value chains.   
Position: Financial Controller 
Duty Station: Nairobi 
Overall Scope of Work 
The  Financial  Controller  reports  directly  to  the  Project  Coordinator  and  is  responsible  for 
financial management of the project and for maintaining all project accounts in good order. 
As  head  of  the  Finance  Unit  for  the  project,  the  Financial  Controller  will  take  charge  of  all 
matters in the project accounting cycle. The project accounting cycle to be overseen by the 
financial  controller  starts  from  financial-related  inputs  in  AWPB  preparation  and  budget 
control,  committing  funds,  disbursements  and  cash  flow  management  in  an  effective  and 
efficient manner, financial reporting to ensuring smooth audits and facilitation for supervision 
missions on all financial management aspects. The Financial Controller will be responsible for 
expediting  all  loan  management  and  disbursement  activities  through  National  Treasury 
systems.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
Specific responsibilities of the Financial Controller include but are not limited to the following: 
 Installation of appropriate accounting/reporting systems to ensure that the PMU and especially 
the Project Coordinator are regularly informed of on-going financial status and transactions.  
 Ensure timely capture of project in the GoK budget as required by the GoK budgeting processes 
and  calendars  including  access  to  counterpart  funding.  Evaluate  annual  work  plan  and 
budgeting procedures, and budgetary control systems applied to monitor actual expenditures 
versus  budget  including  commitment  controls  to  avoid  commitments  beyond  available 
resources. 
 Communicate  to  all  implementing  partner  institutions  and  service  providers  their  financial 
responsibilities, the funds available and how to access it, and the requirements of reporting 
and record keeping in accordance with prevailing government practices which are acceptable 
to IFAD. 
 Ensure  that  all  project  funds  are  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  financing 
agreements,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and  efficiency,  and  only  for  the  purposes  for 
which the funds were provided. 
 Assess  compliance  with  Kenya  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  operation  of  the 
implementing institutions including accountancy standards and the requirements for audits 
and financial reporting.  
32 
 Ensure that all necessary supporting documents, records, and accounts are kept in respect of 
all  project  activities,  with  clear  linkages  between  the  books  of  account  and  the  financial 
statements presented to the financiers. 
 Ensure  that  designated  account  and  operational  accounts  are  maintained  in  accordance  with 
the provisions of the financing  agreement and in accordance with the financier’s  rules and 
procedures. 
 Contribute to the preparation of the Project Implementation and Financial Manuals. 
 Ensure  the  Project’s  Financial  Procedures  as  detailed  in  the  Project  Implementation  and 
Financial Manuals are  strictly adhered to by all Project staff and executing agencies at the 
national and local levels. 
 Ensure that the financial statements are prepared in accordance with International Public Sector 
Accounting Standards as adopted in Kenya. 
 Liaise  with  external  auditors  to  audit  the  project  accounts  to  meet  the  required  submission 
dates  by  both  GoK  and  IFAD.  Review  external  auditor’s  reports  (Audit  Opinions  and 
management  letters),  including  any  qualifications  and  whether  any  concerns  raised  by 
auditors have been adequately addressed. 
 Liaise with the other Project implementing agencies to ensure that SOEs are prepared in timely 
manner and forwarded to IFAD. 
 Process  documentation  and  follow  up  on  disbursements  from  the  government  and  IFAD  to 
ensure  that  releases  are  not  delayed.  Ensure  that  funds  for  project  implementation  are 
disbursed in a timely manner to enable project interventions to be carried out on time. 
 
 
Review eligibility of expenditure in accordance with the financing agreement. 
Report on the operation of internal control including budget controls and report any 
deviations. 
Qualifications and Competences 
In addition to the general requirements listed above, the following specific qualifications and 
other requirements are required: 
(a) A Bachelor’s Degree in Commerce (Accounting option), or Finance, or Bachelor’s degree in 
Business Administration; Accounting or Finance options from a recognized University.  
(b) The candidate should have CPA Kenya qualification. 
(c) The candidate should have at least a minimum of 8 years’  experience  working in a similar 
field and 3 years of which must have been in a senior management position. 
(d) The candidate should have demonstrated experience with financial management/accounting 
in a government ministry/department and donor-funded Project. 
(e) Strong computer skills; electronic spreadsheets and other accounting packages.  
(f)  Working knowledge of banking and financial control procedures. 
Type and Duration of Contract 
Three-year  contract,  with  3  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on  agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
33 
Draft Terms of Reference: Project Accountant 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Kenya.  RK-FINFA  supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture  sector 
through private sector-led development by improving the access of the smallholder farmers 
and rural micro, small and enterprises to appropriate financial services. The Project operates 
nationwide in Kenya.  It consists of three interlinked components: (a) Component 1: Technical 
Support Services (TSS); (b) Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments; and Component 
3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination.  
RK-FINFA  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  for  its  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  in 
Nairobi. While the lead agency of the project is the National Treasury, all RK-FINFA activities 
include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including financial institutions, the 
farming  community  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and 
marketing companies in key agricultural value chains.   
Position: Project Accountant 
Duty Station: Nairobi 
Overall Scope of Work 
The Project Accountant will report to the Financial Controller and support him/her in all 
activities related to the accounting and financial management of RK-FINFA.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
Specific responsibilities of the Project Accountant include but are not limited to the following: 
  Preparation of source documents, e.g. payment vouchers and journal vouchers, of RK-FINFA. 
  File  the  project  document  appropriately  with  adequate  cross  reference  to  ensure  ease  of 
retrieval. 
  Follow up of accountabilities, maintaining a detailed log of outstanding accountabilities. 
  Data entry into the accounting system. 
  Preparation of reconciliations for review by the Financial Controller. 
  Facilitate; both internal and external auditors to audit the project’s financial transactions and 
reports to meet the required submission dates by IFAD. 
  Support the Financial Controller in preparation of reports to enable the withdrawal of funds 
from IFAD and GoK. 
  Maintain  key  registers  such  as  fixed  assets;  inputs  into  the  contracts  register,  contract 
monitoring forms. 
  Support the financial controller in the preparation of informative management accounts in the 
form  of  monthly,  quarterly,  semi-annual  and  annual  reports  regarding  aspects  of  project 
financial  monitoring  bringing  out  variances  and  advising  implementers  as  to  the  limits  of 
expenditure. 
 
 
 
Support in review reports of IFAD/GoK supervision or review missions and follow-up on the 
implementation of agreed to actions. 
Support  in  review  other  aspects  of  the  accounting  and  financial  control  systems,  including 
cash management and banking; procurement of goods and services; advances and acquittals; 
authorisation of expenditure; and budget/actual comparisons. 
Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the financial controller. 
34 
Qualifications and Experience. The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in 
accounting and at least Part II of CPA-K or its equivalent /or be qualified accountant. Other 
skills and experience should include: 
  At least five years of relevant work experience 
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting 
  Excellent quantitative and analytical skills 
  Computer-literate including accounting packages and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word, 
and basic data base set-ups. 
Type and Duration of Contract 
Three-year  contract,  with  3  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on  agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
35 
Draft Terms of Reference: Rural Finance Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Kenya.  RK-FINFA  supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture  sector 
through private sector-led development by improving the access of the smallholder farmers 
and rural micro, small and enterprises to appropriate financial services. The Project operates 
nationwide in Kenya.  It consists of three interlinked components: (a) Component 1: Technical 
Support and Innovation Services (TSIS); (b) Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments; 
and Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination.  
RK-FINFA  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  for  its  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  in 
Nairobi. While the lead agency of the project is the National Treasury, all RK-FINFA activities 
include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including financial institutions, the 
farming  community  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and 
marketing companies in key agricultural value chains.   
Position: Rural Finance Specialist 
Duty Station: Nairobi 
Overall Scope of Work: Reporting to the Project Coordinator, the Rural Finance Specialist 
will  be  responsible  for  the  successful  implementation  of  the  core  rural  finance  instruments 
(Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme and the Green Financing Facility) of RK-FINFA, as well as 
the related capacity building operations.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The specific duties of the Rural Finance Specialist will include: 
a)  Provide pro-active support to the start-up and subsequent implementation to all rural finance-
related RK-FINFA activities 
b)  Provide pro-active support to the start-up arrangements of the rural finance-related PFI and 
borrower  capacity  building  operations  of  RK-FINFA  and  their  subsequent,  effective 
implementation  
c)  Support the  finalisation of the  contractual arrangements for the  establishment of the rural 
window to the CGS and the smooth start-up of the R-CGF guarantee operations with banks, 
MFBs and SACCOs 
d)  Work with the financial sector to engage FIs with rural orientation to actively expand their 
rural outreach with R-CGS support and cover 
e)  Support  the  NT  in  the  selection  and  engagement  of  the  Host  Institution  for  the  Green 
Financing Facility 
f)  Work directly with the GFF Host institution to encourage the active participation of appropriate 
MFBs and rural DT-SACCOs in the green financing operations with the GFF support 
g)  Oversee  the  establishment  of  an  effective,  IT-based  MIS  and  reporting  systems  for  the  R-
CGS and GFF operations and organise systematic field verification visits to the PFIs and their 
RK-FINFA-supported clients 
h)  Lead, together with the NT and the GFF Host Institution, the fundraising efforts to scale of 
the outreach and impact of the RK-FINFA key financing instruments 
36 
i)  Co-operate with the RK-FINFA supported efforts to improve the operational environment for 
rural finance in Kenya, including the measures to transform the CGS into a semi-independent 
company 
j)  Prepare,  jointly  with  the  implementing  partners  and  the  project  KM  staff,  knowledge 
management  products  based  on  RK-FINFA  rural  finance  experiences  and  use  appropriate 
media to publish these products in Kenya and in the region 
k)  Work  closely  with  other  rural  finance  support  initiatives  in  Kenya  with  the  regional  RF 
networks to learn from their experiences for the benefit of RK-FINFA implementation.  
Qualifications and Competences 
  A  university  degree  in  Finance,  Economics,  Commerce,  or  related  discipline,  with  sound 
knowledge of contemporary issues in the rural economy of Kenya 
  Good understanding in banking and rural finance operations   
  Excellent  analytical  skills,  sound  judgment,  resourcefulness,  ability  to  take  initiatives, 
capacity to self-manage and ability to create a team-based, participatory work environment  
  Good skills in strategic planning and partnership building  
  Fluent in English (written and spoken)  
  Excellent communication skills. 
Required Work Experience 
Relevant professional work experience of at least 10 years at a senior level in banking/rural 
finance. Relevant experience in externally funded development projects with  focus on rural 
finance. 
Type and Duration of Contract 
Three-year  contract,  with  3  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on  agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
37 
Draft Terms of Reference: Value Chain Finance Officer 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Kenya.  RK-FINFA  supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture  sector 
through private sector-led development by improving the access of the smallholder farmers 
and rural micro, small and enterprises to appropriate financial services. The Project operates 
nationwide in Kenya.  It consists of three interlinked components: (a) Component 1: Technical 
Support and Innovation Services (TSIS); (b) Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments; 
and Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination.  
RK-FINFA  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  for  its  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  in 
Nairobi. While the lead agency of the project is the National Treasury, all RK-FINFA activities 
include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including financial institutions, the 
farming  community  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and 
marketing companies in key agricultural value chains.   
Position: Value Chain Finance Officer 
Duty Station: Nairobi 
Overall Scope of Work: Reporting to the Rural Finance Specialist, the Value Chain Finance 
Officer will support the Rural Finance Specialist in the management and coordination of the 
Value  Chain  Financing activities  of  RK-FINFA,  especially,  manage  the  project’s  connections 
with partner VC projects and identify suitable  pipeline for the RK-FINFA TSIS services and 
later  investments.  In  addition,  he/she  will  monitor  the  Value  Chain  Financing  model  under 
the R-CGS special investment types.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The specific duties of the Value Chain Officer will include: 
a)  Support,  together  with  the  Rural  Finance  Specialist,  to  the  start-up  and  subsequent 
implementation to all rural finance-related RK-FINFA activities 
b)  Create linkages with the ongoing VC projects (especially IFAD’s VC project portfolio) in Kenya, 
with the intention to identify pipeline for TSIS services and financing instruments of RK-FINFA 
c)  Assist  the  partner  VC  projects  in  provision  of  relevant  pre-support  to  their  target  groups, 
enabling the stakeholders’ incorporation into the RK-FINFA pipeline 
d)  Take direct responsibility of the timely start-up of the project’s Value Chain Finance activities 
related  PFI  and  borrower  capacity  building  operations  and  their  subsequent,  effective 
implementation 
e)  Assist the banks in their design and implementation of the R-CGS Investment Type 3: Value 
Chain Financing product through MSMEs to their supply chains stakeholders 
f)  Support linking of VC projects’ stakeholders to banks, MFBs and rural DT-SACCOs  
g)  Conduct frequent and systematic field visit to support the PFIs in their RK-FINFA supported 
field operations 
l)  Carry out any other tasks activities that are assigned by the Rural Finance Specialist or the 
Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A university degree in Agriculture Finance, Economics, Agribusiness, or related discipline. 
38 
  Good understanding in rural finance and agriculture finance operations   
  Good skills in strategic planning and partnership building  
  Fluent in English (written and spoken)  
  Excellent communication skills. 
Required Work Experience 
Relevant professional work experience with at least 5 years at in rural finance and agriculture 
finance. Experience in externally funded development projects with focus on rural finance is 
an advantage. 
Type and Duration of Contract 
Three-year contract, with 3 months’ probation period, renewable based on agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
39 
Draft Terms of Reference: Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Kenya.  RK-FINFA  supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture  sector 
through private sector-led development by improving the access of the smallholder farmers 
and rural micro, small and enterprises to appropriate financial services. The Project operates 
nationwide in Kenya.  It consists of three interlinked components: (a) Component 1: Technical 
Support and Innovation Services (TSIS); (b) Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments; 
and Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination.  
RK-FINFA  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  for  its  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  in 
Nairobi. While the lead agency of the project is the National Treasury, all RK-FINFA activities 
include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including financial institutions, the 
farming  community  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and 
marketing companies in key agricultural value chains.   
Position: Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Duty Station: Nairobi 
Overall Scope of Work: Reporting to the Project Coordinator, the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist will have the overall responsibility for the coordination of the timely establishment, 
operation and maintenance of the project M&E system in full accordance with IFAD standard 
M&E  requirements  including  the  guidelines  for  Core  Indicator  (COI)  measurement;  for  the 
generation  of  knowledge  and  evidence;  and  for  the  communication  of  project  activities, 
achievements and lessons learned.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The specific duties of the Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist will include: 
a)  Set up the M&E system for RK-FINFA: 
●  Revise the project logframe matrix and include gender sensitive indicators. 
●  Assist in developing the results oriented-AWPB. 
●  Develop the overall framework for the project M&E. 
●  Guide the process of reporting against the project key indicators. 
●  Prepare and M&E matrix. 
●  Ensure the M&E system is aligned with IFAD standard requirements. 
●  Ensure all monitoring and assessment reports adequately report to IFAD COI system. 
b)  Set up an MIS system that entails: 
●  Development  of  formats  (for  data  collection,  analysis  and  interpretation)  to  track  project 
inputs  and  its  results:  production,  consumption,  sales  and  income  of  the  producers  and 
traders/buyers at household, group and value chain/cluster level. 
●  Coordinate with other project staff, especially planning and M&E staff, to ensure MIS system 
is  appropriately  designed  and  implemented  such  that  they  enable  data-rich  knowledge 
management, captures and analyses disaggregated data on gender and social inclusion. 
●  Define requirements for use of software for a web-based online MIS and off-line tablet-based 
devices. 
c)  Provide  technical  assistance  to  recruit,  guide  and  supervise  organisations  or  individuals 
contracted  to  implement  surveys  and  studies  required  for  evaluating  project  effects  and 
impacts.  
d)  Develop  a  capacity-building  plan  on  M&E  for  the  project  staff  and  implementing  partners, 
including: 
40 
●  Development of training modules for different stakeholders and partners; 
●  Development of operation manuals/guidelines on M&E processes; 
●  Use of software for MIS and GIS required for the functioning of the MIS system; 
●  Train M&E staff at national and local levels (Training of Trainers); and  
●  Set up a cascade training mechanism for Extension Officers seconded fulltime to the project, 
Social Mobilizers and Business Skills Mentors and GALS Social Mentors. 
e)  Design,  at  the  project  start-up,  a  RK-FINFA  communication  strategy,  geared  towards  the 
target group and stakeholders, project implementers, and to a wider public, both within Kenya 
and outside. 
f)  Develop  a  functional  approach  for  prioritising  and  implementing  Knowledge  Management 
activities and for developing and disseminating knowledge tools and products. 
g)  Assist the Project Manager in consolidating gender sensitive project progress reports. 
h)  Advise the Senior Management by identifying areas of concerns that might justify a review of 
the  project  M&E  and  KM  systems  and/or  implementation  arrangements,  including  adverse 
effects  on  target  groups  as  a  result  of  project  implementation,  and  suggest  remedial 
measures if necessary. 
i)  Undertake regular field visits to follow-up recommendations made from previous supervision 
missions and support the project implementation in other ways as requested by the Project 
Coordinator. 
j)  Carry out any other relevant duties as may be assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
●  Master’s  degree  in  Agriculture,  Economics,  Statistics,  M&E,  Development  Studies,  Rural 
Development, Planning or a related field  
●  Solid knowledge of participatory M&E approaches and techniques. 
●  Strong knowledge in the development of performance-based indicators. 
●  Demonstrated experience in the techniques of data collection, data entry, data analysis and 
design of management information systems to facilitate the planning and decision- making 
processes within the institution/s. 
●  Working knowledge of written and spoken English.  
●  Excellent analytical and report writing skills. 
●  Excellent spoken and written English.  
●  Strong  knowledge  of  computer  applications,  particularly  MS  Excel,  Word,  Access  and 
PowerPoint, STATA and other software packages for data analysis and technical reports. 
Required  Work  Experience:  At  least  8  years  of  work  experience  with  (a)  M&E  and  KM 
Designs and implementation, (b) data management and analysis, (c) capacity building and 
training in M&E development and implementation, (d) use of Geographic Information Systems 
technologies, and (e) knowledge management strategy development. 
Type and Duration of Contract 
Three years’ contract with possibility of extension based on performance. 
41 
Draft Terms of Reference: Procurement Officer 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Kenya.  RK-FINFA  supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture  sector 
through private sector-led development by improving the access of the smallholder farmers 
and rural micro, small and enterprises to appropriate financial services. The Project operates 
nationwide in Kenya.  It consists of three interlinked components: (a) Component 1: Technical 
Support Services (TSS); (b) Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments; and Component 
3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination.  
RK-FINFA  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  for  its  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  in 
Nairobi. While the lead agency of the project is the National Treasury, all RK-FINFA activities 
include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including financial institutions, the 
farming  community  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and 
marketing companies in key agricultural value chains.   
Position: Procurement Officer 
Duty Station: Nairobi 
Overall Scope of Work 
The  Procurement  Officer  reports  directly  to  the  PC  and  is  responsible  for  managing 
procurement  processes  and  contract  administration  aspects.  As  head  of  the  Procurement 
Unit  of  the  PMU,  the  incumbent  will  be  tasked  to  ensure  compliance  with  Kenyan  Public 
Procurement and Disposal Act, 2015 and its attendant regulations and ensure due diligence 
to comply with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and handbook, 2019. 
a)  Installation of  appropriate procurement systems and procedures for  effective planning and 
monitoring of procurements under the project 
b)  Oversee preparation and consolidation of inputs to the Annual Procurement Plan 
c)  Finalize,  within  three  months  after  start  of  duty,  a  draft  manual  on  procurement  by 
partners, which sets the minimum standards of compliance for the procurement of goods and 
services under RK-FINFA financing 
d)  Train  continuously  the  implementers  in  the  preparation  of  Terms  of  Reference  and 
specifications and proactive follow-up of these inputs in the bidding processes 
e)  Prepare bidding documents based on acceptable bidding standards 
f)  Ensure all prior review requirements such as  obtaining of  the No Objections from IFAD are 
complied with in a timely manner 
g)  Ensure  that  all  the  due  tendering  processes  are  adhered  to  sufficient  publications,  strict 
adherence  to  deadlines,  transparency  in  communications  with  bidders,  publication  of  bid 
results, etc. 
h)  Ensure acceptable record keeping in procurement with a complete procurement file for each 
procurement from  start to contract finalization. Maintain all procurement records in a form 
appropriate for regular auditing and spot checks by supervision missions 
i)  Communicate  to  all  implementing  entities  and  service  provider  their  responsibilities  and 
requirements with respect to procurement in keeping with prevailing government practices 
which are acceptable to IFAD 
j)  Oversee  the  contracting  process,  including  ensuring  that  Evaluation  Committees  have 
people with appropriate expertise 
k)  Monitor  implementation of  contracts:  report  status  and  problems  to  the  PC  on  a  monthly 
basis and intervene to address problem upon request by the PC 
l)  Ensure that  goods  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in  accordance with  the  loan 
agreement and the Kenyan Public Procurement and Disposals Act 
m)  Work with the Financial Controller to ensure that tax exemptions for the procurement of goods 
42 
for the project are secured at the appropriate time 
n)  Prepare  quarterly  reports  of  progress  with  implementation  of  the  Procurement  Plan,  and 
regularly inform the PC of problems and make proposals to overcome bottlenecks 
o)  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the PC. 
Minimum Qualifications 
(a)  A  Bachelor’s  degree 
in  Procurement  and  Supplies,  Commerce,  Public 
Administration, Law, Accounting, or any other related field and a full CIPS (Chartered 
Institute of  Procurement and Supply).  A  post  graduate  qualification  will  be  an  added 
advantage 
(b) A minimum of 5 years’ experience dealing with procurement of civil works, goods 
and services, and with the award of contracts for GoK/donor funded projects  
(c)  Experience  in  preparing  tender  and  contract  documents  for  national  and 
international competitive bidding 
(d) A comprehensive knowledge of Public Procurement Regulations, as well as  
procurement guidelines for IFAD and/or World Bank 
(e) Appropriate computer literacy 
(f) Fluency in both English and Kiswahili 
(g) Good interpersonal and communication skills. 
Type and Duration of Contract: Three-year contract, with 3 months’ probation period, 
renewable based on agreed performance targets and deliverables. 
43 
Draft Terms of Reference: Social Inclusion Officer 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Government of 
Kenya.  RK-FINFA  supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture  sector 
through private sector-led development by improving the access of the smallholder farmers 
and rural micro, small and enterprises to appropriate financial services. The Project operates 
nationwide in Kenya.  It consists of three interlinked components: (a) Component 1: Technical 
Support and Innovation Services (TSIS); (b) Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments; 
and Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment and Project Coordination.  
RK-FINFA  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  for  its  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  in 
Nairobi. While the lead agency of the project is the National Treasury, all RK-FINFA activities 
include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including financial institutions, the 
farming  community  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and 
marketing companies in key agricultural value chains.   
Position: Social Inclusion Officer 
Duty Station: Nairobi 
Overall Scope of Work: Reporting to the Project Coordinator, the Social Inclusion Officer 
will be responsible for the successful implementation of the social inclusion strategies of RK-
FINFA.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The specific duties of the Social Inclusion Officer (SIO) will include: 
a) Be responsible for the development and implementation of the RK-FINFA Gender equality 
and women empowerment, youth, and social inclusion strategies in project interventions to 
ensure results for gender transformation and youth sensitive programming are achieved and 
on  track.  This  will  include  support  to  undertake  gender,  youth  and  social  inclusion 
assessments and analysis to inform gender and youth strategies at project start up, lead the 
integration of gender and youth inclusive approaches during implementation, and monitoring 
progress against RK-FNFA targets. 
b) Ensure that activities of the targeting and gender strategies are reflected in (i) preparation 
of the AWP/B; (ii) design and implementation of the project M&E system; (iii) project progress 
reports and Project supervision. 
c) Participate in the development of detailed TORs and tender documents of national and local 
service providers to various project components to ensure that target groups will be able to 
participate effectively in all components and meet the project’s targets. 
d) Undertake regular capacity assessment on gender and social inclusion issues and provide 
capacity-building  for  staff  at  the  field  level,  PMU,  implementing  partners  and  service 
providers.  
e)  Liaise  with  the  IFAD  country  office  and  gender  team  on  questions  regarding  gender  in 
implementation, knowledge-sharing and other aspects. 
(f) Serve as a channel of communication between the project and others working on gender 
issues in government, implementing agencies, other development projects and IFAD. 
(g) Help project colleagues access the information they may need on gender issues and share 
good practices. 
44 
(h)  Coordinate  and  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  youth  empowerment,  gender 
transformative approaches, women empowerment and GALS approach including contracting 
consultants  or  service  providers  for  technical  assistance,  reviewing  the  TORs,  and 
coordinating between the project and the required technical assistance. 
(i)  Together  with  M&E  and  knowledge  management  staff,  establish  an  M&E  system  that 
captures  and  analyses  disaggregated  data  on  gender  and  social  inclusion.  Document  and 
share M&E, learning and communication products. 
(j) Analyse data to ensure that there are no adverse impacts on target groups as a result of 
project implementation and suggest remedial measures if necessary.  
(k)  Track  the  project’s  effectiveness  in  targeting  strategy,  gender  equality  and  women 
empowerment, youth and vulnerable groups. 
(l) Carry out any other relevant duties as may be assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A  Master's  degree  in  social  science  or  a  field  related  to  rural  community  development 
/gender/nutrition/youth/social inclusion.  
  Experience with poverty, gender and youth targeting in agriculture-based rural development 
financial inclusion programmes. 
  Experience in rural development project management and implementation. 
  Knowledge of participatory and Household Methodologies, especially GALS. 
  Good communications and IT skills as required for the SIO position. 
Required Work Experience 
A  minimum  of  10  years  of  experience  in  community  development  and  applied  gender 
mainstreaming at project or institutional level. 
Type and Duration of Contract 
Three years’ contract with possibility of extension based on performance. 
45 
Draft Terms of Reference: Environment & Climate Change Officer 
Background: The Project 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK-FINFA) is a six-year development project financed jointly by 
the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  and  the  Government  of  Kenya.  RK-FINFA 
supports  the  transformation  of  rural  and  smallholder  agriculture  sector  through  private  sector-led 
development by improving the access of the smallholder farmers and rural micro, small and enterprises 
to  appropriate  financial  services.  The  Project  operates  nationwide  in  Kenya.    It  consists  of  three 
interlinked  components:  (a)  Component  1:  Technical  Support  and  Innovation  Services  (TSIS);  (b) 
Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments; and Component 3: Enabling Rural Finance Environment 
and Project Coordination.  
RK-FINFA is in the process of recruiting officers for its Project Management Unit (PMU) in Nairobi. While 
the  lead  agency  of  the  project  is  the  National  Treasury,  all  RK-FINFA  activities  include  pro-active  co-
operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  financial  institutions,  the  farming  community  as  well  as 
small and medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chains.   
Scope of Work 
The Environment and Climate Change Officer (ECCO) will work closely with all PMU staff, in particular 
the Social Inclusion Officer and the Rural finance Specialist, and implementing partners (host institutions, 
PFIs,  and  technical  service  providers)  to  cover  the  entire  project’s  environmental  and  climate  change 
oversight.  The  position  will  provide  support  to  the  project  to  comply  with  environmental  and  climate 
requirements through:  (i) technical backstopping and advising the PMU and implementing partners in 
addressing a variety of environmental and climate issues, (ii) providing/coordinating environment and 
climate related training/awareness raising particularly in regard to setting up environmental and social 
management systems, (iii) supporting the PFIs to develop and implement ESMSs,  (iv) providing support 
to MFBs, SACCOs and MSMEs to develop ESMSs appropriate to the nature and scale of their activities, 
and  (v) ensuring that environment and climate issues are mainstreamed into project interventions and 
in the application of project documents.  
The ECCO will report to the Project Coordinator.  
Specific Roles and Responsibilities  
Under the direct supervision of RK-FINFA Project Coordinator, the ECCO will be responsible for, but not 
limited to, the following duties: 
  Guide  the  project  in  mainstreaming  environment,  climate  and  NRM  considerations  in  all 
interventions and implementation processes. 
  Prepare  guidelines,  tools  and  notes  for  use  in  the  project  based  on  relevant  environmental 
policies,  acts  and  regulations/directives  of  the  Government  of  Kenya  and  relevant  safeguard 
policies of IFAD. 
  Ensure that national and IFAD’s SECAP guidelines and procedures are complied with at all times 
and at all stages of project implementation. 
  Support proactively the Rural Finance Specialist of the PMU in the development and roll-out of 
the  Green  Financing  Facility  operations  with  the  GFF  Host  Bank  and  the  participating  financial 
institutions.  
  Support the recruited RK-FINFA technical Service Providers in the development and application 
of  technical  green  financing  packages  and  training  events/modules  for  both  the  FIs  and  their 
borrowing clients. 
  Oversee and provide technical support towards the development of the ESMS, indicators, tools, 
guidelines  on  environment  and  climate  aspects  of  the  project’s  baselines,  and  ensure  that  the 
progress is also systematically monitored, including the mid-term and end line. 
  Develop relevant training and capacity building materials for environment and climate  awareness, 
and for setting up ESMSs, 
46 
  Ensure that PFIs develop ESMSs appropriate to the activities they fund, and that they implement 
to the necessary environmental, climate and social processes and procedures as required by their 
ESMSs. 
  Develop implementation strategies of AWPB activities related to environment, climate and NRM 
activities and ensure AWPB targets are met in a timely manner. 
  Review  activity  plans,  ESMSs  and  other  safeguard  requirements  for  PFIs,  and  implementing 
partners  and  contractors,  to  ensure  environmental,  climate  issues  are  mainstreamed  and 
mitigation  measures  are  incorporated,  and  ensure  all  project  documents  and  environmental 
documents are in harmony.  
  Liaise with relevant officers at the all levels to monitor E&S performance of RK-FINFA on-lending 
activities.  
  Support Programme M&E through data collection and writing of required reports. 
  Represent the PMU in relevant meetings and workshops, as well as in the preparation of any 
documents required to mobilise climate finance. 
  Any other environment-related duty as assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualification and Experience 
  Master’s  Degree  or  equivalent  in  Environmental  Sciences;  Natural  Resource  management  and 
NRM or any related field. 
  At least 8 years of relevant and progressive experience at community, national or international 
level in providing environmental management advisory services, hands-on experience in design, 
monitoring  and  evaluation  of  development  projects  and  establishing  interrelationships  among 
international organizations and national governments. 
  Sound knowledge of policy and regulatory frameworks for environmental, climate assessments 
and natural resource management in the agricultural/livestock context of Kenya.  
  Demonstrated  capacity  to  develop  environmental  and  social  management  systems,  execute 
safeguards,  prescribe  solutions  to  environment  and  natural  resource  management  problems, 
manage budgets and programs, as well as prepare reports. 
  Excellent skills in written and spoken English and Kiswahili, and good computer skills; knowledge 
of other local languages will be an added advantage. 
  Creative, innovative system thinker, with ability to catalyse change. 
  Affiliation to a local environmental body. 
  Previous experience in development and implementation of green finance operations would be a 
major advantage for the candidate. 
Duration 
Three years’ contract with possibility of extension based on performance. 
47 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES: COMPONENT 1: TECHNICAL 
SUPPORT AND INNOVATION SERVICES (TSIS) 
Overall Component Structure and Implementation Approach 
Through two fully inter-linked sub-components, the RK-FINFA TSIS is designed to  
(i) 
strengthen  Financial  Institution  (FI)  capacities  for  innovation,  rural  outreach  and  green 
finance services in Kenya, and  
(ii) 
build MSME and smallholder sustainable investment capacities and financial literacy skills. 
Both  aspects  of  the  TSIS,  supply  and  demand  side,  are  embedded  into  the  rural  growth 
strategies of the PFIs, and support the effective use of the resources provided throught the 
project’s Investment Instruments Component. The TSIS thematic areas vary for each PFI. 
The supply side package depends on: 
(i) 
(ii) 
PFI type (bank, MFB, SACCO),  
the level of PFI development 
(iii) 
specific needs in its rural growth strategy,  
(iv) 
the types of innovations the PFIs wish to pursue to increase their rural outreach.  
The demand side package is specified based on: 
(i) 
(ii) 
PFI’s identified target value chains 
PFI’s identified geographic areas.  
Launching of TSIS 
Step 1: At RK-FINFA start-up, the project’s implementing partners will advertise its offered 
support  instruments  broadly  among  Kenyan  financial  institutions.  The  communication  will 
include direct contacting of FIs and utilization of platforms such as the SACCO associations, 
the  MFI  association,  the  bankers’  associations,  the  UN  SDG  platform,  and  other  forums  in 
Kenya. The messages by the project will include transparent and comprehensive descriptions 
of  RK-FINFA  including  the  project’s  geographic  priority  areas,  development  objectives,  the 
TSIS package and the offered investment instruments. 
Step 2: Interested financial institutions are requested to submit their Expressions of Interest 
(EoI) to partner in the RK-FINFA implementation. The EoIs will follow a prepared RK-FINFA 
template, where the candidate PFIs are requested to detail their proposed: 
  Rural and Agriculture Finance, Green Finance and/or Digital Finance innovations and activities 
to be promoted with RK-FINFA support, 
  Target  geographic  areas,  target  value  chains  and  examples  of  investment  types  including 
green investments to be financed with RK-FINFA resources, 
  Utilization of RK-FINFA supply and demand side TSIS including preferred service mechanism 
(internal or external for demand side), short list of preferred external TSPs, and level of PFI 
co-finance to cover the TSIS cost, 
  Overall FI strategy for upgrading and expansion of green investments, agriculture and rural 
portfolios, and outreach to women and youth, 
  Statement of the FI financial performance, commitment, and capacity to sustainably absorb 
and manage the RK-FINFA instruments, following criteria agreed upon with the R-CGS and 
GFF implementing institutions, and 
  Statement of the FI’s MIS capability and its development requirements to provide the required 
borrower-level reports. 
Step 3: Upon receipt of EoIs, the RK-FINFA TSIS Coordinator will conduct an assessment of 
the EoIs submitted by the applying financial institutions. The results of the assessment and 
48 
recommendations for PFI selection to the TSIS pipeline are submitted to the PMU for approval, 
and  subsequently  shared  with  IFAD  for  no-objection.  The  project  repeats  this  call  for 
Expressions  of  Interest  bi-annually  until  the  completion  of  the  pipeline  for  RK-FINFA  TSIS 
implementation. 
Step 4: Upon approval and admission of the PFIs into the TSIS pipeline the TSIS services are 
launched  by  mobilization  of  a  local  specialized  Technical  Service  Provider,  jointly  identified 
with the PFI. Subsequently the PFI will be eligible to apply for financial resources through RK-
FINFA Sub-components 2.1 and 2.2 for implementation of the proposed rural and agriculture 
finance strategy and innovation.  
Management of TSIS 
A co-financing partner organization or organizations coordinate the TSIS component on behalf 
of the National Treasury as “the TSIS Coordinator”, and co-finance the coordination cost. In 
addition to the additional budget, the selected  partners will bring to project a  comparative 
advantage  in  coordination  of  technical  services  and  promotion  of  innovations  in  the  rural 
finance sector. The partners will work under the supervision and oversight of the RK-FINFA 
PMU. 
At the RK-FINFA start-up, the NT and the TSIS Coordinator(s) will negotiate and sign an MoUs 
on the role and responsibilities in the Components 1.1 and 1.2 implementation. The MoU will 
include  a  financing  framework  for  the  whole  6-year  project  period.  It  will  also  include  a 
financing plan for the activity, indicating the annual financing shares of the GoK/IFAD and the 
TSIS  Coordinators.  The  aim  is  that  TSIS  Coordinators  cover  at  least  50  per  cent  of  the 
management costs for the Component 1.   
The finalisation of the focused activity plan for Sub-components 1.1 and 1.2 and the selection 
of the core support areas will be completed after receiving a detailed proposal (including a 
confirmed  co-financing  budget)  from  a  pre-selected  TSIS  Coordinator(s).  Under  the 
arrangement  agreed  during  the  final  RK-FINFA  design,  the  tasks  of  the  co-investing  TSIS 
Coordinator(s) are planned to include the following: 
  Plan, manage and coordinate, under the oversight of the PMU, the successful implementation 
of the Sub-components 1.1 and 1.2 in support of the rural finance operational environment 
in Kenya 
  Design and agree with the NT an overall framework plan for the implementation approach of 
the  Sub-component 1.1  and  1.2  activities  over  the  6-year  RK-FINFA  project  period,  with 
adequate room for flexibility in the implementation approach, targeting 50 per cent women 
and 30 per cent youth using appropriate products and approaches 
  Prepare  the  first  AWPB  for  Sub-component  1.1  and  1.2,  with  detailed  activity  plans  and 
resource allocations 
  Prepare, based on progress achieved and experience gained, the subsequent AWPBs for the 
sub-components and present them to the PMU for including in the RK-FINFA AWPBs 
  Allocate  appropriate  and  adequate  specialist  resources  required  for  the  successful 
implementation from the own resources of the TSIS Coordinator(s) 
  Prepare  the  TORs  for  the  externally  recruited  Technical  Service  Providers  for  the  Sub-
components 1.1 and 1.2 with capacity to deliver on gender and youth targets 
  Advertise the TORs broadly among the potential private and NGO sector service providers 
  Contract,  through  procurement  procedures  agreed  with  the  NT/IFAD/PMU,  the  required 
additional, external expert resources through market-based bidding to support the effective 
implementation of the planned activities, by the Technical Service Providers 
 
Introduce,  train  and  standardize  international  best  practices  and  appropriate,  innovative 
toolkits among the Technical Service Providers including gender-inclusive product design and 
outreach services targeting, and ensure utilization 
  Organise the appropriate knowledge management activities and events to share the outcomes 
of the Component 1 implementation with the financial sector and the wider public, including 
the development networks of the UN and other external partners of RK-FINFA 
49 
  Report to the PMU on the progress of the Sub-components 1.1 and 1.2 implementation based 
on reporting requirements agreed on in the MoU between the NT and TSIS Coordinator(s) 
  Conduct the accounting and financial management tasks related to Sub-component 1.1 and 
1.2 implementation according to the FM rules and procedures agreed for RK-FINFA (see RK-
FINFA draft FM Guidelines in this PIM) 
  Support the RK-FINFA Implementation Support and Supervision missions and other agreed 
RK-FINFA missions and evaluations in their work concerning the progress of Sub-component 
1.1 and 1.2. 
The  Participating  Financial  Institutions  (PFIs)  will  co-finance  the  TSIS  costs  at  a  minimum 
level of 20% for the commercial banks, 15% for the MFBs and 10% for SACCOs. 
The TSIS will need to be operational with a selected PFI prior to its application to implement 
the Component 2 Investment Instruments. 
Sub-component 1.1: PFI Capacity Building for Rural Outreach and Innovation.  The 
overall  purpose  of  this  sub-component  is  to  improve  the  capacity  PFIs  to  provide  financial 
services  to  rural  agricultural  chain  actors  and  especially  to  reach  with  RK-FINFA  services 
50 per  cent  women  and  30  per  cent  youth  clients..  The  expected  outputs  include:  (i)  five 
participating  commercial  banks  capacity  improved  to  invest  in  agriculture  VCs;  (ii)  six 
participating  MFBs  and  30  DT-SACCOs  capacity  improved  to  provide  rural  and  agriculture 
financial  services;  (iii)  the  capacity  of  all  41  PFIs  built  to  implement  and  monitor  green 
investment  portfolios;  and  (iv)  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Systems 
operationalized by the PFIs. 
The PFIs will be provided with a demand driven package of technical support and innovation 
services (TSIS) aimed at helping the PFIs to develop and offer appropriate financial services, 
manage risk of lending to the rural/agriculture sector and reduce transaction costs. 
In the Expressions of Interest (EoI) the PFIs will have identified and proposed key technical 
support areas to expand their rural outreach and agriculture finance. Based on the EoIs, the 
RK-FINFA  technical  support  packages  including  technical  topics  and  appropriate  service 
providers will be tailored for the needs of each PFI.  
Potential PFI capacity building technical support areas will include: 
  Green Finance strategy, products and monitoring toolkit developed for each PFI participating 
in the Green Financing Facility (GFF – Sub-component 2.2) which will directly support the GFF 
rollout.  This  will  be  a  standardized  module  to  establish  national  best  practice  and  support 
Kenyan financial institutions to increase their green portfolios. 
  Gender, youth and social inclusion studies, strategies and toolkit developed for each PFI which 
will support the outreach achievement of 50 per cent women, 30 per cent youth and outreach 
to 5 per cent vulnerable groups. The studies and strategies will inform PFIs awareness on the 
needs and opportunities for women and youth leading to more inclusive products and services 
to increase uptake and outreach among these groups. 
 
Introduction and utilization of Smallholder and Value Chain Digital Platforms present in Kenya, 
to  enable  data  driven,  affordable  and  effective  risk  management  of  agriculture  loans  with 
outreach  to  include  remote  rural  areas.  A  pool  of  platform  providers  will  be  collected  and 
linked with RK-FINFA Participating Financial Institutions for potential collaboration in service 
provision, supported by the project resources. 
  Agriculture  Value  Chain  Finance  strategy  and  specific  products  developed  including  for  alternative 
collaterals, contract farming finance, warehouse receipt systems and cash flow lending. Opportunities and 
risk  assessments  of  VC  stakeholders  carried  out.This  Technical  Service  will  directly  lead  to 
investments through RK-FINFA Component 2. 
  Upgrading of Management Information Systems (MIS) of smaller PFIs based on their demand, 
especially with the objective to integrate seamless mobile banking transaction to their core 
banking system, as well as support to automatization of client profiles and risk assessments. 
The PFIs will need to cover a more substantial share of the relatively high cost of this possible 
intervention. 
  Remittances technical advisory services delivered to PFIs with support by the ongoing IFAD’s 
PRIME Africa project. 
50 
  Effective  Agriculture  and  Climate  Insurance  products  and  solutions  such  as  bundled 
loan/input/insurance packages introduced to PFIs with support by the ongoing the IFAD-led 
PARM and INSURED global initiatives. 
  Environmental,  Social  and  Governance  (ESG)  standards  including  climate  change  risk 
management  strengthened  or  introduced  to  the  PFIs  through  the  establishment  of 
environmental and social management systems (ESMS).  Guidance on the management of 
environmental, social and climate change risks are provided in Appendix 3 of this PIM. 
In addition, the PFI technical support package will include assistance by the TSIS Coordinator 
and the recruited Technical Service Provider at each PFI to monitor and evaluate the social 
and environmental targeting and impact of the RK-FINFA resources. 
A particular target of this sub-component is to develop a permanent culture in the PFIs for 
long term pro-active rural product innovation while at the same time, with improved technical 
skills,  to  help  the  financial  institutions  to  immediately  reduce  the  risks  associated  with 
designing,  piloting,  and  launching  of  new  products.  Success  in  this  area  will  be  especially 
important for the succcessful implementation of RK-FINFA financial instruments. 
Sub-component  1.2:  Business  Development  Services  for  Agribusinesses  and 
Smallholders.  The  expected  outputs  of  this  sub-component  are:  (i)  1,500  small  and 
microenterprises  receive  Business  Development  Services  (BDS)  and  are  able  to  submit 
bankable  business  plans;  and  (ii)  50,000  male  and  female  smallholder  producers  receive 
financial literacy training including for preparation of simple business  plans appropriate  for 
SACCO/MFB loan applications. The PFIs can either utilize their own internal service units with 
RK-FINFA support, and/or recruit external TSPs for the delivery of the Agribusiness BDS and 
Smallholder Financial Literacy services. The BDS is key tool for ensuring that a minimum of 
50% women and 30% youth are included among all BDS clients. 
Pipeline  generation  of  agribusinesses  and  smallholders  for  the  TSIS.  The  agribusiness  and 
smallholder  candidates  into  the  TSIS  programme  of  RK-FINFA  are  identified  through  the 
geographical targeting of the PFIs and the value chain targeting of the project aligned with 
the  four  IFAD-financed  ongoing  value  chain  projects  in  Kenya  and  supported  by  pipeline 
referrals by the VC projects. The final TSIS pipeline generation is based on expressed demand 
from  agribusinesses  and  smallholders,  following  a  set  of  pre-defined  eligibility  criteria 
described in the PIM. The provided BDS and Financial Literacy services will in turn will lead to 
increased access to finance through the PFIs. The TSIS target groups include at least 50 per 
cent women and 25 per cent youth. A dedicated specialist is recruited in the RK-FINFA PMU 
to support coordination with ongoing value chain projects and the pipeline generation. 
Agribusiness BDS. The TSIS Coordinator and the PFIs will mobilize appropriate BDS services 
to the pipeline of targeted agribusinesses. The aim of the BDS is to strengthen the bankability, 
business planning capacity and financial management skills of the MSMEs, and thereby lower 
the  investment  risk  for  the  PFIs.  Furthermore,  a  standard  bankability  assessment  will  be 
completed for each agribusiness, helping to inform the PFIs of the real investment risks and 
opportunities paying attention to women and youth inclusive processes. The BDS services are 
demand-driven  and  a  mandatory  element  prior  to  lending  through  RK-FINFA  Investment 
Resources. The aim of the BDS is to ensure that all RK-FINFA financing will target well planned 
productive and screened investments in the rural agricultural sectors, thereby reducing the 
risks of overindebtedness of the MSMEs as well as the NPL rates of the PFIs. 
Smallholder  Financial  Literacy  services.  The  PFIs  providing  financial  services  to  rural 
communities, including women, youth and vulnerable groups will, with support from the RK-
FINFA,  mobilize  financial  literacy  training  to  the  targeted  groups  and  communities  of 
beneficiaries.  The  major  objective  of  this  is  to  increase  savings  levels  for  sustainable 
investment  by  the  supported  households,  while  simultaneously  increasing  savings 
mobilization as a long term core fund raising strategy  of SACCOs and MFBs,  which in turn 
increases possible investment volumes in the rural communities. Training topics will include: 
basic banking skills; “Saving for a Purpose”; managing resources; borrowing; interest rates; 
collateral;  bank  transactions  and  payments;  and  use  of  mobile  and  digital  banking. 
Furthermore, a targeted module for women and youth empowerment in the use of financial 
services will be developed and rolled out. 
Demand side TSIS delivery mechanism. The PFIs can either utilize their own internal service 
units with RK-FINFA support, and/or recruit external TSPs, for the delivery of the Agribusiness 
51 
BDS and Smallholder Financial Literacy services. The pipeline generated through the demand 
side TSIS is linked to the outreach mechanisms of the PFIs, which are strengthened through 
the supply side technical support to PFIs, leading eventually to the actual investments and 
effective utilisation of the RK-FINFA Component 2 financial resources.  
52 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES: COMPONENT 2: RURAL 
INVESTMENT INSTRUMENTS 
The  RK-FINFA  will  operate  with  two  Rural  Investment  Instruments:  (i)  a  Rural  Credit 
Guarantee Scheme (R-CGS), and (ii) a Green Financing Facility (GFF). Both the R-CGS 
and the GFF will be designed as sustainable financing vehicles, which can utilize resources 
from the GoK and from interested international financiers to unlock private investment into 
Kenya’s  agricultural  and  agribusiness  sector  at  attractive  market  terms  through  Kenyan 
financial  institutions.  The  Technical  Support  and  Innovation  Services  packages  under 
Component 1 will support the PFIs in the implementation of the rural investment instruments, 
in  line  with  each  PFI’s  respective  rural  and  agriculture  finance  strategy.  Identification  and 
referral  of  agribusiness  and  smallholder  candidates  into  the  PFI  funding  pipelines  are 
supported as described above in Component 1.2 (BDS and Financial Literacy services). Below, 
the  guidelines  for  the  implementation  of  R-CGS  and  GFF  are  provided.  The  Operations 
Manuals for the two schemes will be finalised at the project start-up. 
53 
Guidelines for Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme 
Implementation 
The  expected  results  of  the  R-CGS  are:  (i)  supported  by  the  R-CGS  guarantee  amount  of 
US$ 20 million, PFIs are expected to lend US$ 80 million to rural MSMEs and agriculture value 
chains; (ii) 2,000 rural MSMEs have improved access to finance; (iii) 15,000 microenterprises 
and  farmers  have  improved  access  to  finance,  and  (iv)  30,000  smallholder  farmers  have 
improved  access  to  finance  with  targeted  products  for  women  and  youth.  The  Table  below 
summarises the key products, approaches, and implementation approaches of the planned 
R-CGS. 
RK-FINFA Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme Investment Summary 
Budget allocation and 
sources 
Leveraged PFI 
contributions 
Objectives  
Total US$ 20 million  
- US$ 5 million IFAD PoL18 
- US$ 15 million GoK 
US$ 80 million by the PFIs19 
Mitigate real and perceived risk to unlock commercial capital flows 
into the agribusiness sector MSMEs and smallholder communities. 
Managing partner 
Hosted by National Treasury; managed by a dedicated unit in NT 
Participating FIs 
1. Commercial banks as implementers of guarantees 
2. MFBs as implementers of guarantees, and as recipients of 
guaranteed wholesale loans 
3. DT-SACCOs as recipients of guaranteed wholesale loans 
Investment targets  
1. 2,000 MSME medium loans by commercial banks 
2. 15,000 small loans by commercial banks, MFBs and DT- SACCOs 
3. 30,000 microloans by MFBs and DT-SACCOs 
Expected average end-
borrower loan size US$20 
Maximum end-borrower 
loan size US$ 
- US$ 30,000 per MSME 
- US$ 2,000 per small loan 
- US$ 1,000 per microloan 
- US$ 45,000 per MSME 
- US$ 5,000 per small loan 
- US$ 1,500 per microloan 
Maximum wholesale loan 
size US$ 
- US$ 1.000.000 for DT-SACCOs 
- US$ 2.500.000 for MFBs 
- US$ 150.000 for value chain finance through SMEs 
Maximum loan durations 
- 12 months for working capital loans to MSMEs and smallholders 
- 36 months for capex loans to MSMEs and smallholders 
- 48 months for wholesale loans to DT-SACCOs and MFBs 
Target number of HHs 
benefit from farm and off-
farm employment 
opportunities by R-CGS 
Total 160,000 rural HHs 
- 100,000 HHs via MSME loans 
- 30,000 HHs via small loans 
- 30,000 HHs via microloans 
Gender and youth 
- 30% of investment targeting youth and women 
Environment, Social and 
Governance 
PFIs and Agribusinesses follow agreed Environmental, Social and 
Governance (ESG) standards and CC risk management systems 
The strategy of the RK-FINFA R-CGS is to provide risk sharing coverage to promote rural 
outreach  innovations  and  leverage  commercial  investment  into  the  rural  and  agriculture 
sector  from  the  portfolios  of  Kenyan  mainstream  financial  institutions  such  as  Cooperative 
Bank,  National  Bank,  ABSA  Bank,  Kenya  Commercial  Bank  and  Equity  Bank.  The  target 
18 IFAD Programme of Loans i.e., the sovereign lending window, earmarked for micro- and smallholder guarantees 
19 The R-CGS will require minimum 4x leverage with guarantees provided. The US$ 80 million PFI investment is an estimation of the market 
demand. With more demand, additional investment to the guarantee instrument will be sought. 
20 The average loan sizes are based on interviews with potential PFIs. These can be adjusted during the implementation, however so that 
maximum MSME loan is US$ 45.000, maximum small loan US$ 5.000, and maximum microloan US$ 1.500 
54 
institutions  have  a  significant  liquid  resource  base  and  overall  strong  capacity  to  deliver 
banking services, but they have limited risk appetite and limited tools to effectively and in 
large scale service rural and agriculture sectors. 
The R-CGS builds on PROFIT’s Risk Sharing Scheme experiences and institution building at 
the  National  Treasury  (NT).  In  particular,  based  on  PROFIT  lessons,  the  NT  in  2020 
institutionalized  its  guarantee  tool  by  establishment  of  the  public  MSME  Credit  Guarantee 
Scheme (MSME-CGS). The MSME-CGS is established and regulated through the GoK’s Public 
Finance Management Regulations for the Credit Guarantee Scheme, 2020.21  
The  MSME-CGS  at  its  start-up  received  initial  14  applications  from  commercial  banks 
interested  to  participate  in  the  scheme.  To  date,  seven  banks  have  been  approved  to 
participate22. The GoK invested KES 3 billion (US$ 27.6 million) in the scheme in 2021 and 
has confirmed to invest another KES 2 billion (US$ 18.4 million) over the coming two years. 
The MSME-CGS provides an appropriate overall operation framework, suitable for the 
RK-FINFA R-CGS. The detailed management guideline attached to this PIM as “Appendix 1: 
Operational Manual - MSME Credit Guarantee Scheme”. Its key features include:  
  50 per cent coverage of potential losses in qualifying MSME loans on a pari-passu basis, with 
total exposure limit of 25 percent of portfolio and individual loans. 
  Four-fold  required  investment  amount  by  the  PFIs  against  their  received  allocation  of 
guarantee resources. 
  The  PFIs  use  their  own  credit  appraisal  systems  and  criteria,  together  with  CGS  eligibility 
criteria, to select the final borrowers to the scheme. 
  Maximum tenor of three years for guaranteed loans, while the expected medium tenor is 18 
months. The allocations for loan guarantees can be used for several rounds of investments 
during the guarantee contract period. 
  The targeting of loans includes minimum of 30 percent youth and women and a framework 
is established to implement and monitor this. 
  Transparent  information  and  access  by  all  regulated  financial  institutions  as  long  as  they 
qualify based on criteria defined in the Operations Manual. 
  The  guarantee  resources  invested  are  deposited  and  ring-fenced  at  the  Central  Bank  of 
Kenya. The guarantee reserve is accessible to PFIs only after possible losses materialise and 
have been reported and approved. 
 
 
In short term, due to the COVID-19 response nature of the scheme, participating banks are 
not charged any guarantee fees. 
In medium term, the GoK goal is to establish a Credit Guarantee Company, CGC, to which all 
MSME-CGS  operations  and  available  funds  will  be  transferred.  The  CGC  will  charge  a  risk 
weighted guarantee fee. Due to the COVID-19 crisis, the transfer of resources from the public 
Credit Guarantee Scheme to the CGC is likely to be delayed. 
  A  feasibility  study  and  demand  assessment  has  been  carried  out  by  the  ‘Financial  Sector 
Deepening  Kenya’  as  well  as  the  World  Bank,  pointing  to  large  unaddressed  demand  for 
financing of MSMEs and the feasibility of CGS tool especially in targeting women and youth. 
The RK-FINFA R-CGS is established as a special rural window of the GoK MSME-CGS, 
with investment resources as follows: 
 
IFAD RK-FINFA loan, US$ 5 million, 
  GoK’s PROFIT reflows, US$ 7.5 million 
  Earmarked rural allocation from the GoK MSME-CGS overall budget, US$ 7.5 million 
21 https://www.treasury.go.ke/publications/regulations/category/71-pfm-regulations.html?download=1134:public-finance-
management-credit-guarantee-scheme-regulations-2020-1-2 
22 NT invited applications from 39 banks across all tiers. The final set of seven banks that qualified consists of only Tier 1 and Tier 
3 banks 
55 
The total R-CGS investment amount of US$ 20 million is based on expected demand from the 
banking  sector.  At  RK-FINFA  MTR,  the  level  of  R-CGS  utilization  and  expected  remaining 
demand during the project period are assessed. If demand is higher than resources available, 
additional financing will be sought by IFAD and GoK to increase the R-CGS outreach. In case 
of expected under-utilization of the allocation, the reserved guarantee amount can be reduced 
and reallocated to other RK-FINFA instruments. 
The  R-CGS  investment  of  US$  20  million,  with  the  aligned  TSIS,  is  expected  to  leverage 
US$ 80 million of commercial financing to rural clients. This is based on the established Credit 
Guarantee  Scheme,  with  requirement  of  4-time  leverage  amount  by  Participating  Financial 
Institutions. This in turn is based on and in line with the achieved result by IFAD’s PROFIT: 
the  guarantees  of  USD  6.9  million leveraged  USD  32.2  million  of  bank  investments,  which 
equals 4.7-time leverage. 
The leveraged amount includes, in particular (i) about US$ 40 million to SME agribusinesses 
that  lead,  sustain,  and  develop  smallholder-inclusive  value  chains,  and  that  provide 
employment  for  rural  people  including  women  and  youth,  and  (ii)  about  US$  40  million  to 
Smallholder communities and micro-agribusinesses in the rural areas, providing livelihoods 
and employment opportunities in small-scale. 
To enable these rural investments through the public guarantee scheme, it has been agreed 
with the National Treasury that selected aspects of the MSME-CGS regulations are adjusted 
to allow efficient functioning of the special rural window. The adjustments are established and 
regulated by “The R-CGS Addendum of the MSME-CGS Operational Manual”, a draft of which 
is provided in the next 3 pages. 
56 
Government of Kenya RCGS Addendum page 1 
The R-CGS Addendum of the MSME-CGS Operational Manual 
Draft version, May 2021, prepared by the IFAD/GoK RK-FINFA design mission 
The purpose of this Addendum is to adjust the MSME Credit Guarantee Scheme (MSME-
CGS) of the Government of Kenya for the implementation of that part of the MSME-CGS 
resources which is exclusively earmarked  for rural areas. This part of the MSME-CGS is 
here called the “Rural CGS” or “R-CGS”. 
This  Addendum  is  in  particular  made  in  reference  to  the  documents  establishing  and 
guiding the MSME-CGS: 
-  Government  of  Kenya  Public  Finance  Management  Regulations  for  the  Credit 
Guarantee Scheme, 2020 
-  MSME-CGS Operational Manual, Government of Kenya, 2020 
The Addendum 
The R-CGS resources are ring-fenced and exclusively target rural productive investment 
loans. This is achieved by three types of Guaranteed Investments with special conditions 
as described below. 
Investment type 1. Wholesale lending to prudentially regulated SACCOs and MFBs will 
qualify  for  R-CGS  guarantee  coverage.  The  aim  is  to  mobilize  funding  from  existing 
resources in the Kenyan financial system, through the SACCOs and MFBs, towards small 
scale rural productive investments, with the following conditions: 
-  The  guaranteed  wholesale  lending  is  provided  by  the  financial  institutions 
registered as Implementing Financial Institution of the R-CGS 
-  The  eligible  loan  recipients  for  the  guaranteed  wholesale  loans  are  registered 
Kenyan rural DT-SACCOs and MFBs, under prudent supervision of SASRA and CBK, 
respectively  
-  The maximum R-CGS guaranteed loan amount to the DT-SACCOs is US$ 1,000,000 
-  The maximum R-CGS guaranteed loan amount to the MFBs is US$ 2,500,000 
-  The maximum R-CGS guaranteed loan amount duration is 48 months 
-  The  R-CGS  Implementing  Financial  Institutions  use  their  own  credit  appraisal 
systems and criteria for the FI-to-FI transactions, including for (i) the conditions of 
the wholesale loans, and (ii) the selection criteria for the wholesale lending targets 
- 
In  case  of  default  of  a  DT-SACCO  or  MFB  to  pay  back  the  loan  to  the  wholesale 
originating financial institution (R-CGS Implementing FI), the R-CGS covers losses 
per the standard conditions as described in the MSME-CGS Operational Manual 
The utilization of the wholesale resources by the rural DT-SACCOs and MFBs is earmarked 
exclusively for productive rural loans. The DT-SACCOs and MFBs utilize their own standard 
credit  appraisal  systems  and  criteria  for  the  on-lending  of  the  borrowed  resources.  The 
DT-SACCOs and MFBs cover the risk exposure of these loans per their normal business  
Government of Kenya RCGS Addendum page 2 
practice. These end-client-loans are not under the coverage of the R-CGS: If end-clients 
fail to repay back to the DT-SACCO/MFB, the losses are covered by the DT-SACCO/MFB, 
and these losses are not covered by the guarantee. 
57 
The DT-SACCOs and MFBs report back to the wholesale lender on the details of their loan 
portfolio with the resources through the loan. The wholesale lender (implementing FI of 
the R-CGS) aggregates and  reports the information back to the R-CGS. The  monitoring 
information includes: 
-  Number of end-client loans, number of new clients 
-  Locations and types of end-clients: women, youth, MSMEs, smallholder farmers 
-  Sizes of loans: maximum, minimum, average 
-  Loan performance: updates of reflows and NPL % 
-  Accounts of re-utilization of the wholesale loan resources 
-  The total amount of DT-SACCO and MFB on-lending to end borrowers as a result of 
and based on the R-CGS wholesale loan. 
During  the  5  years  of  RK-FINFA  project  implementation,  the  Participating  Financial 
Institutions (including both the wholesale lenders and the wholesale borrowers) in the R-
CGS will receive a technical advisory package as described in the IFAD/GoK Project Design 
Report of RK-FINFA Component 1. Furthermore, the client pipeline of the DT-SACCOs and 
MFBs also receive TA. 
Investment type 2: Value Chain Financing. The loan recipient Agribusiness-SMEs on-
lend  their  borrowed  funds  in  full  to  their  network  of  supplier  smallholders,  by  special 
conditions as follows: 
-  The  R-CGS  Implementing  Financial  Institutions  use  their  own  credit  appraisal 
systems and criteria for the conditions and selection criteria for lending targets 
-  Larger maximum loan amount of US$ 150.000 is applied for SME-agribusiness-led 
Value Chain Financing (VCF) operations 
-  The  VCF  investment  amount  is  exclusively  and  fully  utilized  for  input  loans  to 
supplier smallholders 
-  The maximum VCF operation end-client loan size is US$ 1,500 
-  The VCF loan duration is for one farming season, tailored for each VCF operation, 
and extended at the beginning of the crop cycle 
-  The  SME-Agribusinesses  are  responsible  for  the  organization  of  the  supplier 
smallholder investments 
-  The SME-Agribusinesses carry the full risk of the smallholder input loans and are 
alone  responsible  for  the  loan  repayment  back  to  the  Financial  Institution.  If 
smallholder farmer network members fail to repay back to the SME, the losses are 
covered by the SME. 
Government of Kenya RCGS Addendum page 3 
The  SME-Agribusinesses  report  back  to  the  Financial  Institution  on  the  details  of  their 
portfolio of input material loans to smallholders, covering the full amount of guaranteed 
loan resources. The Financial Institution aggregates and reports the information back to 
the R-CGS. The monitoring information includes: 
-  Number of input material loans 
-  Types of end-clients: women, youth, average/max/min farm sizes 
58 
-  Sizes of loans: maximum, minimum, average 
-  Loan performance: updates of reflows and NPL % 
-  The total amount of VCF on-lending to end borrowers. 
Investment type 3. Direct lending to Rural MSMEs and farmers is promoted by: 
-  RK-FINFA  project  provides  technical  assistance  services  to  the  PFIs,  MSMEs  and 
smallholder farmers that participate (or in pipeline to participate) in the scheme. 
-  The  R-CGS  Implementing  Financial  Institutions  use  their  own  credit  appraisal 
systems and criteria for the conditions and selection criteria for lending targets. 
-  Direct  Microloans  below  US$ 1,500,  from  the  Guarantee  Implementing  FI  to 
agriculture  microenterprises  and  smallholder  farmers,  can  be  included  into  the 
scheme  with  a  district-level  farm  registration  (the  most  appropriate  institutional 
solution to be further discussed with the GoK) 
-  The  direct  loans  above  US$  1,500,  from  the  Guarantee  Implementing  FI  to 
agriculture  microenterprises  and  smallholder  farmers,  apply  the  same  overall 
criteria as described in the GoK MSME-CGS Operating Manual. 
All  the  conditions  of  the  GoK  MSME-CGS  Operating  Manual  apply  to  the  R-CGS 
operations, except for the points described above under Investment types 1, 2 and 3.  
59 
Guidelines for Green Financing Facility Implementation 
(GFF) 
PURPOSE AND DESCRIPTION OF THE GFF OPERATIONAL MECHANISM 
RK-FINFA  supports  the  target  of  the  innovative  and  sustainable  transformation  of  Kenyan 
rural economy through the operations and services of the Green Financing Facility (GFF), to 
be  established with the RK-FINFA support. The GFF will contribute to  the sustainable rural 
transformation,  growth,  and  income  generation  through  two  fully  interlinked  methods:  (a) 
alleviating  the  liquidity  constraints  of  non-bank  financial  institutions  that  are  the  main 
financial service providers for smallholders and rural micro-enterprises, and (b) encouraging 
small-scale farmers and micro-firms to invest in climate-smart and environmentally friendly 
activities.   
Purpose 1: Alleviating Liquidity Constraint 
Aggregate  data  on  Kenyan  economy  shows  that  there  is  adequate  liquidity in  the  financial 
system,  but  this  masks  significant  liquidity  concentration  and  the  uneven  distribution  of 
liquidity among different types of FIs. In a particularly weak position are non-bank financial 
institutions  serving  the  smallholders  and  rural  MSMEs:  the  SACCOs  and  MFBs/MFIs  with  a 
large rural low-income clientele. In addition to limited deposit bases, their capacity to borrow 
on-lending  funds  from  liquid  commercial  banks  remains  weak,  as  the  banks  actively  seek 
safer  investment  opportunities.  The  situation  has  sharply  deteriorated  due  to  COVID-19 
related shocks, rendering most rural SACCOs and MFIs increasingly vulnerable and liquidity-
constrained to continue their lending to their largely informal rural clientele.  
The  GFF  will  be  established  as  a  permanent  facility  to  provide  wholesale  capital  to  rural 
oriented  SACCOs  and  MFBs/MFIs,  for  on-lending  to  the  smallholder  sub-sector  and  rural 
micro-enterprises.  The  RK-FINFA  budget  will  provide  the  start-up  capital  for  the  wholesale 
operations. On the medium term, a key target is to pro-actively increase the capital base of 
the  GFF  through  additional  investments  (grants  or  loans)  by  other  development-oriented 
financiers with a green agenda, to achieve larger GFF outreach and impact. During the RK-
FINFA  design  process,  various  potential  candidates  to  support  the  scaling  up  of  the  GFF 
operations have been identified (see more below).    
The GFF will be hosted in a registered financial institution that best meets the eligibility criteria 
for  the  host  institution  as  defined  in  (a)  the  PIM  of  RK-FINFA  and  (b)  the  GoK  regulations 
concerning the on-lending of public funds. A number of leading commercial banks (including 
the Co-operative Bank, Equity Bank, and ABSA) as well as the government-owned AFC23 have 
expressed their tentative interest to host the GFF, as the GFF objectives are in line with their 
own  development  vision.  The  selection  of  the  Host  Institution  will  be  finalised  after  the 
approval of the RK-FINFA financing package by the GoK and IFAD.  
The wholesale borrowers from the Host Institution using the RK-FINFA GFF finances will be 
the regulated non-bank financial institutions serving the key RF-FINFA target clientele, the 
smallholders and rural micro-enterprises. The final borrowers benefiting from the GFF funding 
would be the rural clients of the SACCOs and MFBs that meet the key requirements agreed 
for  the  RK-FINFA  beneficiaries,  the  smallholders  and  rural  micro-firms.  In  the  PIM  of  RK-
FINFA, the beneficiary/client profiles of the project are described in detail. In addition to the 
increased rural finance outreach to this underserviced group, the key transformative element 
of the intervention is the targeting of the investments with GFF funding to the climate-smart 
productive projects of the borrowers. 
Purpose 2: Rural Transformation through GFF Green Financing  
While the general understanding of the importance of environmental issues and the impacts 
of  climate  change  has  improved  in  recent  years  in  Kenya,  environmentally  friendly  and 
23  In  the  case  of  AFC,  a  potential  constraint  for  its  role  as  a  GFF  Host  can  be  that  it  does  not  operate  under  the 
supervision/regulation of the Central Bank of Kenya. To attract additional investments to the GFF, some key international investors 
consider central bank supervision as a required condition for their investments. 
60 
innovative climate resilient options and related investments are often overlooked due to the 
perception of higher upfront capital costs and the longer-term nature of realising the tangible 
benefits  and  higher  incomes.,  as  well  as  limitations  in  knowledge  of  existing  options  and 
technologies. To achieve faster progress in this area, the traditional knowledge applied in rural 
areas  should  be  complemented  with  scientific  knowledge  to  achieve  the  desired  climate 
resilient  livelihoods  and  a  sustainable  natural  resource  base.  Existing  Government  policies 
and national plans strongly support greener pathways in rural development, and the updated 
Nationally Determined Contributions include actions such as the enhancement of energy and 
resource  efficiency;  clean  efficient  and  sustainable  energy  technologies;  low-carbon  and 
efficient transportation systems; and climate smart agriculture as priorities for climate change 
mitigation.   
The GFF will focus on green investments and target its wholesale loans to PFIs for financing 
activities  and  projects  in  climate  change  adaptation/mitigation,  improved  environmental 
management, and improved efficiencies in the use of natural resources (see types of eligible 
activities/projects below). The GFF terms of additional liquidity for projects of these types will 
enable the provision of loans at more client-friendly terms particularly concerning the terms 
of repayment, including longer loan duration and appropriate grace periods. 
Discussions  with  the  key  potential  wholesale  borrowers  of  the  GFF  indicated  strong  future 
demand  for  capital  for  innovative  green  investments.  First,  leading  MFBs  consider  green 
financing  as  a  key  strategy  in  their  future  operations,  and  they  already  are  offering  green 
products  to  their  clients, 
friendly  and  climate  change 
adaptation/mitigation technologies such as water harvesting/storage, irrigation, agricultural 
insurance, and clean/renewable energy. Special attention will be given to investments that 
result in GHG emission reductions and those that have potential to generate carbon credits. 
The GFF will provide additional TA and financial resources for these institutions to develop the 
green  segments  of  their  portfolios,  together  with  focused  RK-FINFA  technical  support  for 
green strategy and product development.  
including  environmentally 
Second,  rural  oriented  DT-SACCOs  also  expressed  interest  to  finance  sustainable,  green 
agricultural and rural activities but their development level in this area is lower than in the 
case of MFBs, requiring major TA investments under Component 1. 
As a part of Component 1, a key technical support intervention is to:  
 
Improve the capacity of the targeted SACCOs in product development and systems to pro-
actively offer green products to their clients  
  Promote the awareness of their clients of sustainable, green technologies and their ability to 
develop business plans and bankable proposal for their investments in areas covered by the 
GFF funding. These actions will speed up the demand for green finance products offered with 
the GFF-support.    
Through RK-FINFA, IFAD and the GoK will provide the initial investment capital for the GFF. 
Discussions  during  the  project  design  process  indicated  substantial  interest  from  other 
financiers  to  provide  additional  resources  (both  capital  and  TA)  for  this  innovative  green 
finance  operation.  These  include  Green  Climate  Fund’s  Private  Sector  Facility,  European 
Investment Bank, KFW, potential bilateral partners as well as various UN funded programmes 
in Kenya. The success in attracting additional resources from these and other sources will be 
one of the parameters against which the success of the RK-FINFA and GFF management will 
be  measured  as  the  implementation  of  the  GFF  scheme  progresses.  The  Non-Sovereign 
Operations window of IFAD can serve as entry points to create a private sector window into 
the GFF with the condition that a private sector financial institution will be identified as GFF 
host institution. 
SELECTION OF GFF HOST INSTITUTION 
At the RK-FINFA start-up, the PMU and the National Treasury, in close coordination with IFAD 
and with inputs from the supervisory authorities, will select the Host Institution for the GFF. 
The Host institution will be a commercial bank or a government-owned development bank. 
The  Host  Institution  has  to  meet  the  general  conditions  concerning  its  financial  and 
operational status as well as Special Conditions concerning its experience and qualifications 
in rural finance. 
61 
The General Conditions include:  
(a) License - the financial institution needs to be properly licensed. 
(b) Good governance – ‘fit and proper’ owners; adequate Board composition and practices; 
adequate  organization  and  institutional  capacity  for  its  specific  risk  profile;  existence  and 
effectiveness of business- and risk-related committees (such as Assets/Liability Management 
Committee,  Risk  Committees,  Credit  Committees,  Audit  Committee,  and  so  on)  operating 
with adequate policies and procedures; competent management with adequate managerial 
autonomy; business strategy aligned with the financial intermediary’s size and management 
experience.  
(c) Good  standing  with  the  supervisor  -  compliance  with  the  supervisory  authorities’ 
prudential regulations and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(d) Capital adequacy - good capital structure and compliance with risk-based capital adequacy 
requirements;  positive  trend  adequate  for  the  financial intermediary’s  growth  perspectives 
and risk characteristics of new business initiatives.  
(e) Adequate  liquidity  and  effective  asset/liability  management  -  liquidity  meeting  the 
supervisory authorities’ regulations and financial intermediary’s needs with effective liquidity 
management practices. Good funding structure without heavy concentration and capacity to 
mobilize  domestic  resources.  Adequate  contingency  planning  for  funding  to  meet 
unanticipated events or periods of excess liquidity. 
(f)  Adequate profitability - the bank must have positive profitability with well diversified and 
stable earnings trend and acceptable risk profile.  It must maintain the  value of its capital. 
Level and growth trends of operating costs and expenses should be well managed.  
(g) Adequately  managed  financial  and  operational  risks  -  financial  and  operational  risk 
management  functions  should  be  well  organized;  the  bank  must  have  well-defined  and 
prudent  policies  and  written  procedures  for  management  of  all  types  of  financial  risks 
(liquidity,  credit,  currency,  interest  rate  and  market  risk,  as  well  as  risks  associated  with 
balance sheet and income statement structures) and operational risk; exposure to interest 
rate risk, currency risk, and market risk at the instrument, portfolio, and balance sheet levels 
within risk limits and well managed. 
(h) Good  asset  structure  and  portfolio  quality  -  Good  asset  structure  including  type, 
concentration,  liquidity,  and  diversification;  effectiveness  of  loan/finance  underwriting  and 
the related policies, procedures, and practices; lending to/financing connected parties; asset 
classification and provisioning practices; level, distribution, and severity of classified assets 
and timely identification and collection of problem assets.  
(i)  Adequate internal audit function, including organization of internal audit and compliance 
functions;  internal  audit  policies,  procedures,  and  practices;  annual  audit  planning  and 
execution,  ensuring  that  all  risk  areas  are  examined  and  that  those  areas  of  greatest  risk 
receive  priority;  reporting  requirements  to  senior  management  and  Board;  quality  of 
reporting  and  responsiveness  to  audit  suggestions,  recommendations,  or  requirements; 
follow up on any noted issues.  
(j)  Adequate  IT  and  Management  Information  Systems  (MIS),  and  openness  to 
experiment with technology-based credit assessment and distribution approaches. 
(k) Established Environmental and Social Management System – the Host Bank will have 
an ESMS through which it will be able to monitor the environmental and social sustainability, 
as  well  as  resilience  to  climate  change,  of  borrowers’  activities.  It  will  therefore  assign 
qualified environmental and social personnel to oversee that ESMS is implemented and key 
requirements are met. The bank will have the capacity to support its GFF wholesale borrowers 
(PFIs) in the establishment of ESMS procedures appropriate to the nature and level of risk of 
the activities to be financed.  
The Special Conditions for the GFF operation include: 
(a) Experience to act as a host to credit line-based wholesale lending operations with donor 
funding 
62 
(b) Experience and competence in the assessment of the performance and non-bank financial 
institutions as the bank’s borrowing clients 
(c) Overall experience in in financing rural and agricultural clients, including particularly the 
smallholders and rural micro-enterprises 
(d) Adequate MIS systems to collect and aggregate information from various borrowing 
SACCOs and MFBs into comprehensive reports at the total GFF scheme level 
(e) Capacity to proactively participate in fundraising efforts to increase the volumes and impact 
of the GFF. 
The Preparation for the GFF Host Institution selection will start immediately after the IFAD 
and  GoK  financing  to  support  RK-FINFA  has  been  approved.  After  receiving  the  formal 
Expressions of Interest (EoI) by the banks, the PMU, with IFAD support and inputs from the 
supervisory authorities, would organise a due diligence process to identify the best candidate. 
IFAD’s No Objection would be required for the final selection of the Host Institution.   
The selection of the GFF Host, The National Treasury will enter into Financing Agreement with 
the GFF Host. The Financing Agreement will be denominated in KES.  From the subsequent 
fund transfers by the NT to Host Institution, the Host on-lends the GFF funds in wholesale 
tranches to SACCOs and MFBs. From these financing tranches, the SACCOs and MFBs would 
on-lend  the  funds  to  final  borrowers,  the  smallholders  and  micro-enterprises,  for  viable 
projects that meet the green financing eligible criteria of the GFF (see more below on  final 
borrower eligibility criteria). 
After  signing  the  Financing  Agreement  with  the  NT,  the  Host  Institution  and  the  PMU  will 
inform  the  candidate  wholesale  borrower  institutions,  the  MFBs  and  SACCOs  with  rural 
orientation,  about  the  services  of  the  new  GFF.  The  achieve  adequate  coverage,  IT-based 
media as well as cooperative and microfinance apex organisation channels would be actively 
utilised to reach the targeted MFBs and SACCOs.    
GFF WHOLESALE BORROWERS 
The wholesale borrowers from the Host Institution using the RK-FINFA GFF finances will be 
the regulated non-bank financial institutions serving the key RF-FINFA target clientele This 
financial  service  market  consists  of  two  key  segments.  First,  the  deposit-taking  SACCOs 
(regulated  by  SASRA),  particularly  the  49  farmer-based  DT-SACCOs  that  nationally  serve 
around  2.25  million  smallholder  households.  In  addition,  there  are  many  employee-based 
SACCOs that systematically provide credit facilities to farmers and other rural enterprises and 
would qualify for GFF wholesale loans if they direct the received GFF funding to smallholders. 
Second, the microfinance banks (regulated by the Central Bank), serving large  rural client 
networks nationwide and in many cases targeting particularly low-income women with their 
financial  services.  The  largest  MFB  alone  serves  600,000  female  clients  through  over  230 
outlets, and also other MFBs have a strong gender orientation with large female clienteles.  
When the GFF operations mature and its capital base grows, the increase in the number of 
wholesale  borrowers  from  the  GFF  will  be  pro-actively  promoted  through  (a)  actions  and 
policies to increase the number of regulated SACCOs and MFBs in Kenya and (b) the inclusion 
of well-managed (but not regulated) credit-only MFIs into the scheme. RK-FINFA support to 
speed  up  these  institutional  development  processes  will  be  provided  under  Sub-
component 3.1.  The  key  support  initiatives  under  that  sub-component  that  directly 
involve/benefit the GFF Host and its wholesale borrowers include: 
  Development of a regulatory and supportive framework for allocation of affordable resources 
to green finance investments by FIs including banks, MFBs and SACCOs 
  Support to regulations and actions to include the larger non-deposit taking SACCOs and the 
SACCOs with digital service platforms under the regulation and supervision of SASRA (which 
would qualify them as candidates as wholesale borrowers from Green Financing Facility) 
63 
  Support the modifications of regulations to encourage well-managed credit-only MFIs to seek 
for an MFB status or to enter otherwise under the effective supervision by the Central Bank 
(which  would  qualify  them  as  candidates  as  wholesale  borrowers  from  Green  Financing 
Facility). 
The  Host  Institution will process  each wholesale tranche-based loan application from MFBs 
and  SACCOs  based  on  (a)  its  institutional  assessment  of  the  strength  of  the  borrowing 
institution and (a) the assessment of the capacity of the borrowing institution  to reach the 
RK-FINFA  target  group(s)  with  their  green  products.  The  tranches  can  be  issued  for  a 
maximum  period  of  5  years  and  within  that  period,  the  MFB  or  SACCOs  can  revolve  the 
recovered  funds  into  new  green  loans  to  ultimate  borrowers.  At  the  Host  Institution  level, 
recovered funds from the borrowing MFBs and SACCOs are also revolved as new wholesale 
loans. In cases, in which an MBF or a SACCO cannot effectively on-lend the borrowed GFF 
tranches, the Host Institution can call back the idle GFF tranches before the loan repayment 
date and issue them as new wholesale loans. 
The  MFBs  and  SACCOs  that  effectively  use  the  borrowed  GFF  funds  can  apply  for  new 
additional tranche-capital from the Host Institution to increase its green portfolio, even before 
the earlier tranches have reached their full maturity. The total borrowing limit for one MFB or 
SACCO is 20% of the total GFF on-lending capital (at the project start-up, this maximum is 
US$ 3 million, or 20 per cent of the total capital of UD$ 15 million).  
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES FOR GFF FINANCING 
The GFF will finance on green rural investments by the target group of RK-FINFA.  The 
Host Institution will target its wholesale loans to FIs for financing activities and projects 
in  climate  change  adaptation/mitigation,  improved  environmental  management,  and 
improved efficiencies in the use of natural resources. Within the overall context of green 
rural  and  smallholder  agricultural  development,  smallholder  and  microenterprise 
investments that qualify for GFF lending would include, but are not limited to: 
  Efficient water use such as drip irrigation/sprinkler or micro-jet systems 
  Flood protection measures both physical and biophysical 
  Climate resilient infrastructure/increased robustness of infrastructure 
  Climate smart farming including drought or flood tolerant inputs 
  Soil and water conservation measures 
  Renewable energy and energy efficient systems 
  Water harvesting/water storage systems 
  Agro-forestry and afforestation/reforestation 
  Reduction of post-harvest food losses 
  Rural insurance products, and 
  Cleaner transport solutions. 
As the GFF is a new type of support instrument in Kenya aiming at mainstream green financing 
operations in the rural financial sector, the eligible loan purpose of its investments is expected to 
develop and evolve as the scheme operations mature. Therefore, the NT, IFAD and the GFF host 
institution can propose justified changes and additions to the eligibility criteria of the GFF-funded 
loans for the RK-FINFA Steering Committee approval as experiences on GFF scheme performance 
accumulate. 
KEY GFF FINANCING TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
The draft key GFF loan terms to final borrowers (smallholders and micro-firms) are presented 
in the table below. 
64 
RK FINFA – Rural Investment Instruments to Final Borrowers 
Green Financing Facility (GFF) 
RK-FINFA budget 
allocation and sources 
Total US$ 15 million  
- US$ 10 million IFAD PoL 
- US$ 5 million GoK 
Leveraged PFI 
contributions 
Objectives  
US$ 5 million by the PFIs, or 25% of each end borrower loan 
Provide dedicated liquidity to accelerate green agricultural and rural 
investment products of Microfinance Banks and SACCOs that face 
liquidity challenges 
Managing partner 
Hosted and managed by a financial institution 
Projected Participating 
FIs 
Sizes of financed green 
products 
4 MFBs and 20 SACCOs 
Micro loans: US$ 70 to US$ 1,500 
Small loans: US$ 1,500 to US$ 5,000   
Expected average loan 
size US$ 
- US$ 2,000 per small loan 
- US$ 1,000 per microloan 
Maximum loan duration 
Micro loans: 18 months 
Small loans: 36 months 
Grace period 
6 months all loans 
Repayment Terms 
Interest monthly/quarterly, principal monthly/quarterly after grace 
period 
Projected share of the 
value of GFF-financed 
loans 
Repayment Terms 
Micro loans 50%, small loans 50% 
Interest monthly/quarterly, principal monthly/quarterly after grace 
period 
Interest rate 
To be determined by the MFBs and SACCOs 
Investment targets  
- 7,500 small loans 
- 15,000 microloans 
Expected average loan 
size US$ 
- US$ 2,000 per small loan 
- US$ 1,000 per microloan 
Number of HHs benefit 
from farm and off-farm 
employment 
opportunities 
Total 30,000 rural HHs 
- 15,000 HHs via small loans 
- 15,000 HHs via microloans 
Gender and youth 
inclusion targets 
- 50% of investment targeting women 
- 30% of investment targeting youth 
Environment, Social and 
Governance 
MFBs and SACCOs follow agreed Environmental, Social and Governance 
standards framework. The MSMEs and smallholders implement climate 
smart solutions. 
Both at the Host Institution and the MFB/SACCO level, the GFF operation would be based on 
effective revolving of the repaid capital back to new GFF-financed loans, to achieve maximum 
outreach and impact. The long-term (maximum 5 years) tranche-based GFF disbursements 
by the  Host  Institution  will allow  the  MFBs ad  SACCOs to apply longer than their  standard 
loan and grace periods  when issuing working capital and investment loans to their  clients. 
This  will  be  particularly  important  to  support  the  post  COVID-19  recovery  efforts  at  small 
farms and in micro-firms.  
The GFF financing will cover 75% of each loan by an MFB or a SACCO that will be issued to 
an  eligible  borrower  and  loan  purpose.  The  PFI  will  provide  the  remaining  25%  as  its  own 
commitment from its own funds. The PFIs will carry the full credit risk of the GFF loans to 
65 
final borrowers and will use their own credit appraisal systems and criteria, together with GFF 
eligibility criteria, to select the final borrowers to the scheme. With the low price of capital 
provided  by  the  NT  to  the  Host  Institution,  reflecting  the  low  cost  of  IFAD  financing,  the 
MFBs/SACCOs are expected to apply interest rates that are at the low end of the institution’s 
interest rate scale for each type of a loan. In addition, PFIs are expected to publicly disclose 
the  average  interest  rates  they  charge  on  the  GFF-funded  loans,  to  support  clients’ 
comparisons of the terms offered. 
To  ensure  a  smooth  start-up  of  the  GFF  operations  after  the  project  effectiveness,  a 
recommended  start-up  rule  would  be  that  during  the  core  PFI  and  beneficiary  capacity 
building  period  covering  Project  Years  1  and  2,  a  minimum  of  50%  of  the  GFF-funded 
investments in each PFI is used for eligible green investments as defined in this PIM and the 
GFF Operations Manual to be produced before the scheme operations start. The rest of the 
issued GFF tranches can be used for other bankable income generating investments of the 
RK-FINFA target group. After Project Year 2, all the GFF financed investments, including the 
capital from both the GFF repayment reflows and the new GFF tranches, need to be 100% in 
the green category. Following the IFAD and GoK mainstreaming policies, a minimum of the 
50% of the issued loans at the GFF scheme level have to be for women and a minimum of 
30% for youth farmers and entrepreneurs. 
With these terms and the seed capital allocation from RK-FINFA, the GFF is projected during 
the project implementation to provide period green  financing support  to  over 30,000  rural 
households. The NT, IFAD and the GFF host institution can propose justified changes to the 
GFF-funded loan terms for the RK-FINFA Steering Committee approval as experiences on GFF 
scheme performance accumulate. 
GFF MONITORING, REPORTING AND EVALUATION 
Effective monitoring and accurate reporting will be critical for the success of the GFF scheme. 
The improvement of the MIS systems of the participating MFBs and SACCOs is a core target 
function  of  Component  1  technical  support  activities.  Most  of  the  required  performance 
reporting data, including all standard portfolio indicators, will be automatically available from 
the IT-based accounting/management information systems of the CBK or SASRA-regulated 
MFBs and SACCOs. This data will be electronically submitted by them to the GFF Host, which 
will aggregate it to be able to periodically present the whole scheme level data to the NT/PMU. 
The reported information will include detailed data on portfolio indicators such as the gender, 
age and location of the borrower, loan purpose, loan disbursements and outstanding balances, 
as well as the repayment performance for each of the above categories. 
The estimation of the development impact of the R-CGS and GFF interventions on supported 
projects,  including  the  smallholder  households,  will  be  surveyed  by  the  RK-FINFA  through 
specific, sample-based baseline studies and then through repeat studies after the supported 
projects/investments are fully implemented. Experts from IFAD will support in the organising 
of these impact surveys, based on successful methods used in similar type of operations in 
other countries of the region. 
66 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES: SUB-COMPONENT 3.1: 
SUPPORT TO RURAL FINANCE OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT 
Objective and Structure of Intervention 
The purpose of Sub-component 3.1 activities is to promote the creation of a conducive policy 
and institutional environment for increased rural financial intermediation, to support rural and 
agriculture transformation in Kenya. For the design of this sub-component, it is important to 
note that the main investment components of RK-FINFA (Components 1 and 2) specifically 
aim at supporting or creating economic policy instruments and facilities that aim to increase 
rural financial intermediation by commercial banks, SACCOs and MFBs/MFIs. Therefore, for a 
focused  RK-FINFA  approach,  the  relatively  limited  project  resources  allocated  to  Sub-
component 3.1 will largely be directed to the development of institutional arrangements that 
support  the  medium  and  longer-term  development  of  a  more  conducive  operational 
environment  for  the  Rural  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  and  the  Green  Financing  Facility,  to 
improve rural financial intermediation through their increased outreach and impact. 
Implementation Focus and Approach 
Focused Support Topics. RK-FINFA will pro-actively participate in and contribute to the development 
of the selected policies, regulations and development plans that affect the future implementation, results, 
and  impact  of  the  project.  Based  on  the  policy  gap  analysis  performed  through  discussions  with  the 
National Treasury and other key project stakeholders, the supported topics are planned to include the 
following RK-FINFA-related themes that are considered to be critically important for the widening of rural 
financial intermediation in Kenya: 
- 
Finalisation of the addendum to the regulations of the current interim phase of the GoK’s MSME Credit 
Guarantee Scheme. Planned key partners: Treasury, FSD-K. Time: Q3/2022.  
-  Development of a regulatory and supportive framework for allocation of affordable resources to green 
finance investments by FIs including banks, MFBs and SACCOs. Planned key partners: Treasury, CBK, 
FSD-K. Time: Q2/2023. 
-  Support to the design of the regulations and rules of the rural window of the planned credit guarantee 
company to take over from the NT-operated MSME-CGS. Planned key partners: Treasury, WB, USAID, 
FSD-K. Time: Q4/2024. 
-  Support the inclusion of  additional SACCOs under the regulation and supervision of SASRA (which 
would  qualify  them  as  candidates  as  wholesale  borrowers  from  the  GFF).  Planned  key  partners: 
SASRA, CBK, Treasury, AGRA, FSD-K. Time: Q2/2025. 
-  Modify regulations to enable well-managed credit-only MFIs to seek for an MFB status (which would 
qualify  them  as  candidates  as  wholesale  borrowers  from  the  GFF).  Planned  key  partners:  CBK, 
Treasury, FSD-K. Time: Q2/2025. 
-  Support to policies and action plans for increased registration of rural MSMEs to improve their access 
to bank loans and guarantees. Planned key partners: Treasury, AGRA, Ministry of Industry, Trade and 
Enterprise Development. Time: Q2/2025. 
-  Support  a  review  of  agricultural  insurance  operations  and  their  regulatory  status  in  Kenya,  as  a 
preparation for effective agricultural insurance arrangements. Planned key partners: Treasury, FSD-
K. Time: Q2/2025. 
Implementation  Method.  Sub-component  3.1  will  managed  and  operated  by  the  co-
investing  Policy  Component  Implementation  Partner,  to  be  selected  from  among  the 
specialized non-government sector actors in Kenya, under the oversight of the PMU.  In the 
actual activity implementation, the Partner will use either its own experts or contract external 
consultants/companies  when  required.  The  Partner  will  also  ensure  that  the  Sub-
component 3.1 activities are fully integrated with and provide support to the progress of the 
key investment instruments of RK-FINFA, the rural credit guarantee scheme and the Green 
Financing Facility.  
67 
Key Tasks of Policy Component Implementation Partner 
At  the  RK-FINFA  start-up,  the  NT  and  the  Policy  Component  Implementation  Partner  will 
negotiate and sign an MoU on the role and responsibilities of the Implementation Partner in 
the  RK-FINFA  Sub-component  3.1  implementation.  The  MoU  will  include  a  financing 
framework for the whole 6-year project period. It will also include a financing plan for the 
activity,  indicating  the  annual  financing  shares  of  the  GoK/IFAD  and  the  Implementing 
Partner.   
The finalisation of the focused activity plan for Sub-component 3.1 and the selection of the 
core support areas will be completed after receiving a detailed proposal (including a confirmed 
co-financing  budget)  from  a  pre-selected  Policy  Component  Implementation  Partner 
candidate. Under the arrangement agreed during the final RK-FINFA design, the tasks of the 
co-investing Policy Component Implementing Partner are planned to include the following: 
  Plan, manage and coordinate, under the oversight of the PMU, the successful implementation 
of  the  Sub-components  3.1  policy  promotion  activities  in  support  of  the  rural  finance 
operational environment in Kenya 
  Design and agree with the NT an overall framework plan for the implementation approach of 
the  Sub-component 3.1  activities  over  the  6-year  RK-FINFA  project  period,  with  adequate 
room for flexibility to  allow new themes to be included in policy support work as the rural 
finance market evolves 
  Prepare  the  first  AWPB  for  Sub-component  3.1  based  on  the  on  the  policy  gap  analysis 
performed during the RK-FINFA design, with detailed activity plans and resource allocations 
  Prepare, based on progress achieved and experience gained, the subsequent AWPBs for the 
sub-component and present them to the PMU for including in the RK-FINFA AWPBs 
  Allocate  appropriate  and  adequate  specialist  resources  required  for  the  successful  Sub-
component 3.1 implementation from the own resources of the Implementation Partner 
  Contract,  through  procurement  procedures  agreed  with  the  NT/IFAD/PMU,  the  required 
additional, external expert resources through market-based bidding to support the effective 
implementation of the planned activities 
  Organise, in co-operation with the PMU and other stakeholders, the workshops and review 
events required for the successful implementation for the policy support activities 
  Organise the appropriate knowledge management activities and events to share the outcomes 
of  the  policy  support  work  with  the  financial  sector  and  the  wider  public,  including  the 
development networks of the UN and other external partners of RK-FINFA 
  Report  to  the  PMU  on  the  progress  of  the  Sub-components  3.1  implementation  based  on 
reporting requirements agreed on in the MoU between the NT and the Implementing Partner 
  Conduct  the  accounting  and  financial  management  tasks  related  to  Sub-component 3.1 
implementation according to the FM rules and procedures agreed for RK-FINFA (see RK-FINFA 
draft FM Guidelines in this PIM) 
  Support the RK-FINFA Implementation Support and Supervision missions and other agreed 
RK-FINFA missions and evaluations in their work concerning the progress of Sub-component 
3.1 
  Focus the support work of all the core activities of Sub-component 3.1 towards effective and 
innovative rural finance policy and institutional solutions that would support the successful 
implementation  of  the  rural  credit  guarantee  operations  of  R-CGS  and  the  green  financing 
68 
operations  of  the  GFF  and  the  scaling  up  of  the  outreach  and  impact  of  these  RK-FINFA 
supported rural finance support instruments.    
69 
PLANNING, M&E, KM AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS PROCEDURES 
PLANNING AND M&E PROCESS 
The logframe of RK-FINFA (Annex 1 of the PDR) will guide the development of work plans and 
budgets for the project. Planning and budgeting will be integrated in the GoK processes and 
cycles and will be based on AWPBs. These, together with the logframe’s quantified results-
based indicators and RK-FINFA’s MIS database, will provide the primary basis for monitoring 
the RK-FINFA progress. At the project start-up, the PMU will update the Logical Framework 
and  based  on  that,  develop  the  first  AWPB.  Thereafter,  the  PMU  will  prepare  each  year  a 
consolidated  AWPB  based  on  the  principles  of  results-based  planning.  Subsequent  AWPB 
processes will offer the opportunities to the PMU to reflect on lessons from the implementation 
experience  of  the  previous  years,  and  to  propose  activities  and  expenditures  required  to 
achieve the intended project outcomes. The Project will have the possibility of revising the 
AWPB at any time of the year, and any proposed adjustments will require approvals by both 
the GoK and IFAD. 
RK-FINFA  will  develop  a  robust  M&E  system  in  compliance  with  IFAD’s  Core  indicator 
framework  and  the  GoZ  requirements.  The  RK-FINFA  M&E  system  will  (i)  collect,  analyse, 
and  update  information  based  on  the  COI  outcome  surveys  at  baseline,  midterm  and 
completion; (ii) support PMU and the Steering Committee in planning and making informed 
decisions  on  project  strategies  and  actions;  (iii)  maintain  and  strengthen  strategic 
partnerships with stakeholders; and (iv) create opportunities for learning and sharing results. 
The  system  will  be  participatory,  gender  sensitive  and  results-oriented  while  enabling  the 
integration of physical and financial progress reporting. In addition, the system will enable 
the analysis of climate change vulnerability among the beneficiaries. The project M&E will be 
anchored  to  the  Country’s  National  Integrated  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  System  (NIMES) 
that tracks implementation of policies, programmes, and projects in the country. It will also 
be anchored to the monitoring and evaluation system that is being developed for the Credit 
Guarantee Scheme and the GFF to track the performance and impact of these operations.  
The RK-FINFA M&E system will be participatory, gender sensitive and results-oriented while 
enabling the integration of physical and financial progress reporting. In addition, the system 
will  enable  the  analysis  of  climate  change  vulnerability  among  the  beneficiaries.  It  will 
incorporate  in-depth  baseline,  mid-line  and  completion  surveys,  as  well  as  qualitative 
thematic  studies  as  relevant.  To  ensure  quality  and  to  allow  IFAD  to  aggregate  results  at 
corporate level, the baseline, mid-line and completion surveys will align to the IFAD guidelines 
for the measurement of Core Indicators at Outcome level (the COI guidelines).  Data on all 
people-centred indicators will be collected and analysed disaggregated by age and gender. 
Relevant indicators have been specified in the RK-FINFA logframe and, to the extent possible, 
quantified.  The  indicators  relate  to  the  different  levels  (output,  outcome,  and  impact)  and 
include  IFAD  Core  Indicators  (CIs)  as  well  as  project  specific  indicators.  At  start-up,  the 
project  will  develop  a  glossary  of  indicators,  detailing  the  exact  meaning  of  each  indicator 
(including CIs) in the specific context of RK-FINFA. The approach is based on the Theory of 
Change of RK-FINFA (see Annex 2 of the PDR), and demonstrates the logical links between 
the results at their different levels, thereby enables the meaningful analysis of whether the 
project is on-track towards its planned results even in the first years of implementation when 
higher-level results are not yet expected.  
The Project will set up a Management Information System (MIS) to facilitate the storage, use 
and  analysis  of  data.  RK-FINFA  will  promote  digitalization  the  M&E  system  of  the 
implementing intermediaries and PFIs, including the use of portable electronic devices so as 
to speed up data entry, cleaning, and reporting at different levels. The project’s M&E plan will 
be refined as part of the first implementation support mission scheduled to take place within 
the first six months of the programme approval. It will comprise: i) setting up a Management 
Information System (MIS) to facilitate storage, analysis and use of data; ii) providing clear 
details  on  the  reporting  requirements  from  different  stakeholders;  iii)  developing  standard 
70 
reporting formats and agreeing on the timeline and modality of reporting from the different 
implementing partners. 
Effective monitoring and accurate reporting will be critical in the R-CGS and GFF schemes, 
under  which  the  issuing  of  the  client  loans  is  carried  out  by  the  selected  PFIs.  The 
improvement of the MIS systems of the PFIs is a core target function of Sub-component 1.1 
technical  support  activities.  Most  of  the  required  performance  reporting  data  will  be 
automatically  available  from  the  IT-based  accounting/management  information  systems  of 
the CBK or SASRA-regulated PFIs. This data will be electronically submitted by the PFIs to 
the  NT  and  GFF  Host,  which  will  aggregate  it  to  be  able  to  periodically  present  the  whole 
scheme level data. The reported information will include detailed data on portfolio indicators 
such as the gender, age and location of the borrower, loan purpose, loan disbursements and 
outstanding balances, as well as the repayment performance for each of the above categories. 
Table below shows the core M&E indicators collected on the R-CGS and the GFF operations 
and the source of information for each indicator. 
No 
Information Collected 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Loan size 
Recipient age 
Recipient gender 
Loan recipient location   
Purpose of the loan in application 
Loan disbursement 
Time it from loan application to loan 
disbursement to recipient 
Actual utilization of the loan 
8 
9 
Loan repayment (% paid against target) 
10  Was the recipient trained by the project? 
How was the recipient identified? 
11 
Observed outputs 
12 
13 
Observed outcomes 
Source of 
Information 
PFI 
PFI 
PFI 
PFI 
PFI 
PFI 
PFI 
PMU M&E  
PFI 
PFII/PMU 
PFI 
PMU M&E, Impact 
surveys  
PMU M&E, Impact 
surveys  
The  estimation of the development impact of the R-CGS, the  GFF and the related capacity 
building interventions on supported smallholder and micro-enterprise owner households will 
be  surveyed  by  the  RK-FINFA  through  specific,  sample-based  baseline  studies  and  then 
through repeat studies after the supported projects/investments are fully implemented. IFAD 
Experts  will  support  in  organising  the  impact  studies,  based  on  methods  used  in  similar 
projects in other countries in the region.  
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
The  project’s  KM  activities  will  be  guided  by  a  robust  KM  approach  and  plan,  to  improve 
learning, KM and communication practices within the project. After the project start-up, RK-
FINFA will, with support from technical KM experts, develop an effective RK-FINFA Knowledge 
Management (KM) Strategy. Lessons learnt in implementation will be actively shared between 
key  RK-FINFA  stakeholders.  Semi-annual  review  meetings  with  RK-FINFA  staff  and 
implementing partners will be organised by the PMU to discuss progress towards results in 
relation  to  each  semi-annual  progress  report,  with  the  focus  on  lessons  learnt  in  terms  of 
challenges, good practices, etc.  
The KM Strategy will have a strong focus on documenting best practices as well as positive 
and  negative  lessons  from  RK-FINFA  implementation  experience,  supported  by  reliable 
evidence  and  analysis.  The  programme  KM  plan  will  promote  the  key  innovations  such  as 
experiences in green financing and will be aligned to the policy engagement activities of the 
project. The wider adoption of RK-FINFA’s documented best practices and financing methods 
71 
will be an important measure of the project’s success in knowledge management, especially 
as RK-FINFA is expected to attract additional funding from other donors and financiers for the 
two sustainable financing facilities that form the core of the RK-FINFA investment. 
A draft RK-FINFA KM Plan is presented at the end of this section of the PIM. It will be further 
developed after the project start-up, with support from the IFAD KM Specialist. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) of RK-FINFA will record and address any complaints 
that may arise during the implementation phase of the project promptly and transparently 
with no impacts (cost, discrimination) for any reports made by project affected people. The 
GRM  will  work  within  existing  legal  and  cultural  frameworks,  providing  an  additional 
opportunity  to  resolve  grievances  at  the  local level.  Complaints  at  the  project  level  will  be 
recorded on the Grievances Register that will be maintained by the project. Implementing the 
grievance  mechanism  and  recording  all  grievances  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Social 
Inclusion  Specialist  in  the  PMU.  A  Grievance  Redress  Committee,  comprised  by  the  Social 
Inclusion Specialist in the PMU, a county level representative and a representative from the 
PFIs  will  investigate  to  check  the  validity  and  severity  of  the  grievance  and  resolve  it.  
Complaints  can  also  be  submitted  through  IFAD’s  Complaints  Procedure  that  allows 
individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly and file a complaint if they believe they 
are or might be adversely affected by an IFAD-funded project/programme not complying with 
IFAD's  Social  and  Environmental  Policies  and  mandatory  aspects  of  SECAP.      Further,  the 
mechanism should implicitly discourage referring matters to the court system for resolution. 
Each PFI to be supported through RK-FINFA will be expected to develop grievance redress 
mechanism of their  own, specific to the types  of borrowers, adopting local and institution-
based mechanisms.    
GENDER BASED VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE 
In  line  with  IFAD’s  Policy  to  Preventing  and  Responding  to  Sexual  Harassment,  Sexual 
Exploitation  and  Abuse  (2020),  RK-FINFA  will  ensure  a  safe  working  environment  free  of 
harassment, including sexual harassment, and free of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) in 
its  activities  and  operations.  The  ESMS  for  all  PFIs  will  include  prevention  and  mitigation 
measures for GBV/SEA and PFIs will be bound to ensure that these are applied across their 
client base. 
72 
RK-FINFA Draft Knowledge Management Plan 
Knowledge Management: Definition 
For  the  purposes  of  this  strategy,  Knowledge  Management  (KM)  is  defined  as  “a  set  of 
processes,  tools  and  behaviours  that  connect  and  motivate  people  to  generate,  use  and 
share good practice, learning and expertise to improve projects’ efficiency and development 
effectiveness”.24  
The present document is a draft plan developed to this end. After the RK-FINFA start-up, 
this  draft  should  be  completed  and  refined  with  support  from  IFAD.  The  KM  strategy  and 
plan will be validated by project stakeholders through a national workshop. The workshop 
will  be  an  opportunity  to  refine  the  thematic  focus  and  dissemination  strategy  of  the  KM 
products, but also to better understand the key information needs for RK-FINFA to succeed. 
Knowledge management: Goal, objective and activities 
The overall goal of this KM plan is to support learning and adaptation for improved RK-
FINFA  performance.  It  will  also  enable  RK-FINFA  to  develop  and  disseminate  knowledge 
products  that  can  promote  wider  changes  at  national  and  regional  levels,  as  well  as  the 
sustainability of project results. 
RK-FINFA’s  KM  strategy  will  aim  to  adopt  a  proactive  approach  to  developing  knowledge 
products and learning processes that can be replicated in other similar projects in Kenya and 
in the region. For this purpose, the KM activities will focus in particular on shedding more 
light on how to effectively develop rural finance approaches that contribute on a sustainable 
basis to the increased incomes and improved living standards of rural low-income people.  
The specific objectives of this KM Plan are:  
  To support learning and improved project performance during implementation; 
  To raise awareness among people in Kenya on the importance of availability of rural 
financing to agricultural development and improved rural livelihoods;  
  To capture, use and share lessons learned; 
  To improve the design of future projects in Kenya and elsewhere based on the lessons 
learned from RK-FINFA; 
  To raise awareness of project activities and results, and publicize successful experiences; 
  To boost the project profile among decision makers; 
  To engage with and inform rural people about project activities; 
  To build a community of stakeholders. 
The  main  KM  activities  will  be  implemented  in  three  broad  action  areas:  (a)  raising 
awareness  on  the  importance  of  rural  finance  for  agriculture  and  rural  development;  (b) 
what  works  and  what  does  not  work  in  rural  financing;  and  (c)  promoting  RK-FINFA’s 
visibility.  
Raising  awareness  on  the  importance  of  rural  finance  for  agriculture  and  rural 
development: Given that agriculture is the main contributor to the Kenyan economy and 
that  only  4%  of  lending  go  to  agriculture,  KM  efforts  will  focus  on  effects  of  sustained 
availability  of  financing  resources  to  the  rural  poor  population.  This  will  be  done  through 
regular review workshops and meetings among on-going and future IFAD financed projects 
and programmes, with staff of counties, national government and implementing partners, to 
share knowledge and lessons learned on relevant rural finance-related topics.  
24 IFAD, 2019 
73 
What works and what does not work in rural finance: This will enable the project to 
build a credible knowledge base of practical and actionable know-how that can be used to 
better address the challenges of rural finance. Studies will be carried out and briefs prepared 
focusing  on  identification  of  effective  incentives  and  regulatory  changes  that  can  increase 
Kenyan FIs’ participation in rural finance. Such incentives and regulatory changes will focus 
on what works and what does not work in terms of rural finance. Key activities will include 
development of studies, and production of briefs that highlight project results, key lessons 
learned, and stories from the field. 
Promoting RK-FINFA’s visibility: KM activities will aim at promoting RK-FINFA’s visibility 
by developing an RK-FINFA website, Facebook page, and by being active on other relevant 
social media. The communication plan will be flexible and should be adjusted according to 
needs as they arise and based on feedback from the beneficiaries. 
RK-FINFA Knowledge Management Structure  
The  implementation  of  the  knowledge  management  strategy  requires  strong  and  visible 
leadership from the project management team and all PMU staff. It will also require strong 
partnerships with implementing institutions, co-financing partners and the private financing 
sector. Each member of the PMU has the responsibility to engage in developing knowledge 
products, facilitate connections between the field work and the PMU office, and offer technical 
support to knowledge-sharing and learning.  
The KM will be the primary responsibility of the Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist at PMU 
level. The M&E Specialist will work in close collaboration with the other PMU staff and the 
implementing partners of RK-FINFA to ensure that:  
  M&E  findings  on  project  results  are  widely  disseminated  in  a  clear,  synthetized,  and 
interesting way;  
  Knowledge products are backed up by solid M&E evidence and therefore, the M&E system 
collects all data necessary for the envisaged knowledge products to be developed;  
  Field visits to collect stories are effectively used for triangulating M&E data, and the other 
way around;  
  Stakeholder  interviews  and  surveys  will  be  used  to  deepen  the  understanding  of  factors 
contributing  to  successes  and  failures,  and  to  enable  full  documentation  of  the  project 
impact.  
SWOT analysis in the KM context 
A SWOT analysis is a simple but useful framework for analysing the Strengths, Weaknesses, 
Opportunities,  and  Threats  that  the  PMU  may  encounter,  especially  when  starting  new 
project or undergoing a mid-term evaluation, etc. It can also be used in project planning and 
eventually evaluation of its activities at various intervals.  
This SWOT analysis helps in focusing on the main strengths and leverage them to pursue 
key opportunities and to avoid threats. The team can also become aware of its weaknesses 
which  might  need  to  be  overcome  in  order  to  take  the  greatest  possible  advantage  of 
potential opportunities available. 
Table 1 below shows an example of SWOT analysis for a project of the RK-FINFA type, to be 
completed/adjusted/completely  modified  at  project  start-up  and  updated  during 
implementation.  
74 
Table 1: RK-FINFA KM SWOT analysis  
STRENGHTS 
OPPORTUNITIES 
  Qualified PMU human capital 
 Networking with other projects 
competitively recruited 
  A good culture of knowledge   
sharing among IFAD financed 
projects 
  A good support system by the 
PMU staff 
  Ongoing IFAD financed projects 
that will provide initial client 
pipeline and have already 
ongoing KM activities  
  Availability of different 
dissemination tools such as 
website/Facebook, Instagram, 
YouTube etc that will enable easy 
accessibility of KM information 
  Good M&E system 
  Presence of partners that support 
Project implementation. 
WEAKNESSES 
 Exchange of good practices with 
partners and projects 
 Focus on youth and women groups 
and farmer cooperatives, which 
bring beneficiaries together 
 Capacity building to broaden 
beneficiaries understanding. 
THREATS 
  Delay in RK-FINFA execution due 
 Beneficiaries fear of borrowing 
to limited interest by FIs 
  Inadequate resources to support 
the KM 
  Low acceptance rate of the 
beneficiaries to share their story 
that affect communication 
activities. 
 Limited stakeholder engagement 
 Beneficiaries’ illiteracy.  
Stakeholders and Audiences  
RK-FINFA  KM  activities  will  be  differentiated  depending  on  the  different  audiences  they  aim  to 
reach. Tables 2 and 3 below are examples of KM stakeholders/audiences and KM products that 
could be used to reach these. Both these tables are to be completed/adjusted/completely modified 
at start-up and updated during implementation.  
Table 2: RK-FINFA KM Stakeholders 
Stakeholders 
Local 
  Beneficiaries 
  Local communities 
What do they want/need to know? 
What do we want to communicate to 
them? 
  Purpose and activities of the project  
  Opportunities to partner, to 
participate or to benefit 
75 
  Notifications about project events 
and meetings  
  Project results and impacts 
  Experiences of beneficiaries and 
lending institutions 
  Relevant lessons learned 
  Results of successful pilots and 
trials of new technologies, loan 
products, etc.  
  Guidelines and methodologies 
  Results of studies, surveys and 
assessments undertaken 
  Policy-relevant lessons 
  Project staff 
  Local offices of government agencies 
and project partners 
National 
  Project partners 
  Service providers 
  Financial Institutions 
  Other similar projects 
  Government agencies 
  General public 
International 
  Donors/financiers 
  Development agencies  
  Communities of practice/interest groups 
  Other projects in other countries and 
regions 
  General public 
  Policy makers  
Table 3. RK-FINFA KM products 
Products 
 Recorded interviews on 
beneficiary experiences 
with the project  
 Brochures on project 
outcomes in English 
and Swahili languages 
 Community meetings 
on project experiences, 
success and challenges  
What knowledge can they share and with who? 
  Directed to project beneficiaries aimed at getting feedback 
on project’s activities  
  Directed to the project’s beneficiaries and non-project 
participants to raise awareness on life changing benefits 
from accessing rural finance 
  Aimed to allow the beneficiaries and the community at 
large to better portray their points of view and produce 
powerful stories.  
  Stories from the 
field 
  Lessons learned 
  Project briefs  
  Policy briefs 
  Reports and studies 
  Technical guidelines 
  Working papers 
  How-to-do-note 
 
 
Inputs to partners 
publications 
Inputs to 
government policies 
and strategies 
  Good for sharing information on project activities, 
results and lessons learned with a wide variety of 
audiences from participating FIs, beneficiaries to high-
level decision makers.  
  Typically short (a few pages) and not too technical, but 
with enough detail to be useful or to encourage 
audience to seek out more information. 
  Addressing particular issues in significant detail, 
normally longer and more analytical and targeted 
towards audiences with specialist knowledge or interest 
in the topic. 
  Useful opportunities to put project knowledge into 
action and to use partners and government resources 
to leverage its impact and raise awareness of the 
project. 
76 
  Articles 
(newspaper/magazi
ne) 
  Useful for communicating information about project 
activities and results achieved and reaching a wide 
general audience. 
  Blog posts 
  Newsletters 
  Press releases 
  Videos 
  Photos 
 
 
  Podcasts 
Interviews 
Infographics 
  TV spots  
  Radio sessions  
TOOLS 
  Newspapers, websites and blogs are normally eager for 
content and are normally keen to publish interesting 
stories from projects. 
  These make great content for the project to 
disseminate through social media – publishing videos 
and photos of project activities and outcomes, 
beneficiaries, field visits etc. online is a good way to 
attract interest (but make sure you get permission 
where necessary). Interviews often provide good 
soundbites for sharing through social media, perhaps 
together with links to longer articles or publications. 
  As part of promoting agriculture through local TVs and 
radio (especially through vernacular channels) will raise 
awareness and promote behavioural change by FIs in 
lending to the agriculture sector.  
Useful KM tools and templates can be accessed on the IFAD KM Resource Centre, accessible through 
this link: https://ifadkmcentre.weebly.com/integrating-km-in-projects.html  
Table 4 below presents a Template for Knowledge Management action plan, to be completed after 
the RK-FINFA start-up. 
77 
Table 4: Template for Knowledge Management action plan  
KM AREA 
Activities 
OUTCOME 
STAKEHOLDERS/ 
TARGET 
AUDIENCES 
OUTPUT 
 (knowledge 
products) 
DISSEMINATION 
CHANNELS/EVENTS 
RESPONSIBL
E  
Awareness 
campaigns  
TV and radio   People in rural 
TV and radio 
listeners on a 
national scale  
RK-FINFA stories 
are broadcasted X 
times per week for 
X weeks in X TV 
and Radio channels   
TV (channel X and X); 
Radio (channel X and 
X); social media 
(Facebook; 
Instagram; YouTube) 
KM officer 
with inputs 
from 
component 
specialists and 
M&E officer 
etc. 
Awareness 
campaigns 
for FIs 
Meetings 
and 
workshops  
Awareness 
campaigns 
Videos in 
local 
languages   
Financial Institutions 
in Kenya 
Project 
beneficiaries 
A total of 4 
workshops for the 
project 
implementation 
period 
videos in local 
languages on 
project outcomes  
National Workshops  KM officer 
Local FIs  
supported by 
the PMU Staff  
Local video 
projections among the 
communities  
KM officer 
Kenya are 
aware of the 
importance of 
savings and 
credit to 
improve their 
welfare  
FIs are 
motivated to 
lend to 
agriculture 
sector.  
Maintaining the 
feedback loop 
of the project’s 
activities  
Relevant 
knowledge 
products and 
lessons 
learned on 
Collection of 
“stories 
from the 
field”  
Partners and 
stakeholders 
are informed in 
an attractive 
way on the 
experiences of 
Project 
partners and 
stakeholders 
and high-level 
decision 
makers 
6 Stories from the 
field narrated 
through articles 
with testimonies.  
IFAD official social 
networks and the 
project’s social 
networks 
KM officer, 
M&E Officer, 
PMU 
78 
USEFUL 
/POTENTIA
L 
PARTNERS
HIPS 
Kenyan 
Rural 
Population  
Developing 
Partners 
interested in 
Kenyan 
Rural 
Finance  
Partnership 
with 
communicati
on agency?  
TIMEFRA
ME 
BUDGET 
TBD 
TBD 
TBD  
TBD 
1 
awarenes
s 
campaign 
per year 
starting 
in year 3 
1 
workshop 
per year 
X Videos 
in each 
participat
ing 
county 
1 story 
per year 
of the 
project, 
starting 
Rural 
Finance 
Relevant 
knowledge 
products and 
lessons 
learned on 
Rural 
Finance 
Relevant 
knowledge 
products and 
lessons 
learned on 
Rural 
Finance 
Ensuring 
visibility 
Ensuring 
visibility 
Project 
briefs & 
Policy briefs 
How-to-do-
note 
RK-FINFA 
website, 
Facebook 
page, and 
on other 
relevant 
social 
media. 
Articles 
(newspaper
/magazine), 
Blog posts 
and 
Press 
releases 
beneficiaries 
through their 
own narratives  
Partners and 
stakeholders 
and high-level 
decision 
makers are 
informed of 
lessons learned 
through the 
project  
Key 
stakeholders 
and high-level 
decision 
makers are 
informed of 
issues and 
lessons learned 
Project 
visibility is 
ensured in 
social media.  
All local, 
national, 
regional and 
international 
stakeholders 
Project 
visibility is 
ensured in 
social media  
All local, 
national, 
regional and 
international 
stakeholders 
Partners and 
stakeholders 
and high-level 
decision 
makers 
4 project briefs 
Developed, 
published and 
shared with key 
readers. 
IFAD networks and 
partners’ networks.  
KM Officer, 
M&E Officer, 
PMU 
Partners and 
stakeholders 
and high-level 
decision 
makers 
Develop one How 
to do note on 
engaging the rural 
communities on 
access to credit. 
IFAD networks and 
partners’ networks, 
KM Officer, 
M&E Officer, 
PMU 
Partnership 
with 
interested 
Development 
Partners  
RK-FINFA social 
media and RK-FINFA 
website,  
IFAD networks 
KM Officer, 
M&E Officer, 
PMU, IFAD 
Communicatio
ns team 
National newspapers;  
Online, local and 
national magazines; 
Online blogs;  
KM Officer, 
M&E Officer, 
PMU, IFAD 
Communicatio
ns team 
Possible 
partnership 
with X 
newspapers
/magazine 
/blogs 
1 RK-FINFA 
website 
1 RK-FINFA 
Facebook page 
1 RK-FINFA 
Instagram page to 
publish photo-
stories and videos 
X articles in X 
national newspaper 
X articles in X 
magazine 
X blog posts in X 
blogs 
X press releases  
79 
TBD 
TBD 
TBD 
TBD 
from year 
3 
1 project 
brief per 
year, 
starting 
from year 
3 of the 
project.  
1 How-
to-do 
note 
develope
d by the 
end of 
the 
project 
Develop
ed from 
year 3 
of 
project. 
Ensure 
the 
publicati
on of at 
least 1 
article, 1 
blog 
post per 
year.  
Ensuring 
visibility 
Content for 
the 
previously 
mentioned 
products: 
videos, 
photos, 
interviews, 
infographics 
and 
podcasts. 
Project 
visibility is 
ensured in 
social media.  
All local, 
national, 
regional and 
international 
stakeholders 
Videos 
Photos 
Interviews 
Infographics 
Podcasts 
IFAD, RK-FINFA and 
partners social media 
and networks,  
Newspapers, 
magazines and blogs, 
Radio stations  
KM Officer, 
M&E Officer, 
PMU, IFAD 
Communicatio
ns team 
In 
partnership 
with 
newspapers
/magazine 
/blogs 
1 press 
release 
at the 
start of 
the 
project. 
Continuo
us all 
along 
project 
impleme
ntation 
time  
80 
DRAFT RK-FINFA PROCUREMENT GUIDELINES 
Country Framework Assessment 
Public procurement in Kenya is governed by the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 
adopted  in  December  2015  (the  Act),  which  came  into  force  in  January  2016.  Public 
Procurement and disposal regulations of 2020 have now been developed based on the 2015 
Act. However, procurement manuals in place are still based on the old Act of 2005.  Some 
of  the  provisions  to  enhance  transparency  and  accountability  have  not  been  fully  developed 
either.  Despite  the  robust  national  public  procurement  system,  gaps  and  inconsistencies  still 
exist.  
(i). 
(ii). 
(iii). 
Under  IFAD  financing,  the  project  must  communicate  all  choice  of  non-competitive 
sourcing methods both in the Procurement Plan submitted to IFAD for NO and through a 
specific  dossier  in  NOTUS  under  the  corresponding  procurement  method.  Likewise,  any 
contract entered into as a consequence of a non-competitive process must be entered in 
the Contract Monitoring Tool as such. 
The  Project  will  ensure  the  advertisement  of  all  ICB  activities  in  the  UNDB  and  the 
advertisement of lower-value procurement through a dedicated project website. 
All contracts awarded should be advertised in a website which is accessible by the public.  
Assessment of National Treasury Procurement Capacity 
The proposed project will operate under the NT. The overall capacity of the NT proved to be 
less than optimal in the closed PROFIT programme which led to overall slow procurement 
processes with major delays. Based on the review of the NT procurement documents, the 
general quality of documents produced could be improved. However, under RK-FINFA, the 
volume of procurements to be handled under NT is expected to be much less as most of the 
procurements will be carried out by the co-financing partners. The PMU is currently  not staffed 
with any procurement professionals. There is a plan to competitively recruit a procurement 
officer  who  will  be  in  charge  of  the  procurement  function.  In  order  to  ensure 
understanding and compliance with requirements,  RK-FINFA  will  provide capacity building 
to the PMU; this will largely be in form of provision of targeted skills enhancement, particularly 
in the area of project procurement 
Assessment of AGRA Procurement Systems 
AGRA  procurement  systems  were  reviewed  in  detail.  It  was  observed  that  AGRA  follows  a 
framework  based  on  very  detailed  procurement  guidelines  embodied  in  the  organization’s 
manual. The procurement unit is resourced with four qualified staff with additional support 
from  consultants.  The  procurement  and  Finance  units  are  separate  and  distinct  and  are 
managed by different people. The procurement manual captures a number of key issues that 
are  a  backbone  to  sound  procurement  principles  which  include  procurement  planning 
separated  into  different  categories,  competition  depending  on  the  amounts,  different 
procurement methods are applied, and proper evaluation which captures both technical and 
financial.  There  are  policies  in  place  on  fraud  and  corruption  in  procurement,  issues  on 
conflict of interest, confidentiality, and vendor code of conduct. AGRA uses an ERP system 
which  captures  procurements  from  requisition  stage  to  contract  award  to  final  payment. 
81 
AGRA was also found to have a system in place for checking debarred suppliers  by the UN 
and other bodies.  
Consultancies mostly are done following the QCBS system where both quality and cost are 
considered  and  weighted  on  a  70%  and  30%  for  technical  and  financial  evaluation, 
respectively. Combined technical and financial reports were also done.  
In conclusion, AGRA systems were found to be adequate to manage the kind of 
procurements envisaged in this project. It is recommended that while working with AGRA, 
they will be expected to provide a procurement plan to the PMU for consolidation and 
request for NO from IFAD. AGRA will also be required to adopt IFAD’s Revised Policy on 
Fraud and Corruption, SH/SEA and Anti-money laundering policies in their SPDs and 
contracts. Finally, the agreement entered into with AGRA must contain all relevant 
instructions related to procurement processes and will be submitted to IFAD for No 
Objection.  
Assessment of FSD Kenya Procurement System 
FSD  procurement  systems  were  reviewed  in  detail.  The  organization  has  only  one 
Procurement professional who runs the unit. The procurement specialist has the necessary 
qualification  and  experience  to  handle  procurements  for  this  project.  The  procurement 
regulations of FSD seem inadequate to handle major consultancy procurements envisaged in 
this  project.  A  review  of  procurement  activities  executed  showed  weak  processes  and 
inconsistencies  with  IFAD’s  project  procurement  requirements.  In  conclusion,  FSD  has 
internal  capacity  to  handle  procurements  under  Sub-component  3.1  but  by  using  IFAD’s 
Project  Procurement  Guidelines,  Procurement Handbook, and Standard Bidding Documents 
in  lieu  of  their  guidelines.  The  agreement  entered  into  with  FSD  must  contain  all  relevant 
instructions related to procurement process and will be submitted to IFAD for No Objection.       
Procurement under Proposed RK-FINFA 
It  is  expected  that  procurement  under  the  proposed  RK-FINFA  would  mainly  be  for  g o o d s  
a n d   services. Rural Investment Instruments (Component 2) would not be considered as public 
procurement  as  it  involves  both  Rural  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  (R-CGS),  and  Green 
Financing Facility (GFF) designed as sustainable financing vehicles. 
Under Component 1 (Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS), a co-financing partner 
organization is being sought to coordinate the TSIS component on behalf of the National Treasury 
as “the TSIS Coordinator. As the first implementation step, RK-FINFA will advertise its offered 
support  instruments  broadly  among  Kenyan  financial  institutions.  Upon  receipt  of  EOIs  for 
participation,  the  TSIS  Coordinator  will  conduct  an  evaluation  of  the  EOIs  submitted  by  the 
applying  financial  institutions.  The  results  of  the  evaluation  and  recommendations  for  PFI 
selection  to  the  TSIS  pipeline  are  shared  with  IFAD  for  no-objection.  Upon  approval  and 
admission  of  the  PFIs into the  TSIS  pipeline, they  are  eligible to apply  for  financial  resources 
through RK-FINFA subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2. The project repeats this call for Expressions of 
Interest bi-annually until the completion of the pipeline for RK-FINFA TSIS implementation.  
Under  Sub-component  3.1,  managed  and  operated  by  the  Policy  Component  Implementation 
Partner, procurements will be carried out in compliance with IFAD procurement guidelines and 
for  each 
handbook  and  standard  bidding  documents.  Procurement/selection  methods 
82 
procurement  requirement  should  be  provided  in  the procurement plan  to  be  submitted to 
IFAD for no-objections. 
Procurements  under  component  3.2  will  be  carried  out  by  the  PMU  and  will  follow  the  GoK 
procurement guidelines with relevant provisions as highlighted above.  
Proposed  methods  of  procurement  for  goods,  works,  consulting  services  and  related  non-
consulting services, as well as the IFAD prior-review thresholds, will be laid out in the Letter 
to the Borrower/Recipient, as may be amended from time to time, and in all agreements with 
implementing partners, which shall be subject to IFAD’s prior review and No-Objection. 
The  procurement  section  of  this  PIM  has  a  dynamic  nature.  It  will  be  reviewed  and  updated 
periodically  based  on  lessons  learned  during  implementation  and  on  developments  that  may 
occur  during  the  Project’s  life.  Any  changes/amendments  to  the  procurement  section  will  be 
made in order to improve the Project’s efficiency and effectiveness. 
83 
RK-FINFA FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND ACCCOUNTING ARRANGEMENTS 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
I. 
Summary of Financial Management arrangements 
1.  Financial  Management  System:  RK-FINFA  financial  management  arrangements  follow  the 
Government of Kenya financial management system with some enhancements proposed to 
mitigate  on  risks  identified.  A  financial  management  assessment  for  RK-FINFA  has  been 
carried out in accordance with IFAD’s Guidance Note on Undertaking Financial Management 
Assessment at Design. The objective of FMA is to provide assurance that RK-FINFA will be 
implemented within sound financial management practices (timely and efficient accounting 
systems), and punctual professional reviews; both internally (internal audit) and externally 
(external audit).  The assessment was based on existing IFAD Kenya portfolio because RK-
FINFA will be adopting similar processes and procedures. The assessment was combined with 
reviews at the National Treasury in Kenya.  
2.  The Government of Kenya (the Borrower) will be required to maintain acceptable financial 
management systems including accounting, financial reporting, and auditing systems for the 
RK-FINFA. Some project’s specific additional measures have been incorporated to enhance 
financial management of the project. 
Implementing and participating organizations with fiduciary responsibilities 
3.  The  Lead  Implementing  Agency  of  RK-FINFA  will  be  the  Directorate  of  Budget,  Fiscal  and 
Economic Affairs in the National Treasury and Planning (NT&P). The Directorate is headed by 
a  Director  General  who  is  answerable  to  the  Principal  Secretary  of  the  NT&P.  A  Project 
Steering  Committee  (PSC)  will  be  established  with  representation  from  the  ministries  and 
private and public agencies that will play key roles in the implementation of RK-FINFA. The 
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established at the NT&P, housed in the Financial and 
Sectoral Affairs Department. 
4.  The Project Management Unit (PMU). The PMU under NT&P will be the overall accounting hub 
for  the  project.    The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  the  implementation  of  Project 
activities and will have the following fiduciary responsibilities:  
a)  the preparation of Annual Work plans and Budgets ensuring a bottom-up approach and 
timely submissions for inclusions in GoK overall approved budget estimates;  
b)  Procurement planning, execution, and support service;  
c)  Disbursement of funds to other implementing agencies as per funds flow structure,  
d)  Management of withdrawal applications from IFAD;  
e)  Financial management of the Project, including supervising and ensuring compliance with 
government regulations;   
f)  Financial reporting and consolidation of financial statements for audits;  
g)  Any requests for No Objection to IFAD will emanate from the PMU. 
Disbursement Arrangements and Flow of Funds 
5.  There  will be three types  of disbursement mechanisms for the Project which consist of (i) 
Disbursements,  Accounts  and  Financial  Management  Systems.  There  will  be  three 
types of disbursement mechanisms for the Project, which consist of (i) Advance Withdrawal, 
(ii) Direct Payments, and (iii) Reimbursements. Disbursements from IFAD will be made by 
way  of  an  advance  to  the  Designated  Account  and  subsequent  replenishments  based  on 
expenditure incurred as supported with Statement of Expenditure (SoE). There will be one 
84 
designated account held by the National Treasury at the Central Bank of Kenya that would 
receive  funds  from  IFAD  which  will  have  a  corresponding  dedicated  project  operational 
account in Kenya Shillings (KES). All partnering institutions that will receive funds from the 
PMU  will  keep  sub-project  accounts  for  segregating  the  funds  received.  The  sub-project 
account  will  be  denominated  in local  currency  and  will  be  opened  in  a  financial institution 
acceptable to IFAD. The R-CGS funds, after required conditions are met, will be deposited 
and ring-fenced at the Central Bank of Kenya. The guarantee reserve is accessible to PFIs 
only after possible losses materialise and have been reported and approved. The GFF funds 
will be transferred to the Host Financial Institution after required conditions are met. There 
will be monthly financial reports to the PMU for monitoring operations of sub-accounts and 
consolidation. Below is a diagram summarising the flow of funds: 
6.  The  Designated  Account  limit  will  be  set  at  the  total  18  months  of  AWPB.  For  the 
implementing agencies, the earmarked advances for specific activities agreed with the PMU 
will  be  disbursed  on  quarterly  basis,  by  15th  of  the  month  following  the  quarter  end.  To 
manage risks of delays in accountability from implementing agencies, advances will be made 
for  quarterly  budgets  and  additional  amounts  for  the  subsequent  quarter  made  only  after 
50% of the previous disbursements has been accounted for. Recording of expenditure to the 
project  accounting  system  will  be  done  by  the  PMU  based  on  reports  submitted  by  the 
implementing agencies. Payment for GoK counterpart costs for component 1 and 3 will be 
made  from  the  PMU  counterpart  funds  project  account.  Direct  payment  to  suppliers  or 
partners  by  IFAD.  This  will  be  on  exceptional  basis  and  for  payments  of  more  than  US$ 
100,000 as will be guided in the letter to borrower. 
7.  Counterpart finance. There have been delays observed in other portfolio projects regarding 
disbursements of counterpart finance to projects’ accounts. IFAD will demand commitment 
from GoK that this will be done promptly for smooth implementation of the project. As shown 
above,  there  will  be  a  separate  bank  account  counterpart  finance  will  be  deposited.  This 
account will be managed by PMU staff just like the project operational account. Counterpart 
85 
contribution for R-CGS and GFF will be made directly to the Bank Accounts where the funds 
are held. 
8.  Withdrawal Applications for Advance Withdrawal and Reimbursements may be submitted 
once  ninety  90  days  (quarterly  basis)  have  lapsed  from  the  submission  of  the  previous 
withdrawal application. However, if the requested withdrawal amount is at least twenty per 
cent (20%) of the initial advanced amounts, a withdrawal application may be submitted even 
if ninety (90) days have not lapsed. This will be included in the letter to the borrower (LTB). 
9.  The Designated Account limit will be set at the total 18 months of AWPB. The DA limit may 
be reviewed and adjusted if there are increased payments as the project progresses. In that 
case PMU would write an official letter to IFAD with the expected cash flow projections and 
the proposed adjusted ceiling for considerations. 
Planning and budgeting  
10.  RK-FINFA budget will, as required by the Public Finance Management Act, be part of the GoK 
overall  printed  national  budget  estimates  as  part  of  the  parliamentary  approvals  and 
appropriations.  The Project budget would need to be included in the line ministry (National 
Treasury) budget.  
11.  The  Financial  Controller  of  the  PMU  will  coordinate  the  budget  preparation  processes  with 
close  coordination  with  project  coordinator.  Payments  cannot  be  made  if  the  budget 
provisions have not been made and approved by Parliament.   
12.  The GoK budget formulations usually start by August; 10 months before the implementation 
period while the AWPB for the project are usually prepared and submitted to IFAD near the 
end  of  a  financial  year.  Due  to  the  timing  difference,  there  can  be  significant  differences 
between the AWPB for which IFAD eventually expresses ‘no objection’, and the budget that 
had been appropriated and approved in the printed estimates. The appropriated amount is a 
block limit, from which implementing entities have a window in May/June at submission of 
AWPB, to provide the breakdowns for the AWPB signed–off by the Accounting Officer of the 
Ministry.    The  Financial  Controller  will  ensure  the  breakdowns  included  in  the  accounting 
system is in line with the AWPB for which IFAD has provided no-objection and spending is in 
line with this.  
13.  In some cases by the time the budget is appropriated by parliament there can be unexplained 
cuts/  reductions  in  expenditure  estimates  for  line  Ministry.  This  element  of  uncertainty 
sometimes results into discrepancies between the AWPB  on which IFAD has expressed No 
objection and that appropriated by Parliament. The Financial Controller will closely work with 
planning  officers  at  the  National  Treasury  to  ensure  the  project  is  not  affected  by  these 
regular budget cuts which are usually based on estimated and actual revenue collections by 
the government. The budgeting area is therefore considered a  risk area that require keen 
monitoring. While there are supplementary budget processes which ensure what may have 
been omitted is rectified, this takes time, hence critical to ensure there is adequate budget 
for the project at the start of the year. Over-budgeting also poses problems in future since 
the project would not be able to demonstrate capabilities to absorb future significant amounts 
which leads to more struggles in asking for higher budget allocations in the printed estimates. 
Close monitoring in this regard will be critical.  
14.  The arbitrary cut of printed estimates budgets in the course of a fiscal year due to other fiscal 
measures will be emphasized during loan negotiations and specific assurances be sought that 
project budget estimates will not be arbitrarily cut by the National Treasury. 
86 
15.  Budgeting as Revenue and AIA: The project funds will be budgeted either as Revenue or 
appropriation in aid (AIA).  
  Budgeting  as  Revenue:    Budgeting is  done  under  Revenue  IFAD  will release  the  funds 
through  the  exchequer  system.    This  budgeting  will  be  done  for  activities  which  are 
expected to be paid from the project operational accounts.  
  Budgeting  under  AIA  procedure:  This  is  where  the  donor  is  expected  to  pay  the 
beneficiary  direct.    All  the  procurement  procedures  are  followed  as  per  the  laid  down 
government  procedures,  vouchers  processed  in  the  normal  manner,  but  the  original 
documents  accompanied  with  form  100  (Application  for  withdrawal)  with  all  relevant 
details is forwarded to Donor for payment after capturing the amount payable into the 
Ministry’s  books  by  using  form  F.O.  25  (Journal  voucher)  as  well  as  in  the  Integrated 
Financial Management System (IFMIS). However, the minimum to be processed should 
not be less than US$ 100,000. 
Accounting systems, policies and procedures 
16.  The National Treasury will procure a financial management software as well as training for 
the finance staff on how to use it. IFAD requires a financial system that will be able to (i) 
extract  SoE  for  withdrawal  applications,  (ii)  reporting  expenditure  per  category  and 
comparing budget vs actual for the same for the current year and cumulatively, (iii) reporting 
expenditure per category and comparing budget vs actual for the same for the current year 
and cumulatively, (iv) reporting expenditure by component and comparing budget vs actual 
for  the  same  for  the  current  year  and  cumulatively,  and  (v)  reporting  of  expenditure  per 
financier. There has been issue of full adoption and delays in implementation of accounting 
system  in  other  projects.  To  mitigate  on  this,  acquisition  of  the  accounting  system  has 
proposed as an effectiveness condition. The selection of project finance staff will also consider 
the competence of the candidates to use computerised systems. 
17.  Disbursement  to  the  partners  will  be  made  as  advances.  Recording  of  expenditure  to  the 
project accounting system will be done by PCU based on expenditure reports submitted by 
the counties.  
Accounting  Officer 
18.  The  project  expenditure  initiation,  authorization  and  payments  will  be  in  line  with  Public 
Finance  Management  Act  of  Kenya. The  Principal  Secretary  (National  Treasury)  is the 
Project  Coordinator 
the 
responsible 
May authorize payments  memo  in  line  with  the  delegated  authority  by  the  Principal 
Secretary. At the other implementing agencies, all payments memos will also be approved 
by  responsible  officers  in  accordance  with  their  organisational  structure.  The  Financial 
Controller  at  the  PMU  will  be  responsible  for budget  control, proper  recording  in  the 
accounting system and all financial reporting for the project and will produce a consolidated 
financial statement for all the components.  
Project. 
The 
for 
19.  The  Permanent  Secretary,  National  Treasury  and  all  Ministry  officials  under  his  delegation 
play  a  key  role  of  approving  all  financial  documents  for  onward  submission  to  IFAD  on 
financial and other project implementation matters. Under the loan agreement, The National 
Treasury represent GoK as the borrower. 
87 
Financial reporting 
20.  Financial Controller at PMU will be responsible for all financial reporting for the project and 
will  produce  a  consolidated  financial  statement  for  the  project.  The  financial  reporting  will 
comply with International Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) - Cash basis. 
21.  On annual basis, the consolidated financial statements for the project will be audited by Office 
of the Auditor General and audited financial statements submitted to IFAD within six months 
after the period end in accordance with IFAD guidelines. IFAD will, in addition, to the annual 
audited financial statements require interim financial reports on a six-monthly interval. For 
management decision and control, detailed monthly and quarterly management accounts will 
be produced.   
STATEMENTS OF EXPENDITURES (SOE) 
22.  SoEs will be prepared by the project for processing of Withdrawal application. The detailed 
guidelines and SoE templates have been elaborated under financial guidelines issued by IFAD 
which will be included in the disbursements letter.  The PMU Accountant shall assist in the 
compilation  of  the  expenditures  from  the  implementing  agencies  which  upon  meeting  the 
IFAD threshold shall be submitted in form of Withdrawal Applications to IFAD, through the 
lead ministry and ERD – Treasury. This activity shall be carried by the PMU every quarter or 
if the withdrawal limits has been attained. Partners will prepare the SoE on monthly basis 
and submit to PCU.  
23.  The  PCU  will  prepare  the  consolidated  SoE  which  shall  be  used  in  the  preparation  of  the 
Withdrawal Applications using the guideline below: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Each and  every category  should be typed  on a separate  summary sheet, which 
should be numbered sequentially, and details of categories e.g. civil works clearly 
marked on the section – description of category. 
Reporting period on the summary sheet to be clearly indicated with the earliest 
paid voucher indicating the starting period and the latest end period e.g. 1st Nov 
2020 to 31st December 2020. 
The rate of exchange will be the ruling rates when funds are transferred from the 
special  account  to  project  operational  account  and  should  be  used  when 
exchanging to the US Dollar equivalent. The rates will be applied on FIFO basis 
until the prior transfer is fully exhausted. 
The  IFAD  forms  used,  including  the  checklist  and  SPA  Reconciliation  shall  be 
attached  to  form  the  Withdrawal  Application.  Other  documentations  for 
attachment shall include: 
-  Bank Reconciliation Statement for the last month of reporting. 
-  Cash book copy of the last reporting date showing the balances. 
-  Copy of the bank statement for the last reporting month. 
-  DA statement  
-  DA reconciliation statement 
-  PCU bank account reconciliation statement 
o  The  summary  sheets  will  be  prepared  according  to  categories  and  numbered 
sequentially. 
o  The amount spent per component should be clearly indicated. 
o  The  summary sheets signed by the Project  Coordinator and Financial Controller 
and to be signed by authorized representative from Ministry of Finance. 
o  Special Account Reconciliation statement duly signed by the Financial controller 
o  Checklist  withdrawal  application  duly  signed  by  the  Project  Coordinator  and 
Financial Controller. 
o  Application for withdrawal to be duly signed by authorized representative. 
88 
o  All  the  above  supporting  documents  together  will  be  forwarded  to  External 
Resources department for further processing before being forwarded to IFAD for 
replenishment. 
Financial management organization and staffing  
24.  As noted above, the project financial management arrangements follow the Government of 
Kenya financial management system. The PS, NT&P is the accounting officer for the project. 
The Accounting Unit of the Project shall be managed by the Financial Controller assisted by 
the Project Accountant. 
25.  The Project Accounting team duties and responsibilities shall include: 
  Contributing to the preparation and update of the Financial Manuals. 
  Ensuring the project’s financial procedures as detailed in the Project Implementation and 
Financial  Manuals  and  other  guidelines  that  may  be  issued  are  strictly  followed  by  all 
Project staff and implementing agencies at the national and devolved levels. 
  Facilitating, as much as possible, the timely disbursement of project funds 
  Compiling the Expenditure Returns  for the PMU and other implementing agencies, and 
headquarters for submission to the External Resources Department – Treasury. 
  Liaising with the implementing officers from the Project implementing partners to ensure 
that  SOE’s  are  prepared  in  timely  manner  and  forwarded  to  External  Resources 
Department – Treasury. 
  Preparing periodic and statutory financial reports and advising the Project Coordinator on 
the Project’s financial status and trends. 
  Ensuring adherence to Government of Kenya’s financial practices and circulars as issued 
from time to time, to ensure only legible payments are made from the Project’s funds. 
  To carry out periodic backstopping visits to the implementing agencies, providing financial 
advice and recommendations where necessary. 
  Facilitating  and  ensuring  that  external  auditors  are  availed  all  necessary  documents 
during  the  audit  as  detailed  in  the  Loan  Agreement  and  making  a  follow  up  on  audit 
recommendations. 
  Ensuring that the financial transactions are well documented, filed and that the Project 
financial transactions are entered into the Government existing accounting systems. 
  Any  other  duty  (related  to  the  Project’s  activities)  as  may  be  assigned  by  the  Project 
Coordinator. 
26.  The  following  staff  positions  have  been  provided  for  to  ensure  adequate  coordination  of 
payments  for  project  expenditure,  making  appropriate  accounting  entries  and  financial 
reporting. 
Implementation 
level 
Project  Staff  position 
and numbers 
Remarks 
PCU  
 Finance Controller (1)  
Accountant 
 Project 
(1) 
 The staffing is based on a similar IFAD 
funded project which has similar types 
implementation 
of  activities  and 
arrangement.  
 These  staff  will  be  hired  on  two  years 
contract, 
on 
renewable 
performance  which  is  expected  to 
enhance performance.   
based 
 The staff will be hired as part of start-
up activities. 
89 
Implementing 
Partners (TSIS) 
Designated 
Accountant 
Project 
 This  will  be  a  staff  of  the  partners, 
designated to handle financial reporting 
and 
of 
transactions. 
coordinating 
processing 
 It  will  be  one  of  the  conditions  in  the 
MoU  with  TSIS  Coordinator  to  have  a 
designated  accountant  for  the  project 
to  ensure  there  is  a  focal  person  for 
financial 
smooth 
transactions. 
handling 
of 
Internal Controls  
27.  In order to effectively safeguard project resources, internal controls have been instituted at 
the PMU in the whole framework of financial and administrative procedures. The identified 
controls  range  from;  proper  record  keeping  and  posting,  authorization  of  accounting, 
procurement,  and  administrative  documents,  balancing  and  checking,  physical  security  of 
assets, double signing (approval) arrangements, to financial reporting and monitoring. These 
are prescribed in PFM act and further detailed in the finance and operation manual for the 
project. There will be internal audit function, as noted below, to check overall compliance to 
internal  controls  and  provide  support  towards  improving  systems,  procedures,  and 
processes. 
Internal Audit 
28.  Internal audits will be conducted to provide assurance that the Project is being implemented 
in  accordance  with  the  PIM,  complies  with  GoK  regulations  and  is  complying  with  Project 
financing covenants. The project will utilise the internal audit function at NT&P to carry out 
internal audit. The internal Auditors will be required to carry out the audit of the project at 
least once annually. 
29.  IFAD supervision and implementation support missions will consistently demand and review 
the rolling internal audit plans, internal audit reports produced and  shared as per internal 
audit plans and implementations of internal audit recommendations.  
External Audit  
30.  External  audits  will  be  executed  by  the  Auditor  General  who  have  been  carrying  out  the 
external audit of IFAD projects implemented by the Government. Any changes in the Terms 
of Reference will require the Fund’s No Objection. IFAD will require specific audit opinions: 
(a) general opinion on the financial statements, (b) opinion on the balances of funds held in 
the special account. The new IFAD handbook on audit has been shared with the auditors to 
enhance their reviews.  
31.  The audits by OAG are carried out in accordance with the International Standards of Supreme 
Audit  Institutions  (ISSAIs)  and  relevant  ethical  requirements.  As  such  they  also  include 
revenue, expenditure, assets, and liabilities. In addition, they highlight any relevant material 
issues and systemic and control risks. This enables the auditor to express an opinion as to 
whether or not the financial statements are prepared, in all material respects, in accordance 
with  an  identified  or  applicable  financial  reporting  framework  and  (or)  statutory 
requirements. 
32.  The  Auditor  General  in  drawing  up  his  audit  Projects  incorporates  review  of  the 
implementation of the previous period’s recommendations. If those recommendations have 
not  been  followed  this will  be  stated  in  the  current  audit  report.  The  capacity  of  OAG  has 
90 
been consistently assessed by IFAD as satisfactory in terms of undertaking project audits. 
The risk assessment here is therefore low. The audited financial statements will be submitted 
to IFAD within 6 months after financial end as required by IFAD.  
33.  Nature  of  project  eligible  expenditures  -  Project  expenditure  categories  have  been 
allocated in accordance with the standard expenditure categories.  Detailed cost tables are 
presented in this document. Transaction-based disbursement procedures will be used. The 
eligibility of expenditure should require: 
a)  The expenditure shall meet the reasonable cost of goods, works and services required for 
the  Project  and  covered  by  the  relevant  AWPB  and  procured  in  conformity  with  the 
procurement guidelines 
b)  The expenditure shall be incurred during the project implementation period, except that 
expenditures to meet the costs of winding up the project that may be incurred after the 
project completion date and before the closing date 
c)  The expenditure shall be incurred by a project party 
d)  If  the  agreement  allocates  the  amount  of  the  financing  to  categories  of  eligible 
expenditures and specifies the percentages of such eligible expenditures to be financed, 
the expenditure must relate to a category whose allocation has not been depleted and 
shall be eligible only up to the percentage applicable to such category. 
e)  The expenditure shall be otherwise eligible in accordance with the terms of the financing 
agreement 
34.  All payment vouchers will be examined to ascertain the following requirements: 
  That the expenditure has been incurred on proper authority and is a charge to properly 
voted funds. 
  That payment vouchers are supported by original documents or certified photocopies of 
the original documents (such copies must be certified by the appropriate officer that he 
has taken all possible steps to ensure that no payment has been made on the original 
document). 
  That rates charged are according to regulations/contracts, fair and reasonable. 
  That  appropriate  authority  e.g.  DTC,  MTC  etc.  has  been  obtained  and  a  copy  of  the 
minutes attached to the payment vouchers for reference purposes. 
  That the allocation of account codes is correct. 
  That appropriate certificates have been signed by the AIE holder or officer authorized by 
him in writing. 
  That the vote book control certificate has been duly signed to confirm availability of funds. 
  That the computations and costing have been verified and are arithmetically correct. 
  That  the  persons  named  in  the  payment  vouchers  are  those  entitled  to  receive  the 
payment. 
  Any alterations of payment voucher should be counter signed by the AIE holder in charge 
of the unit. 
  That  the  signatories  to  the  certificates  are  as  per  those  indicated  in  the  specimen 
signature document 
  That payments are supported by duly certified invoices,  receipted bills (for direct cash 
payments), LPOs,  LSOs, VAT certificates,  copies  of  supplier’s delivery  note, Form S13, 
and the certificate at the reverse of the payment voucher signed to confirm stores entry 
into the relevant inventory ledgers. 
91 
FM Supervision plan 
35.  Supervision.  RK-FINFA  will  be  directly  supervised  by  IFAD  with  annual  implementation 
support missions, followed initially by shorter follow-up missions six months later as may be 
assessed. Supervision will not be conducted as a general inspection or evaluation, but rather 
as  an  opportunity  to  jointly  assess  achievements  and  lessons,  and  to  reflect  on  ways  to 
improve  implementation  and  impact.  From  a  financial  management  perspective,  IFAD 
missions  will  keenly  follow  up  the  fiduciary  risk  at  various  levels,  including  the  use  of  the 
report-based disbursement. 
92 
RK-FINFA PIM APPENDIX 1: OPERATIONAL MANUAL - MSME CREDIT 
GUARANTEE SCHEME  
RK-FINFA PIM APPENDIX 2: MAPPING OF KENYAN RURAL FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS 
RK-FINFA PIM APPENDIX 3:  ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND CLIMATE 
CHANGE MANAGEMENT 
93 
DRAFT Operational Manual  
Kenya MSME Credit Guarantee Scheme 
Covid-19 Response 
November 25, 2020 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
3. 
2. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
3.1. 
3.2. 
3.3. 
1.1. 
1.2. 
1.3. 
PART I. PROJECT BACKGROUND ..........................................................................................................4 
THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC CONTEXT ................................................................................................ 4 
CGS PROJECT OVERVIEW ............................................................................................................... 5 
KEY PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS .......................................................................................................... 6 
The National Treasury ............................................................................................................................ 6 
The Central Bank of Kenya ..................................................................................................................... 6 
Participating Financial Institutions ......................................................................................................... 6 
PART II. CGS OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK ..........................................................................................8 
TARGET GROUP CHARACTERISTICS ................................................................................................... 8 
MSME Definition .................................................................................................................................... 8 
MSME Profile in Kenya ........................................................................................................................... 8 
CGS Target Group ................................................................................................................................ 10 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION ............................................................................................................... 11 
Overview .............................................................................................................................................. 11 
2.1. 
Product Rationale ................................................................................................................................ 12 
2.2. 
2.3. 
Financial Terms .................................................................................................................................... 12 
2.3.1.  Credit facility amount ......................................................................................................................... 12 
2.3.2.  Credit facility Maturity ........................................................................................................................ 12 
2.3.3.  Credit Facility Repayment mode ......................................................................................................... 12 
Pricing .................................................................................................................................................. 13 
2.3.4. 
Collateral Requirements ...................................................................................................................... 13 
2.3.5. 
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA .............................................................................................................. 13 
3.2  PFIs Eligibility requirements ..................................................................................................................... 14 
ORIGINATION AND CLAIM PROCESS ................................................................................................ 15 
4.1  Credit Facility Processes ........................................................................................................................... 15 
Application Process .............................................................................................................................. 15 
4.1.1 
4.1.2 
Credit Facility Monitoring Process ....................................................................................................... 15 
Credit Facility Rescheduling .................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.1.3 
4.2  Claims Processes ....................................................................................................................................... 16 
4.3  Debt Collection ......................................................................................................................................... 19 
4.4  Recovery Proceedings............................................................................................................................... 19 
4.5  Claims Settlement..................................................................................................................................... 19 
ACCOUNTING & RISK REPORTING .................................................................................................. 21 
5.1  Accounting & Financial Reporting ............................................................................................................ 21 
5.2  CGS Risk Reporting Requirements ............................................................................................................ 22 
5.3  PFI Reporting Requirements to the CGS ................................................................................................... 22 
5.3.1  Monthly Reporting on credit facilities Outstanding ............................................................................ 22 
5.3.2  Monthly Reporting on Due by Unpaid credit facility Instalments ....................................................... 22 
5.3.3  Monthly Reporting on Claims Paid by Defaulted credit facilities ........................................................ 23 
INTERNAL AUDIT & RISK MANAGEMENT .......................................................................................... 23 
6.1  Overview ................................................................................................................................................... 23 
6.2  Post disbursement Compliance Audits ..................................................................................................... 24 
MONITORING AND EVALUATION .................................................................................................... 25 
PART III. GOVERNANCE & STAFFING ................................................................................................. 26 
7. 
5. 
6. 
4. 
2 
1. 
2. 
1.1. 
KEY CONSIDERATIONS ................................................................................................................. 26 
Guiding Principles ................................................................................................................................ 26 
OVERALL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE ............................................................................................... 28 
ANNEXES ......................................................................................................................................... 29 
A1. LIST OF PROHIBITED BUSINESS ACTIVITIES ............................................................................................... 29 
A.2 SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT TEMPLATE .................................................................................................. 30 
A3. LIST OF OTHER OPERATIONAL TOOLS / DOCUMENTS REQUIRED FOR THE CGS ................................................... 30 
3 
PART I. PROJECT BACKGROUND 
1.  THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC CONTEXT1 
Kenya’s economy is being hit hard by the global coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic, negatively 
impacting  MSME  operation  and  their  ability  to  meet  their  payment  obligations.  The  public 
health emergency that has been called across many countries is posing temporary difficulties for 
people and businesses to keep up with their loan repayments or with their utility bills (phone, 
electricity,  water,  etc.).  As  part  of  containment  measures,  the  Government  of  Kenya  (GoK) 
introduced  movement  restrictions,  which  inadvertently  led  to  job  and  income  losses  for 
numerous  households2.  Restrictions  in  movement  across  the  globe  and  in  Kenya  also  led  to 
disruptions  in  supply  chains,  affecting  the  ability  of  the  private  sector  to  produce  and  supply 
goods and services. Demand has also been suppressed due to decreasing incomes and depressed 
consumer spending, further compounding the economic challenges.   
MSMEs  are  the 
lifeblood  of  Kenya’s  economy  and  employment.  They  have  been 
disproportionately affected by COVID-19 and require immediate life-line interventions and a 
re-evaluation of their operating environment. The unforeseen and dramatic fall in revenues and 
liquidity  has  put  the  sector  under  significant  stress.  Due  to  increased  risk-aversion,  some 
businesses are expected to be unable to access new funding or further drawdowns of their credit 
facilities just when they need them most. To compound the situation, continued access to funds 
under  revolving  credit  facility  facilities  or  other  sources  is  at  risk  due  to  the  weak  business 
environment. 
To mitigate the economic impact of the pandemic, the Kenyan Government introduced various 
measures to increase employment, support local enterprises, and provide Kenyan citizens with 
financial support. Some of the interventions include recruiting additional health workers, hiring 
local  labor  to  support  national  hygiene  efforts  and broader public  works  initiatives,  allocating 
funds for VAT refunds, soft credit facilities, credit facility guarantees for businesses, and rolling 
out direct cash transfer programs to support vulnerable Kenyans. However, these interventions 
will not be sufficient to cushion and revive the economy. Additional measures are therefore being 
drafted with a priority given to initiatives that will create a significant number of new jobs with 
manageable financing implications for the government. 
1 This section is based on the Government of Kenya report entitled “Rebuilding the Kenyan Economy Post-COVID-19” 
2 KNBS, “Survey on Socio-Economic Impact of COVID-19 on Households,” 2020; KNBS, “Economic Survey,” 2020 
4 
2.  CGS PROJECT OVERVIEW 
The National Treasury is proposing the establishment of a Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) to 
support access to finance for the Kenyan MSME Sector. The proposed facility will aim to stabilize 
the  market  and  protect  jobs,  maintaining  current  access  to  finance  to  MSMEs  impacted  by 
COVID-19. MSMEs affected by the COVID-19 crisis have immediate cash-flow needs to meet their 
credit facility obligations and reorganize their operations to navigate this difficult period.  
The CGS will effectively support MSME impacted by COVID19 by facilitating a credit facility at 
more favourable financing terms as well as access to emergency bridge credit facilities. The risk 
sharing is on a 50:50 pari-passu basis; once the CGS’s loss attains a 25% level, the lenders will 
bear the rest of the risk. The risk-sharing arrangement will be provided on a portfolio basis. A 
portfolio approach to managing guarantee payments promotes faster turnaround times and ease 
of processing. To avoid the moral hazard issue, lenders must register all of their MSME  credit 
facilities that meet the CGS criteria as the guarantee is targeted at the PFIs total MSME portfolio. 
During  this  temporary  program,  lenders  will  register  their  eligible  credit  facilities  by  emailing 
specific  data  on  each  credit  facility  when  it  is  approved.  The  data  submitted  will  identify  the 
borrower and include information about the credit facility.  
When a credit facility has been in default for 90 calendar days PFI can claim for payment by the 
scheme. Subject to validation process of up to 30 days, the scheme will pay the PFI and advance 
of 25% of the balance outstanding. During the following 90 day period, the lender must try to 
restructure  the  credit  facility  to  meet  the  borrower’s  cash  flow.  The  scheme  will  pay  the 
remaining 25% of the outstanding amount after 180 days of the credit facility being in default, 
subject to a validation process up to 30 days. The maximum sum payable on a claim shall not 
exceed 25% of the principal amount.  
The PFI must continue to collect on the credit facilities after default. Once the sum of guarantee 
and recovery payments equal the amount defaulted, any further collections will be remitted to 
the CGS. 
This is seen as short-term intervention to support MSMEs until after the COVID-19 pandemic 
impact. Once the effects of the pandemic have subsided, the CGS will provide a sound platform 
for establishing the national MSME Credit Guarantee Company contemplated by the National 
Treasury  to  support  the  implementation  of  the  Government  of  Kenya’s  Big  Four  Agenda. 
Substantial changes are likely to be made at that time including a revamping of the guarantee 
process and the fee schedule.  
5 
3.  KEY PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS 
3.1. 
The National Treasury 
The National Treasury upon enactment of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 
2020 provides for the establishment of the Credit Guarantee Scheme. The management of the 
scheme will be vested in the CGS in accordance with the provisions of the PFM Act, 2012. The 
National  Treasury  will  provide  guidelines  on  the  operationalization  of  the  CGS  and  ensure 
prudent management of the Facility. The National Treasury shall maintain oversight of the CGS 
through a steering committee.  The National Treasury will provide the initial funding of  KSh. 5 
billion for the CGS and enter into a Risk Sharing Scheme Agreement with Participating Financial 
Institutions (PFIs) that have been competitively selected through a set out criteria to implement 
the Risk Sharing facility. The National Treasury will also engage other stakeholders and partners 
to achieve additional funding, which will be required given the magnitude of the pandemic. 
The CGS shall undertake all activities related to the management of credit guarantee including 
processing applications, risk management, reporting, among others. The CGS management shall 
report to the Cabinet Secretary, the National Treasury and Planning on a regular basis on the 
progress in the implementation of the scheme. The CGS will be audited on an annual basis. The 
CGS  will  provide  regular  reports  with  regard  to  portfolio  guaranteed,  list  of  beneficiaries, 
coverage, among other performance indicators in accordance with the PFM Act 2012.  
3.2. 
The Central Bank of Kenya 
The National Treasury intends to collaborate with CBK in the management of the CGS in the 
implementation of the scheme. Further, the CBK will, among others, support the supervision of 
the  guarantee  product  in  the  market  and  provisioning  of  the  product  in  accordance  with 
prudential guidelines to facilitate uptake and realization of the development objective.   
3.3. 
Participating Financial Institutions 
PFIs will enter into a Risk Sharing Agreement with the Government of Kenya and will abide to 
adhere to the terms and conditions set in the Agreement. 
•  PFIs  will  establish  a  Scheme  credit  facility  Portfolio  through  the  Facility  Agreements 
entered into between the PFIs and the Borrowers and, a PFI will maintain control over the 
credit  processes  and  decisions  related  thereto.  It  is  expected  that  a  bank  will  use  its 
normal bank lending criteria as applied by the Bank in the ordinary course of its business 
in considering and approving credit/credit facility applications and more so as relating to 
credit facilities under the Scheme, and which shall be applied by the Bank in considering 
and approving facilities under the Scheme. 
•  Once the relevant credit processes have been established, PFIs will make available credit 
facilities to the potential borrowers, subject to an applicant satisfying both the Scheme 
6 
Qualifying  Criteria  and  based  on  the  Bank’s  Prudent  Lending  Criteria.  The  Scheme 
Qualifying Criteria refers to the pre-qualifying criteria required to be met in order for an 
Applicant to be considered for a Facility under the Scheme.  
•  The PFI will be required to conduct its lending business towards the Borrowers by using 
banking  practice,  business  discretion,  due  diligence,  and/or  adhering  to  the  applicable 
laws, regulations, and directives; 
•  PFIs  will  be  required  to  provide  information  and  other  necessary  data  needed  for  the 
monitoring and evaluation framework of the CGS project. 
7 
PART II. CGS OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK  
1.  TARGET GROUP CHARACTERISTICS 
1.1.  MSME Definition 
As shown in Table 1, companies are classified by number of employees, annual turnover and total 
assets. Microenterprises are those entities with 1-9 employees, an annual turnover of up to KSh 
500,000. The threshold for total assets is to be set by the Government from time to time. 
Table 1: Definition of MSME by staffing and annual turnover 
Definition 
Micro 
Small 
Medium 
Employees 
1-9 
10-49 
50-250 
Annual Turnover 
Up to 500,000 KSh 
Up to 5,000,000 KSh 
Up to 100,000,000 KSh 
1.2.  MSME Profile in Kenya 
The majority of businesses in Kenya are micro businesses, and most of them are unregistered. 
The vast majority of MSMEs are micro enterprises with 1-9 employees, representing more than 
92%  of  all  formal  MSMEs,  and  an  even  higher  percentage  of  informal  ones.  Informality  is 
widespread, with an estimated 5.9 million unlicensed businesses operating, as compared to 1.6 
million licensed businesses.  
Registered  businesses,  defined  as  businesses  registered  with  the  Registrar  of  Companies, 
represent about 6% of businesses in Kenya. 28% of formal MSMEs are registered; nonetheless, 
registered businesses contribute approximately 90% of the total gross value added by MSMEs. 
The vast majority of registered MSMEs are also micro-sized enterprises with 1-9 employees (74%) 
and  this  pattern  holds  across  most  sectors,  with  a  few  exceptions  for  sectors  with 
disproportionately high percentages of SMEs (e.g., Mining and Quarrying; Education; Agriculture; 
Electricity, Gas, and Air Conditioning Supply; and Water Supply).  
Approximately  three  out  of  four  (76%)  MSMEs  have  a  monthly  turnover  of  less  than  KSh 
100,000.  The  median  monthly  turnover  of  registered  MSMEs  is  KSh  50,000  (KSh  600,000 
annually). Small and medium MSMEs have the highest share of businesses with monthly turnover 
higher than KSh 100,000. About 40% of Kenyan MSMSE are located in Nairobi. 
Table 2: Registered MSMEs by Business Sector 
8 
Sector 
Wholesale and retail trade; vehicle/motorcycle repair 
Accommodation and food service activities   
Manufacturing   
Financial and insurance activities   
Education   
Other service activities   
Professional, scientific and technical activities   
Transportation and storage   
Administrative and support service activities   
Human health and social work activities   
Real estate activities   
Construction   
Information and communication   
Arts, entertainment and recreation   
Water supply; sewerage, waste mgmt. and remediation  
Mining and quarrying   
Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply   
Agriculture, forestry and fishing   
Source: 2016 MSME survey by the KNBS 
% of Total   Micro  
85.0% 
47.1% 
61.5% 
7.4% 
72.7% 
6.9% 
81.0% 
6.7% 
21.8% 
6.2% 
91.6% 
4.7% 
60.3% 
4.3% 
54.6% 
3.5% 
78.6% 
3.2% 
63.6% 
2.2% 
74.6% 
1.9% 
57.3% 
1.7% 
58.7% 
1.7% 
89.0% 
1.6% 
20.0% 
0.8% 
2.4% 
0.2% 
45.5% 
0.1% 
29.6% 
0.1% 
Small 
13.3% 
35.6% 
21.4% 
15.5% 
66.0% 
8.4% 
34.2% 
32.9% 
20.6% 
24.8% 
22.9% 
34.9% 
39.8% 
10.9% 
79.9% 
97.5% 
53.3% 
67.4% 
Medium 
1.7% 
2.8% 
5.8% 
3.5% 
12.1% 
0.0% 
5.5% 
12.5% 
0.8% 
11.5% 
2.5% 
7.8% 
1.5% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
1.2% 
3.0% 
Table 3: Country coverage by MSME type 
Source: 2016 MSME survey by the KNBS 
9 
CountyMicroSmallMediumOverallNairobi36.33%46.01%37.52%38.54%Kiambu6.94%5.44%3.08%6.47%Kisumu5.38%5.75%10.27%5.64%Mombasa6.06%3.27%1.73%5.28%Nakuru3.47%6.43%18.18%4.65%Kajiado2.51%3.34%1.45%2.66%Kakamega2.59%2.35%5.05%2.62%Narok2.99%1.08%1.11%2.50%Machakos2.09%2.82%0.73%2.21%Uasin Gishu2.08%2.43%0.46%2.10%Other Counties29.55%21.08%20.41%27.31% 
1.3. 
CGS Target Group 
The CGS will target registered MSMEs, contributing approximately 90% of the total gross value 
added by MSMEs. These MSMEs directly or indirectly impacted by the COVID-19 crisis have the 
immediate need to maintain their source of funding to mitigate cash flow issue and continue with 
their operations without carrying out drastic cuts to their number of employees. All sectors and 
MSME types shall be targeted. 
10 
2.  PRODUCT DESCRIPTION 
2.1.  Overview 
Product features 
Credit Guarantee Scheme 
Product Concept 
The Credit Guarantee Scheme aims to maintain access to finance for 
MSMEs and protect jobs. 
Target Clientele 
Registered MSMEs  
Coverage Type 
 Risk  shared  on  a  50:50  pari-Passu  basis;  subject  to  a  maximum 
guarantee exposure of 25% of the principal amount 
Effective Coverage 
25% of individual credit facility3 
Credit Facility Terms 
Interest rate:  Market rate with a discount by the lender 
➢  Maximum Amount: KSh.5 million 
➢ 
➢  Term: maximum tenor is 3 years 
➢  Prepayment penalty is not allowed 
➢  Grace  period:  up  to  5  months  of  no  payment  or  interest  only 
payments determined by the borrower’s current cash flow 
➢  Facility issued upon establishment of the scheme and entry into 
force of the service level agreement 
CGS Pricing (guarantee fee) 
No guarantee fee  
CGS Collateral Requirements 
Standard collateral as per PFI’s policy, but subject to negotiation with 
borrower 
CGS Approval Process  
All  credit  facilities  meeting  the  SME  credit  facility  criteria  must  be 
registered with the scheme.   
NB 
Loss sharing ratio illustration on a 50:50 pari-passu basis; subject to a maximum exposure of 25% of the 
principal amount 
To illustrate the proposed loss sharing ratio of 50:50 pari passu basis with maximum exposure of 25% for 
the CGS, using an example of a facility of KES 1,000,000.00 
On the occurrence of a loss, the scenarios are as follows:  
Share of CGS 
Loss  
KSh.50, 000    
KSh.100, 000 
KSh.250, 000 
KSh.500, 000 
KSh.700, 000 
KSh.250, 000 
                KSh.250, 000 
KSh.1, 000,000 
Share of PFI 
KSh.50, 000 
KSh.250, 000 
KSh.450, 000 
KSh.750, 000 
3 Credit facilities could include, among others, loans, overdrafts, commercial paper, purchase order financing, finance bonds, invoice discounting, 
letters of credit, performance and bid bonds, pre-shipment receipts, trade and commercial bills and warehouse receipts. 
11 
2.2. 
Product Rationale 
MSMEs have limited revenue due to the reduction in business caused by the pandemic. They 
need working capital to pay their ongoing bills including rent, utilities, and the salaries of staff 
that are still working. They need working capital financing with a sufficient grace period to allow 
them to stay in business until sales recover. This working capital funding must have a relatively 
long tenor as the income that will be used to repay these credit facilities will not be earned until 
later this year or early next year. Typically, a credit facility is obtained by a borrower and the 
funds are invested in a productive activity which generates income. The income is then used to 
repay the credit facility. The credit tenure should be long enough to enable the borrower meet 
the repayment instalment.  
Eligible clients are those MSMEs which are in good standing, but have been affected by the 
COVID-19 pandemic and are struggling to meet their financial obligations. These businesses will 
require  a  credit  facility  to  maintain  or  re-start  business  operations.  The  CGS  will  provide 
guarantees to support all economic sectors. PFIs will determine the viability of the credit facility 
proposal based on their own assessment.    
  The banks will also benefit from a reduction in their risk exposure as the CGS will provide partial 
guarantee for those borrowers that otherwise may have trouble repaying their credit or loans.   
2.3. 
Financial Terms 
2.3.1.  Credit facility amount 
The maximum credit facility shall be KSh.5, 000,000 per borrower. Top up loans will not be eligible 
for guarantee.  
2.3.2.  Credit Facility Maturity 
The tenor of the CGS credit facility may not exceed 3 years, including rescheduling, but excluding 
the grace period. 
2.3.3.  Credit Facility Repayment mode 
The  mode  of  repayment  for  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  credit  facilities  shall  be  monthly.  The 
limiting of the grace period to a maximum of 5 months is to ensure that MSMEs do not divert 
resources  to  other  uses.    It  also  hastens  repayment  to  free  up  funds  in  the  the  scheme  to 
guarantee more borrowers. During the grace period, the PFI may suspend principal and interest 
or  principal  only  (with  interest  payments  being  made).  Instalments  must  be  in  line  with  the 
normal bank lending criteria and the available cash flow of the borrower.  
12 
2.3.4.  Pricing 
Fee 
Interest rate: 
Commitment fees: 
Late payment fees: 
Registration fees: 
Rate 
Market rate with a discount by the lender 
None 
Prepayment penalty is not allowed 
None 
The CGS will not charge any fee for its guarantee.  
2.3.5.  Collateral Requirements 
Collateral requirements shall be as per PFI’s credit appraisal policy. 
3.  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
3.1  MSMEs Credit Facility Eligibility Criteria 
Borrowers may operate in any sector of the economy and must meet specific requirements to 
qualify for the CGS. These requirements are: 
1.  Be a micro, small or medium enterprise registered as a business or company  under the 
relevant Kenyan laws 
2.  Be a registered taxpayer and in compliance with the relevant tax laws 
3.  Be registered by a county government and hold a valid business permit or trade licence 
4.  Not  part  of  any  group  or  related  to  any  enterprise  that  would  otherwise,  by  the  law, 
regulations or other attendant guidelines, not be eligible for credit guarantee under CGS 
5.  Agrees in writing to comply with the provisions of PFM Act and any conditions that may 
be prescribed in accordance to the Act 
6.  Borrower must have been operating viably for at least two years and/or provide a viable 
business proposal; 
7.  The  borrower  must  provide  statements  of  accounts.  While  PFIs  may  help  in  preparing 
these statements, reconstructed statements of accounts  must be based on documentary 
evidence, such as bank statements, accounting records and purchase receipts; 
8.  The borrower must be a credit-worthy micro, small or medium-sized enterprise operating 
in Kenya; and 
13 
9.  The  borrower  must  be  compliant  with  Kenya  Bank’s  Environmental  Risk  Management 
Guidelines4. 
A list of business activities excluded from CGS support can be found in Annex A1. 
3.2 
PFIs Eligibility requirements 
In general a commercial bank will be eligible to participate if it fulfils the following criteria: 
1.  A commercial bank that is licensed by the CBK and provides credit facilities to MSMEs in 
the ordinary course of business; 
2.  Have wide geographical outreach network;  
3.  Have wide sectoral coverage in its portfolio; 
4.  Have the experience and ability to make and service MSMEs credit facilities as evidenced 
by the number of MSME credit facilities currently in their portfolio and the length of time 
the PFI has been making MSME credit facilities;  
5.  Must have a sound track-record of maintaining portfolio quality; and 
6.  Must be in compliance with the CBK Prudential Guidelines. 
An eligible commercial bank willing to participate in CGS must express interest to the National 
Treasury. Upon receiving the expression of interest, the National Treasury will apply an objective 
scoring tool to select qualifying banks and issue to them the Risk Sharing Agreement. After the 
PFI has executed the agreement and returned an original version of the agreement to the CGS, 
the  CGS  will  contact  the  PFI  and  review  the  procedure  for  registering  a  credit  facility  for  a 
guarantee.  
https://www.centralbank.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/risk-management-guidelines-
4 
january-20131.pdf 
14 
4.  ORIGINATION AND CLAIM PROCESS 
4.1 Credit Facility Processes 
4.1.1  Application Process 
CGS applications and claims processing will be handled manually during the initial phase of the 
program.  The PFI shall email the information necessary for the CGS to register the credit facility 
for a guarantee. Any documents necessary will be sent via email as a PDF file.  
CGS must assign a maximum portfolio amount to each PFI at the beginning of the process. The 
KSh.20 billion can be divided among the PFIs, although it is a good idea to hold some in reserve 
in case one bank ends up approving more credit facilities than anticipated.  
Figure 1: CGS Credit Facility Process 
Qualifying MSME 
approaches a PFI for a 
credit facility 
The credit facility is 
evaluated and approved 
based on PFI’s standard 
policies and procedures 
PFI register credit with 
the scheme as part of its 
portfolio 
Normal collection and 
recovery process 
Credit facility managed by 
PFI 
Credit facility is registered 
as part of PFI portfolio 
4.1.2  Credit Facility Monitoring Process 
All credit facilities under the CGS must be monitored with the same level of diligence as any 
other credit facility in accordance with the PFIs’ policies. In the case of any guaranteed credit 
facilities or instalments falling past due, it is imperative that the PFI is able to demonstrate that 
it has classified the credit facility on their books accordingly.  
15 
Indicative Credit Facility Monitoring Procedures at PFI level 
- 
-  Any credit facility that is past due must be actively monitored and pursued by the PFI. If 
full payment of all credit facility instalments and/or fees are not made within 15 calendar 
days  of  the  due  date,  the  PFI  must  contact  the  MSME  by  telephone  and/or  physically 
visiting its premises to determine why payment has not been made and determine when 
it  will  be  made.  The  PFI  must  also  contact  the  MSME  in  writing  requesting  overdue 
instalments and fees to be paid. Copies of the letters should be kept on file. 
If no payment has been received from the MSME within the subsequent 7 calendar days, 
then the PFI must begin discussions with the owner(s) of the MSME  to determine further 
why  payment  has  not  been  made,  when  it  will  be  made  and/or  establish  whether  a 
rescheduling  of  payments  is  needed/feasible.  This  should  be  documented  by  the  PFI 
through a call report and kept on file. 
In the event the account remains delinquent even with the PFI following up for payments 
in accordance with their policies and the process described above, the PFI must write to 
the  MSME  at  least  twice  at  30-day  intervals  during  the  90-day  period  after  default 
demanding payment. Copies of the letters should be kept on file. 
If at the end of this 90-day period, the MSME has failed to respond, the PFI will write to 
the MSME making a formal demand on the credit facility and advise that if payment is not 
made,  the  PFI  will  execute  the  recovery  process  according  to  the  PFIs’  internal 
procedures. The PFI must notify the CGS in writing stating that an event of default on a 
specific  credit 
the  account  has  been 
downgraded/reclassified. Copies of the letters should be kept on file. 
taken  place  and 
facility  has 
that 
- 
- 
-  The  above  notwithstanding,  the  credit  facility  shall  be  classified  as  per  CBK  prudential 
guidelines  on  risk  classification  of  assets,  provisioning  and  limitation  of  interest 
recoverable on non-performing credit facilities (CBK/PG/04). 
4.2 Claims Processes 
The PFI must provide the borrower name, registration number, copies of the borrower’s note, 
claim letters, evidence the credit facility was used for the intended purposes, date of default and 
balance outstanding at the time of the default to the CGS (see full list of requirements below). 
These documents may be sent via email as a PDF file. The PFI will continue its normal recovery 
policies and procedures to recover defaulted credit facility balances. In the event that amounts 
recovered are more than expected after a claim has been processed and a disbursement made 
to the client, the lender must return the extra funds to the CGS within 15 days of identifying the 
excess payment.   
When a credit facility has been in default for 90 calendar days PFI can claim for payment by the 
scheme. Subject to validation process of up to 30 days, the scheme will pay the PFI and advance 
of 25% of the balance outstanding. During the following 90 day period, the lender must try to 
16 
restructure  the  credit  facility  to  meet  the  borrower’s  cash  flow.  The  scheme  will  pay  the 
remaining 25% of the outstanding amount after 180 days of the credit facility being in default, 
subject to a validation process of up to 30 days. The maximum sum payable on a claim shall not 
exceed 25% of the principal amount.  
Figure 2: Recovery & Claims Process 
Borrower defaults 
on guaranteed 
credit facility 
Initiate 90-day 
time to recover 
Standard 
recovery 
process 
performed 
Recovery 
successful; no 
claim required 
PFI  unable  to  recover 
all amounts in default; 
final 
CGS  makes  a 
the 
of 
payment 
guaranteed amount 
Credit facility 
provision 
maintained; PFI 
continues 
recovery efforts 
Collection 
attempts 
unsuccessful and 
90-day limit 
reached 
CGS advances 
(partial) payment 
to PFI 
Indicative Claims Processing Procedures at PFI-level 
-  The PFI may begin the process to call upon the guarantee if the MSME fails to make the 
due payment in full within 90 days of the due date and no arrangement is made between 
the PFI and the MSME to resolve the default situation.  
-  The PFI must have declared the credit facility in default and informed the borrower in 
writing of the legal steps to be undertaken.  
- 
If  any  collateral  was  pledged  to  secure  the  credit  facility,  the  PFI  must  begin  legal 
proceedings  to  liquidate  collateral  and  recover  the  debt  and  have  the  foreclosure 
documents accepted by the court before the guarantee settlement.  
17 
-  Cash or cash equivalent collateral should be set off against the principal amount of the 
outstanding credit facility. 
-  The  CGS  will  confirm  claim  acceptance  of  the  guaranteed  principal  sum  outstanding 
within fourteen  days  of receipt of the  claim  documentation,  subject  to positive  claims 
validation. 
-  Advance  payment  of  guarantees  will  be  made  within  fourteen  days  of  the  immediate 
quarter end. 
- 
If the borrower of a credit facility, guaranteed by the CGS, is claimed then subsequent 
credit facilities to that borrower or any of their affiliated enterprises would not be eligible 
for CGS guarantee coverage. 
-  The CGS should have access to following documents for claims validation purposes: 
o  All statements and documents that evidence the efforts exerted for the collection 
of the credit facility 
o  A copy of the credit facility contract between the PFI and the borrower 
o  A copy of the statement of account of the borrower 
o  A copy of the guarantee application including all warranties, representations and 
checklists 
o  Any other documents deemed appropriate by both PFI and CGS to justify payment 
of the claimed amount 
-  The CGS reserves the right to perform a detailed analysis of any claims, thus performing 
the following procedures: 
o  The  CGS  would  confirm  that  the  PFI  has  met  all  the  terms  of  the  guarantee 
agreement both in terms of the eligibility of the application and the viability of the 
original proposal. The CGS would verify that the credit facility was used according 
to the purpose indicated in the client credit facility application. 
o  The CGS would confirm that the  credit facility was assessed in accordance with 
PFI’s normal assessment procedures prior to application for the CGS guarantee. 
o  The CGS would confirm that all the relevant fees have been paid by the PFI where 
applicable. 
o  The CGS would confirm that the  credit facility was not renegotiated before the 
guarantee was approved. 
o  The CGS would confirm that the PFI has not re-scheduled the credit facility without 
the approval of the CGS. 
o  The CGS would confirm the PFI has made all collection efforts required by the CGS. 
18 
o  The CGS would review the borrower’s credit facility file at the PFI including due 
diligence  and  documentary  checklists  to  ascertain  that  procedures  certified  as 
having been carried out were in fact discharged, and that documentation on file 
corresponds to items marked on the checklist. 
o  The  CGS  would  confirm whether  the  claim  was  presented  and  accepted  by the 
court. In case the credit facility amount is not sufficient to file a court case because 
it would not be cost effective, PFI will justify to the CGS in writing. 
4.3 Debt Collection 
The  credit  facilities  backed  by  the  CGS  guarantee  should  be  followed  up  for  repayment  in 
accordance with the PFIs’ standard credit policies as long as they are at least as aggressive as 
the guidance described above. If they are less stringent, then the process described above must 
be followed.  This means that the PFI should endeavour to recover unpaid amounts outstanding 
by liquidating collateral and calling personal and other guarantees that PFI obtained prior to the 
credit facility being granted. The PFI should exercise due diligence in recovering the amount of 
the credit facility outstanding and exhaust all legal remedies in pursuit of full recovery of past 
due amounts. The PFI must update the CGS on a monthly basis of the status of the debt recovery 
proceedings. Credit facilities for which guarantee claims have been presented to the CGS may 
not be written off without the consent of the CGS. In the event that the PFI decides not to pursue 
a claim where the CGS does not agree, the PFI should notify the CGS of its decision and assign to 
the  CGS  the  right  to  pursue  the  claim  on  its  behalf  if  the  CGS  does  not  agree  with  the  PFIs’ 
decision. 
4.4  Recovery Proceedings 
The  PFI  should  provide  the  CGS  with  a  full,  detailed  account  of  the  costs  involved  in  the 
recovery  of  collateral.  Proceeds  of  recovery  would  be  applied  in  the  following  order:  (i)  the 
recovery costs (ii) the principal balance owed, and (iii) interest owed to the bank that accrued 
during the default period. The principal amount of the credit facility should be paid to the CGS 
before the defaulted portion of the interest can be recovered. If the credit facility is not recovered 
within five (5) years of the credit facility falling past due, the PFI may stop reporting on the status 
of  collection  efforts  to  the  CGS  and  would  consider  the  matters  related  to  that  credit  facility 
closed. 
4.5  Claims Settlement 
After a guarantee claim has been validated for compliance, the CGS computes the guaranteed 
amount due to the PFI by the CGS.  
19 
Indicative Claims Settlement Procedures 
1.  Determine the date on which the credit facility came into default. 
2.  The outstanding principal balance of the credit facility on this date would be determined 
as being the starting point of the guarantee claims calculation. 
3.  The principal amounts of the repaid instalments and collections made after the default 
must be subtracted from the guarantee coverage amount paid to the PFI. 
4.  Upon payment of the claim, the amount is entered in the CGS records for defaulted credit 
facilities, for which the CGS has paid the coverage amounts. 
20 
5.  ACCOUNTING & RISK REPORTING 
5.1 Accounting & Financial Reporting 
Management,  Steering  committee  and  stakeholders  have  to  be  kept  well  informed  of  the 
performance  of  the  CGS  and  in  particular  its  financial  performance.  This  needs  a  proper 
accounting  system  and  transparent  reporting  procedures.  The  quality  of  the  reports  is 
determined  to  a  great  extent  by  the  quality  of  the  accounting  system,  and  even  more  by  its 
reliability.  Since  the  CGS  will  be  implemented  by  selected  financial  institutions  and  managed 
within  a  government  agency, it  is necessary that  adequate  accounting and financial  reporting 
arrangements are put in place to ensure accountability.  
These accounting and financial reporting arrangements relate to the following issues: 
•  Operation of the CGS Bank Accounts; 
•  Financial reporting and reconciliation  
•  Reporting on the size and quality of the guaranteed portfolio 
•  The liquidity position of the guarantee fund – its capacity to cover its financial obligations 
in the short and medium term 
The CGS will be audited by Auditor General  who shall provide an opinion regarding whether its 
financial statements are free of material misstatements. The Office of the Auditor General shall 
use  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS)  to  the  fullest  extent  possible  to 
provide an accurate financial picture of the organization.  
21 
5.2 CGS Risk Reporting Requirements 
The  CGS  should  produce  periodic  reports  on  its  guarantees  to  keep  relevant  stakeholders 
appropriately informed. Such reports may include: 
1.  Monthly financial and technical reports on guarantees made during the period, including 
information on products and sectors for which guarantees have been issued, number of 
jobs affected, funds guaranteed, repayment periods, etc. 
2.  Monthly  reports  on  repayments  made  on  outstanding  credit  facilities  together  with 
details of any outstanding payments. 
3.  Monthly reports on delinquent guarantees and the stage of recovery. 
4.  Monthly  reports  providing  information  on  the  size  and  quality  of  the  guaranteed 
portfolio; the liquidity position of the guarantee fund; the profitability of the guarantee 
fund, and the ability of the scheme to cover costs with its income. 
5.  Monthly  Reports  on  compliance  with  set  prudential  rules  (e.g.  solvency,  liquidity,  risk 
concentration and exposure limits, etc.) 
5.3  PFI Reporting Requirements to the CGS 
5.3.1  Monthly Reporting on Credit Facilities Outstanding 
PFIs should submit a list of all credit facilities on a monthly basis. This report is by credit facility 
account  number  and  provides  the  name  of  borrower,  amount  of  credit  granted,  outstanding 
balance and the paid to date. If there are any missed instalments, lender must supply the amount 
of unpaid instalment, date of first unpaid instalment, number of days in delay, reasons for non-
repayment and endeavours for collection. The report will also provide a column for other notes 
regarding the credit facility. The CGS will develop a template for the report.  
5.3.2  Monthly Reporting on Due by Unpaid Credit Facility Installments 
PFIs should submit a list of all credit facilities thirty days or more past due on a monthly basis. 
This report is by credit facility account number and provides name of borrower, amount of credit 
granted,  outstanding  balance,  amount  of  unpaid  instalment,  date  of  first  unpaid  instalment, 
number of days in delay, reasons for non-repayment, endeavours for collection and provides a 
column for other notes regarding the credit facility. 
22 
5.3.3  Monthly Reporting on Claims Paid by Defaulted Credit Facilities 
PFIs should inform the CGS of the status of any defaulted credit facility for which the PFI has 
paid coverage amounts. A report on each defaulted credit facility must be submitted to the CGS 
until collection of the guarantee payment is recovered by the PFI from the borrower or the PFI 
writes off the credit facility. 
6.  INTERNAL AUDIT & RISK MANAGEMENT  
6.1 Overview 
A  robust system  of  internal  controls  ensures  the  CGS functions  effectively  and  efficiently in 
accordance  with  its  policies  and  procedures.  This  is  an  integral  part  of  the  Fund’s  risk 
management  process,  as  internal  controls  serve  to  mitigate  business  risks.  Internal  controls 
should  address  the  risks  associated  with  the  misappropriation  of  assets,  as  well  as  the 
misstatement of financial information. Internal controls should be clearly defined and identify 
significant risks and key control activities that mitigate those risks. Internal control policies and 
procedures should be designed and implemented in accordance with internationally accepted 
standards, such as the COSO5 integrated control framework. This framework is designed to help 
institutions establish, assess and enhance their internal control systems. 
Figure 3: COSO Integrated Internal Control Framework 
Internal  audits  of  controls  shall  be  performed  annually  to  ensure  proper  coverage  of  all 
relevant risks. A risk-based approach should be used, ensuring that high-risk areas are tested at 
least once a year, while lower risk areas are tested less frequently. For low risk areas, a rotation 
plan can be employed that ensures all areas are covered at least once every three years.  
5 Committee of Sponsoring Organisations of the Treadway Committee 
23 
6.2 Post disbursement Compliance Audits 
After the credit facilities are disbursed by the PFI, random checks should be carried out by CGS 
to check for compliance with eligibility requirements and credit facility processing rules by the 
PFIs. To this end, the CGS will periodically select a random sample of guaranteed credit facilities 
at  PFIs  to  review  following  a  risk-based  approach.  If  the  guaranteed  credit  facilities  are  non-
compliant,  then  CGS  will  work  with  the  PFI  to  correct  the  issue.  To  verify  credit  facility 
compliance, the audit shall for example assess the following aspects: 
•  existence and accuracy of credit facility collaterals 
•  potential conflict of interest 
•  PFI has followed the proper approval process in line with risk policies 
Figure 4: Post disbursement Compliance Audit Process 
CGS generates 
random list of 
guaranteed credit 
facilities 
Credit 
facilities are 
audited for 
compliance 
Guaranteed credit 
facilities not in 
compliance 
Guaranteed credit 
facilities in 
compliance 
No further action 
required 
Remediation 
possible; CGS works 
with PFI 
CGS 
determines 
extent of issue 
and 
remediation 
Remediation not 
possible; further 
action to be taken 
24 
7.  MONITORING AND EVALUATION  
A  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  of  CGS  performances  should  be  established.  The  M&E 
would allow for tracking the performance and impact of the CGS’s operations. In particular, the 
M&E framework evaluates the Fund’s impact on MSMEs and the Kenyan economy (outcomes) 
based on Fund activity (e.g., guarantees issued and leverage achieved). Tracking and analysis of 
the  Fund’s  outputs,  and  whether  they  are  leading  to  the  intended  outcomes,  is  critical  to 
determine how, why and to what extent the CGS’s design and operations are fulfilling the Fund’s 
intended objectives. The M&E framework is meant to be results-driven, with clearly identified 
and defined key performance indicators (KPIs). If possible, technology-enabled methods shall be 
used to collect, analyse and report data in order to minimize costs and ensure timely delivery of 
information.  
Figure 5: CGS Results Framework 
TIER 1: SYSTEMIC CONTEXT 
Tracks improvements to the broader Kenya MSME 
sector and Kenya economy 
MSME Sector 
TIER 2: BENEFICIARY CONTEXT 
Measures 
results 
beneficiaries (MSME borrowers) 
attributable  directly 
to 
MSME Borrowers 
TIER 3: INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT 
Measures  operational  performance  at 
institutional level 
the 
Customer Service 
Talent Management 
Financial Sustainability 
Process Efficiency 
The  M&E  framework  for  the  CGS  is  comprised  of  three  tiers  with  the  goal  of  monitoring 
performance  by  establishing  baseline  and  target  values  against  which  progress  can  be 
measured.  In  this  framework,  the  institutional  context  (operational  performance)  drives  the 
beneficiary context (results to MSME borrowers), which ultimately impacts the MSME sector at 
the systemic level. This approach ensures analysis of the causal linkages between inputs, outputs 
and  outcomes  over  time.  The  Fund’s  strategic  objectives  are  meant  to  inform  the  key 
performance indicators (KPIs), which are designed to be realistic translations of the Fund’s overall 
vision and mission. Performance indicators should be SMART (specific, measurable, achievable, 
relevant  and  time-bound),  thus  allowing  the  Fund  to  objectively  monitor  and  evaluate  its 
operations.  
25 
PART III. GOVERNANCE & STAFFING 
1.  KEY CONSIDERATIONS 
1.1.  Guiding Principles 
- 
Institutional  Framework  and  Governance:  Trust  is  a  key  determinant  of  success.  PFIs, 
consisting of banks and other eligible FIs, must be able to trust that the CGS will deliver 
on  its  promises.  This  trust  in  turn  usually  depends  on  (i)  the  extent  to  which  the  PFIs 
perceive the CGS to be independent, autonomous, and free from interference; and (ii) 
the  financial  viability  of the  CGS  in terms of  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity to  pay  out. 
Therefore, the CGS must be considered financially sound and financially sustainable (i.e. 
fees charged by the CGS provide income sufficient to ensure its sustainability) if the goal 
is  to  continue  providing  guarantees  going  forward.  The  goal  of  this  scheme  is  to  put 
money into the business community as quickly and responsibly as possible. Therefore, it 
is not designed to be sustainable. With a capital contribution of Kshs. 5 billion the scheme 
can  support  up  to  Kshs.  20  billion  in  total  credit  facility  losses.  If  additional  funding  is 
obtained in future months, it may be appropriate to revisit the sustainability issue, but it 
is  likely  that  substantial  changes  will  have  to  be  made  to  the  scheme  to  reach 
sustainability.  
-  Strength and commitment from PFIs: For an ongoing scheme, only PFIs that meet and 
continue to live up to a set of strict minimum criteria for eligibility should be allowed to 
use  the  CGS.  These  criteria  will  look  at  the  financial  soundness  including  performance 
metrics  such  as  the  level  of  NPLs,  profitability,  etc.  Strict  criteria  will  help  ensure 
sustainability: if poorly run FIs are allowed to participate there is a risk that CGS capital 
adequacy  could  falter  and  perceived  higher  risk  from  strong  FIs  reducing  market 
confidence.  
-  Need to avoid Moral Hazard: A major risk faced by risk-sharing facilities is “moral hazard”. 
Indeed,  the  existence  of  the  risk  sharing  may  weaken  the  will  and  commitment  of 
borrowers to repay and the commitment of PFIs to vigorously collect payment when they 
know that the guarantee will reimburse a substantial part of the loss incurred. Similarly, 
the PFIs may also have incentives to submit only “problem credit facilities” to the facility 
or credit facilities, which they would have financed even without the guarantee, thereby 
limiting  the  additionality  of  the  facility  from  a  policy  perspective.  The  CGS  must  be 
carefully designed to address this risk. By requiring lenders to submit any credit facility 
that meets the criteria for a guarantee, the scheme will guarantee the cross section of 
risks  taken  by  the  bank.  The  fully  creditworthy  credit  facilities  and  slightly  less 
creditworthy credit facilities will be in the same portfolio. Using a portfolio guarantee with 
a  registration  feature  does  not  require  that  the  borrower  be  informed  that  the  credit 
facility is guaranteed, reducing the possibility of moral hazard on the part of the borrower.  
26 
-  Simplified, quick, and efficient application and claims payout processes: It is critically 
important  for  the  credibility  and  uptake  of  risk-sharing  facilities  that  credit  facility 
applications are processed expeditiously. Long processing times typically lead to loss of 
interest  by PFIs  as  well as  borrowers.  Payouts  should be  made promptly after a  credit 
facility  has  defaulted  once  all  the  requirements  are  met.  In  the  interest  of  time,  the 
scheme  will  establish  manual  structures  and  process  guarantee  claims  as  quickly  as 
possible. Encouraging the PFIs to ensure that credit facility files are kept up to date and 
include all of the items listed above that are necessary for a claims payment will speed 
the claims process.  
27 
2.  OVERALL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE 
 A  dedicated  program  steering  committee  will  oversee  the  CGS  governance.  This  structure 
ensures appropriate checks and balances and ensure that lending decisions are made following 
the best professional standards.  
The  operating  model  shall  be  highly  simplified  and  automated,  limiting  the  staffing 
requirements  and  enabling  optimal  process performances.  With  adequate  automation  level 
the CGS staffing can be maintained at 8 resources, consisting of a project director, a finance 
manager, two (2) credit officers, two (2) risk officers, one (1) monitoring and evaluation officer, 
and  an  administrative  assistant.  The  Program  Director  will  report  to  the  program  steering 
committee which will oversee the high-level strategic issues such as priority sector, risk tolerance 
etc.  
The roles will be distributed as follows: 
a.  Program Director: responsible for the day to day operations of the CGS. He/she will establish 
and run the office, hire junior staff, implement procedures for operations, and take any other 
steps necessary to meet the mission of the CGS. 
b.  Credit officer: Process new applications, perform financial due diligence, interact with PFIs in 
case of issues on the application  
c.  Risk Officer: Conduct credit facility audit, Monitor and assess risk exposures at the portfolio, 
PFI, and sub-credit facility levels. Monitor CGS risks related to capital adequacy, liquidity, and 
financials. 
d.  Finance Manager: Responsible for financial reporting, payment processing, provisioning of 
CGS portfolio, financial planning and resource mobilization. 
e.  Monitoring  &  Evaluation  Officer:  Responsible  for  tracking  and  analyzing  the  Scheme’s 
outputs, and whether they are leading to the intended outcomes. It is critical to determine 
how,  why  and  to  what  extent  the  CGS’s  design  and  operations  are  fulfilling  the  Scheme’s 
intended objectives. 
28 
ANNEXES 
A1. LIST OF PROHIBITED BUSINESS ACTIVITIES 
The following business activities would be prohibited from obtaining CGS support: 
a.  Production or trade  in  any production  activity deemed  illegal under host  country  laws or 
international  conventions  and  agreements,  or  subject  to  international  bans,  such  as 
pharmaceuticals,  pesticides,  herbicides,  ozone  depleting  substances,  PCBs,  wildlife  or 
products regulated under Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) 
b.  Credit not in compliance with prudential regulations 
c.  Production or trade in weapons and munitions 
d.  Projects/businesses that violate workers’ rights 
e. 
f. 
Illegal activities 
Environmentally, socially and ethically damaging projects 
g.  Gambling 
h.  Drugs 
i. 
j. 
Production or trade in tobacco 
Production or trade in alcoholic beverages (excluding beer and wine) 
k.  Production or trade in radioactive materials (This does not apply to the purchase of medical 
equipment,  quality  control  (measurement)  equipment  and  any  equipment  where  the 
radioactive source is considered to be trivial and/or adequately shielded) 
l. 
Production or trade in unbonded asbestos fibres (This does not apply to purchase and use 
of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is less than 20%) 
m.  Drift net fishing in the marine environment using nets in excess of 2.5 km in length 
n.  Commercial logging operations for use in primary tropical moist forest 
o.  Production  or  trade  in  wood  or  other  forestry  products  other  than  from  sustainably 
managed forests 
p.  Production or activities involving harmful or exploitive forms of forced labour/harmful child 
labour 
q.  Production,  trade,  storage  or  transport  of  significant  volumes  of  hazardous  chemicals  or 
commercial  scale  usage  of  hazardous  chemicals  (Hazardous  chemicals  include  gasoline, 
kerosene and other petroleum products) 
r.  Production or activities that impinge on the lands owned or claimed under adjudication by 
indigenous Peoples, without full documented consent of such Peoples 
s.  Real-estate development companies and projects 
t.  Currency or securities trading 
29 
u.  Any other prohibited business as may be determined by the Cabinet Secretary for 
the National Treasury  and Planning 
A.2 SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT TEMPLATE 
A3. LIST OF OTHER OPERATIONAL TOOLS / DOCUMENTS REQUIRED FOR THE CGS 
Draft Compliance & Risk Management Manual, including:  
✓  Risk Analysis & Reporting procedures 
✓ 
 Internal control procedures  
Draft Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) Manual 
Draft Operational Forms  
Software  
✓  Software  can  be  built  in  a  modular  approach  with  initial  focus  on  credit  facility  application 
processing which can be ready within 2 weeks. 
✓  Other modules such as (i) PFI risk monitoring, and (ii) Claim processing modules can be added 
within 2 months   
30 
Appendix 2 to RK-FINFA PIM 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility 
RK-FINFA 
Mapping of Kenyan Rural Financial Institutions 
MAY 2021 
1 
1.  BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
1.  The agriculture sector (crop production, animal production, forestry and fisheries) 
is the mainstay of Kenya’s economy, contributing 34.1% of gross domestic product 
(GDP),  and  at  least  56%  of  the  total  labour  force  employed  in  the  country.  It  also 
accounts  for  up  to  65%  of  merchandise  exports.  Forestry  and  fishing  activities, 
including industry-related activities, accounted for 14.1%and 16.3% of this growth, 
respectively, in 20191. However, there is still a lot of scope for productivity increases 
in  the  sector  that  can  contribute  to  reduction  of  poverty  and  transformation  of  the 
economy.  There  is  untapped  potential  in  the  sector,  especially  in  productivity 
improvement and value addition in most of the value chains2 (VC). Most of the value 
chains  are  characterised  by  low  yields,  variable  quality,  and  poor  market  linkages. 
While access to finance can help smallholder farmers address these challenges, the 
vast majority of smallholder farmers have difficulty obtaining appropriately structured 
financial services to meet their needs. 
2.  One of the critical challenges the sector faces is that of limited productivity and 
market  penetration.  Small-scale  producers’  profitability  is  also  impacted  by 
inadequate  access  to  financial  services.    Improving  access  to  financial  services 
continues to be a work in progress for small-scale farmers in Kenya. The Government 
of Kenya and many stakeholders in the financial services sector have taken initiatives 
to  improve  access  to  rural  and  agricultural  finance.  The  objective  of  the  proposed 
Rural  Kenya  Financial  Inclusion  Facility  (RK-FINFA)  Programme  is  geared  towards 
deepening access to financial services among farmers and rural sector stakeholders. 
3.  Smallholders  and  agricultural  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (agriSMES) 
typically require: (i) short-term financing for the purchase of inputs and production 
activities  during  the  farming  season  and  for  harvesting  (3–6  months);  and  (ii) 
medium- to long-term financing for equipment, purchase of assets, farm improvement 
and  renovation/rehabilitation  of  equipment  (1–5  years).  Additionally,  smallholder 
farmer producer groups typically require: (iii) short-term trade credit (up to one year) 
to  purchase  products  from  group  members;  and  (iv)  long-term  financing  for 
equipment and infrastructure.  
4.  Smallholders  who  operate  in  tight  value  chains  –  coffee,  tea,  dairy,  and  to  a 
smaller  extent  rice  and  horticulture  –  are  characterised  by  strong,  consistent 
relationships  with  buyers;  they  often  have  access  to  finance,  inputs,  agronomic 
training,  and  other  support  from  the  buyers  they  work  with.  However,  most  other 
smallholders  lack  these  strong  relationships  with  buyers  and  the  support  that 
accompanies them. These farmers primarily grow staple crops, practise small-scale 
1 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, Economic Survey, 2020 
2  Value  chain  –  the  set  of  actors  (private,  public,  and  including  service  providers)  and  the 
sequence of value-adding activities involved in bringing a product from production to the final 
consumer. In agriculture they can be thought of as a ‘farm to fork’ set of processes and flows 
(Miller and da Silva, 2007). 
2 
horticulture (fruits and vegetables), produce cereals, root crops and nuts and operate 
on small land holdings, and are mainly subsistence in nature. They consume most of 
their  produce  and  sell  the  small  marketable  surplus  at  the  local  market  or  nearest 
urban centre. 
5.  Smallholder  producers  have  unique  financial  needs. Their  household  cash  flows 
are often cyclical – requiring cash for inputs and other farming needs (such as labour) 
during  the  planting,  weeding,  or  harvesting  season.  They  are  also  required  to  pay 
other relatively large household expenses, such as school fees, medical (hospital) bills, 
at points in the year when household liquidity is particularly low. Yet, they often do 
not earn the income required to repay these loans until several months later, usually 
after  the  harvest.  This  cyclical  nature  of  financing  needs  and  repayment  abilities 
conflicts with traditional commercial banks, or microfinance or group saving and loan 
models that are structured around regular repayment schedules.  
6.  On  the  supply  side,  offering  financial  services  to  the  rural  and  agricultural 
stakeholders  carries  additional  risks  and  is  often  challenging.  Therefore,  financial 
institutions  (FIs)  or  financial  service  providers  (FSPs)  need  to  make  well-informed 
decisions because most small-scale farmers lack the credit history and collateral that 
traditionally inform financial service provision assessments.  
7.  Moreover,  poor  husbandry  practices,  adverse  weather,  for  example,  flooding, 
drought conditions and climate change, create significant risks for both smallholders 
and finance providers. Many smallholders have limited knowledge of agronomic best 
practices  and  some  lack  access  to  high  quality  inputs  –  both  of  these  factors  can 
contribute to low yields and revenue. Finally, most smallholders’ lack of strong and 
consistent  relationships  with  buyers  contributes  to  price  risk  when  selling  their 
surplus,  which  can  further  jeopardise  their  credit  repayment  ability.  Therefore, 
delivering financial products and services to small-scale farmers in rural areas is both 
challenging and costly to FSPs.  
Situational analysis: General landscape/overview of the types of FIs, their 
numbers, and location 
8.  This is a situational report on landscaping/mapping/scoping of potential financial 
institutions (FIs) that could participate in the proposed Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion 
Facility  (RK-FINFA)  Programme  being  prepared  and  to  be  jointly  financed  by  the 
Government of Kenya (GoK) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD). The report is an overview of the  financial  landscape  in  Kenya and the role 
that  financial  institutions  can  play  to  unlock  the  growth  potential  in  enhancing 
agricultural productivity, and improving livelihoods and food security in the country 
and ultimately in the agriculture and rural sector.   
9.  Kenya  has  a  stable  and  diversified  financial  sector,  comprising  42  banking 
institutions  (41  commercial  banks  and  1  mortgage  finance  company),  14 
microfinance  banks  (MFBs),  many  non-deposit-taking  or  credit-only  microfinance 
3 
institutions3  (MFIs),  more  than  5,000  savings  and  credit  cooperative  societies 
(Saccos), out of which 173 are deposit-talking Saccos4. The MFIs are classified into: 
(i)  microfinance  banks,  which  are  deposit-taking  and  which  are  regulated  by  the 
Central Bank of Kenya; and (ii) the non-deposit-taking/credit-only MFIs, which lend 
their own funds. 
10. Since the first deposit-taking microfinance bank (MFB) was licensed in 2009, the 
number of MFBs has increased to 14, with total assets of about KES 16.5 billion and 
deposits  of  approximately  KES  40.2  billion  as  at  December  2018.  The  credit-only 
MFBs are non-regulated and there is growing concern in the country on their non-
regulated  operations,  particularly  in  relation  to  consumer  protection  and  market 
conduct.  These  concerns  are  amplified  by  the  rapid  proliferation  of  digital  lenders, 
most of which exhibit credit-only practices. Therefore, there have been proposals that 
these credit-only institutions need to be more closely regulated. 
11. The  financial  inclusion  landscape  in  the  country  has  undergone  a  major 
transformation since 20065, with formal financial inclusion reaching 82.9% in 2019 
from 26.7% in 2006, while complete exclusion has narrowed to 11% from 41.3% in 
2006. In addition, the disparities in financial access between rich and poor, men and 
women, and rural and urban areas have also declined remarkably. The key drivers of 
these  changes  include  the  growth  of  mobile  money,  government  initiatives  and 
support, and developments in information and communications technology (ICT). It 
is  important  to  note  that  the  significant  reduction  in  the  proportion  of  the  adult 
population totally excluded from financial services and products is due to the policies, 
strategies  and  reforms  undertaken  by  the  government,  as  well  as  the  widespread 
adoption of digital technology and innovations by financial sector players. These have 
helped  in  deepening  financial  inclusion  by  enabling  the  population  to  overcome 
infrastructural constraints to access, especially in rural areas. 
12. The performance of commercial banks in the country remained stable in 2019. 
Their  income  remained  broadly  unchanged  from  2018,  with  the  rate  of  growth 
marginally  rising  to  5.2%  in  2019  compared  to  4.8%  in  2018.  The  overall  income 
growth in the banking sector, however, masks the diversity evident across individual 
banking institutions. Among big and small banks, income grew at 9.6% and 10.9%, 
respectively,  while  among  medium  banks,  it  contracted  by  14.6%.  However,  non-
performing loans (NPLs), as a share of gross loans, remains high, still at double-digit 
levels. By the end of 2019, NPLs as a share of gross loans stood at 12.6% (similar to 
the 12.7% recorded in 2018.6  
13. The repeal of capping of interest rates in November 2019 was expected to be a 
boost to the economy because a free market – where interest rates are set by the 
3 AMFI Report, 2017 
4 Annual Supervision Report, 2019 
5 2019 FinAccess Household Survey 
6 Kenya Bankers Association, State of the Banking Industry Report, 2020 
4 
forces of demand and supply coupled with increased competition among commercial 
banks and among non-bank financial institutions for funding – was expected to set a 
competitive  environment  with  increased  access  to  credit  by  borrowers  and  higher 
economic growth prospects.  
14. Unfortunately, a few months after the repeal of interest rate caps were lifted and 
as  financial  sectors  and  their  stakeholders  were  adjusting  to  the  new  interest  rate 
regime,  the  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19)  pandemic  struck.  In  2019,  Kenya’s 
economic  growth  averaged 5.7  %, placing  Kenya  as  one  of  the  fastest  growing 
economies in sub-Saharan Africa, with a stable macroeconomic environment, positive 
investor confidence and a resilient services sector. The economy had been hit hard 
by supply and demand shocks on external and domestic fronts, which interrupted its 
recent  broad-based  growth  path. Apart  from  the  Covid-19  pandemic,  the  locust 
invasion,  which  started  early  in  2020,  had  caused  a  scare  in  agriculture  in  the 
country,  causing  negative  impacts  on  the  food  security  situation  and  growth  of 
the agriculture sector. Real GDP growth was projected to decelerate from an annual 
average of 5.7 % (2015-2019) to around 0 % in 2020. However, it has taken longer 
than expected to bring the Covid-19 pandemic under control. In fact, the country is 
in  its third wave of the pandemic, which  seems to be more virulent and  infectious 
than the previous ones, and the government locked down 5 counties, amongst them 
Nairobi County, in March). GDP had contracted by 1.0% in 2020, and the country has 
witnessed a delay in the projected recovery to 5.2% growth in 2021. Internationally, 
the  pandemic  has  caused  a  protracted  global  recession,  which  has  undermined 
Kenya’s  export,  tourism  and  remittance  inflows.  Further  tightening  of COVID-
19 health  response  measures  and  weather-related  shocks  have  also  disrupted 
domestic economic activity, leading to fiscal slippages.7  
2.  DETAILED ANALYSIS OF A SPECIFIC CATEGORY OF FIs 
a) 
Savings and credit cooperative societies  
15. Co-operatives or cooperative societies have the potential to transform much of 
rural  Kenya  in  ways  that  unorganised  farmers  supplying  unorganised  markets  will 
never  be  able  to  replicate.  Around  the  world  in  countries  ranging  from  the  United 
States,  the  Scandinavian  countries,  Israel  and  much  of  Asia,  including  India  and 
China, cooperatives have been able to lead in the transformation of rural livelihoods.  
16. In Kenya cooperatives are classified into two broad categories: financial and non-
financial  cooperatives.  Non-financial  cooperatives  play  a  facilitating  role  in  the 
business  chain  and  do  not  provide  direct  financial  services.  They  are  found  across 
various  sectors  of  the  economy  and  include  marketing  cooperatives,  producer 
cooperatives,  consumer  cooperatives  and  transport  cooperatives,  among  others. 
Financial cooperatives are also referred to as savings and credit cooperative societies 
7 Kenya World Bank Update, July  2020 
5 
(Saccos).  The  main  objective  of  Saccos  is  to  meet  the  financial  needs  of  their 
membership  by  mobilising  savings  and  granting  loans  to  the  members.  Members 
achieve  this  objective  by  pooling  their  savings  and  advancing  credit,  using  their 
deposits as collateral. 
17.  In  Kenya  Saccos  are  classified  into  either  deposit-taking  (DT-taking)  or  non-
deposit-taking (non-DT-taking) Saccos. Non-deposit-taking Saccos accept long-term 
deposits,  which  are  used  as  collateral  that  members  use  to  borrow  loans  against. 
These deposits cannot be withdrawn unless a member leaves the Sacco altogether. 
Deposit-taking Saccos, in contrast, perform bank-like functions and accept demand 
deposits  that  can  be  withdrawn  from  time  to  time  and  used  to  provide  credit  to 
members. It is because of this intermediation, and the systemic risks they pose in 
the  market,  that  deposit-taking  Saccos  are  regulated  prudentially  by  the  Sacco 
Societies Regulatory Authority (SASRA).  
i)  Deposit-Taking Saccos  
18. The  Kenya  financial  services  sector  is  becoming  increasingly  competitive  and 
technologically sophisticated. It has multiple providers and stakeholders - commercial 
banks,  MFIs,  Saccos  and  digital  (mobile  money  transfer  and  lenders).  There  were 
172 licensed DT-Saccos operating in the country in 2019. This cluster of Saccos have 
shown resilience and stability in the provision of financial services in the midst of stiff 
completion  from  other  types  of  financial  service  providers  (FSPs).  In  spite  of 
competition, DT-Saccos continued to show great depth of resilience and stability, as 
evidenced by their double-digit growth rate in all the key parameters or metrics of 
performance  in  2019.  Their  total  assets  increased  by  12.4%  to  KES  556.7  billion, 
while the total deposits increased by 11.27% to KES 380.4 billion8. 
19. In  addition,  DT-Saccos  have  continued  to  be  stable  and  sound  when  assessed 
against capital adequacy (core capital), with their core capital having grown from KES 
54.94 billion in 2016 to KES 79.20 billion in 2019. In terms of liquidity, only nine DT-
Saccos had a liquidity ratio of less than the prescribed 15%, with the remaining 163 
DT-Saccos  recording  liquidity  rations  of  well  above  that  15%  threshold.  This  is  an 
improvement from the 25 DT-Saccos that were unable to meet the liquidity threshold 
in 2018.   
20. The  performance  of  DT-Saccos  continued  to  grow,  resulting  in  an  increase  in 
gross  loans  by  12.1%  to  KES  419.6  billion,  while  net  loans  and  credit  advances 
constituted 71.9% of the total assets in 2019, and which was largely financed by the 
non-withdrawable deposit portfolio of the Saccos. On the other hand, deposits grew 
by 11.3% to KES 380.4 billion in 2019. Indeed, the DT-Saccos’ total assets share of 
the national nominal GDP was 5.6% in 2018, while it was projected that this share 
8 SACCO Supervision Annual Report, 2019 
6 
of  the  national  nominal  GDP  will  increase  to  about  5.72%  in  2019,  further 
underscoring the importance of DT-Saccos in the economy9. 
21. A  comparison  of  performance,  risk  assessment  and  compliance  of  DT-Saccos 
indicates that they are categorised into three groups: (i) the large-tiered banks with 
assets in excess of KES 5 billion; (ii) medium-tiered Saccos whose total assets are 
between KES 1 billion and KES 5 billion; and (iii) DT-Saccos whose total assets are 
less  than  the  KES  1  billion  threshold.  In  2019,  31  DT-Saccos  in  the  large-tiered 
Saccos had total assets worth KES 390.29 billion (70.11% of the total assets portfolio 
for  DT-taking  Saccos),  while  the  medium-tiered  Saccos  had  58  Saccos  controlling 
KES 135.70 billion worth of assets and had a market share of 24.38%. The small-
tiered Saccos category had 83 Saccos, which controlled only KES 30.72 billion worth 
of assets and a market of a meagre 5.52%. 
22. It is instructive to note that the market share of total assets of the large-tiered 
Saccos  increased  by  6.55%,  from  65.8%  in  2018  to  70.11%  in  2019,  while  the 
medium-tiered category had its market share reduced by about 11%, from 27.37% 
in 2018 to 24.38% in 2019 and the small-tiered category suffered the largest decline 
in market share of 19.2%, from 6.83% in 2018 to 5.52% in 2019. 
23. The  Sacco  Societies  Regulatory  Authority  (SASRA),  which  is  the  regulator  for 
these Sacco groups, places DT-Saccos into three categories in terms of total deposits:  
large-tier Saccos comprise those with deposits of more than KES 5 billion; medium-
tier Saccos are those with total deposits of between KES 1 billion and KES 5 billion; 
and small-tier Saccos are those with less than KES 1 billion of total deposits. As was 
the case with total assets, the large–tier Saccos increased in number from 13 to 20 
and controlled KES 224.75 billion worth of deposits and a market share of 59.08%, 
while medium-tier Saccos had their numbers reduce from 54 to 53, and controlled 
assets worth KES 123.73 billion and a market share of 32.52%. The small-tier Saccos 
had  their  numbers  reduce  from  107  to  99,  and  controlled  KES  31.96  billion  and  a 
market share of a paltry 8.4%.  
24. As was the case with total assets, the largest DT-Saccos saw their market share 
increase  by  8.1%  from  54.64%  in  2018  to  59.08%  in  2019,  while  the  middle- 
(second)  tiered  Saccos  saw  a  8.0%  decrease  in  their  market,  from  35.35%  to 
32.52%. The third-tier Saccos saw an erosion of their market share of 16.1%, from 
10.01% to 8.4% during the same period. 
in  Kenya  are 
founded/formed  along  certain  “common  bond” 
25. Saccos 
characteristics,  such  as  occupation,  profession,  industry,  geographical  area  of 
operations, among others. They can be grouped into five main categories based on 
this classification or clustering: (i); government employee-based Saccos; (ii) teacher-
based Saccos; (iii) farmer-based (coffee, tea, dairy, sugar, cotton, horticulture, etc.) 
Saccos; (iv) private sector employee-based Saccos; and (v) community-based (social 
9 Kenya Financial Sector Stability Report, 2018 
7 
association or membership) Saccos. Many DT-Saccos have, in the last decade or so, 
opened  their  common  bond  to  membership  of  a  more  diverse  group  of  people. 
However,  the  bulk  of  the  DT-Sacco  membership  is  still  drawn  from  the  original 
common bond members. This categorisation has been retained by the regulator for 
the purposes of analysis and understanding the general and individual performance 
of  Saccos  in  each  cluster  (even  when  the  composition  of  membership  may  have 
changed significantly). This is important for purposes of assessing the performance 
of  an  individual  Sacco  and  the  general  performance  of  a  cluster  of  Saccos.  This 
classification/clustering  also  assists  in  the  analysis  and  identification  of  risks 
associated  with  a  particular  cluster  of  DT-Saccos,  as  well  as  the  development  of 
mitigation strategies for such risks.  
26. The government is interested in having a properly regulated Sacco sub-sector in 
the  country.    SASRA  continues  to  do  a  good  job  in  licensing,  supervising  and 
regulating  the  DT-Saccos.  In  order  to  further  efforts  to  fight  corruption,  reduce 
financial  malpractices  and  improve  the  governance  of  the  Sacco  sub-sector,  the 
government has proposed several measures. This is in tandem with the government’s 
objective  of  having  a  better  legal  and  regulatory  regime  for  this  section  of  the 
financial  services  sector.  There  are  several  measures  that  have  been  proposed 
towards this end. One of the measures is the development of new rules/regulations 
to bring on board non-DT Saccos under SASRA supervision. The regulations specified 
a number of non-deposit-taking back office saving activity (BOSA) businesses as non-
deposit taking SACCOs as defined by Section 3(2) of the SACCO Societies Act. These 
are  the  non-deposit-taking  businesses,  popularly  known  as  Back  Office  Service 
Activity (BOSA), in which the total non-withdrawable deposits from members is equal 
to or KES 100 million, BOSA in which the SACCO Society mobilises membership and 
subscription to its share capital through digital or other electronic payment platforms 
and  BOSA  in  which  the  Sacco  mobilises  membership  and  subscription  to  its  share 
capital from persons who are ordinarily resident outside the country. The potential 
Saccos have been given six months to comply (up to 30th June, 2021), at which time 
SASRA will start applying the regulations. Already there are about 45 non-DT-Saccos 
that have shown interest by supplying pre-licensing data and information. However, 
none  have  formally  made  the  application.  According  to  SASRA,  there  are 
approximately 300 non-DT-Saccos that could potentially be brought under SASRA’s 
purview, according to their unaudited returns. 
27. The second new measure proposed is the planned Sacco Central Liquidity Facility 
(CLF). It will facilitate cooperation amongst Saccos through pooling of liquidity and 
connected services to enhance the financial soundness and competitiveness of the 
Saccos as deposit-taking institutions. The guidelines and polices on bringing Saccos 
together have already been developed. It is worth noting that over 50 Saccos have 
already  shown  interest  in  participating  in  the  facility  and  are  working  with  the 
regulator on this initiative. They have already developed by-laws to govern the CLF 
and  shared  services  business  amongst  themselves.  A  Cabinet  Memorandum  has 
already been prepared for ministerial consideration and processing. The Office of the 
Attorney General, in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries 
8 
and Cooperatives (State Department of Cooperatives) will then prepare a draft legal 
framework to be tabled in Parliament to amend the current Co-operative Societies 
and the Sacco Societies Act. 
Farmer-based DT–Saccos 
28. There are 49 farmer-based DT-Saccos, 10 of which account for slightly more than 
28%  of  the  current  172  DT-saccos  that  were  licensed  in  2019.  While  the  farmer-
based DT-Saccos account for 47.8% of total DT-taking Saccos’ membership (about 
2.25 million members), they only had a market share of 10.2% of total assets and 
9.9%  of  total  deposits  in  2019.  A  critical  point  to  note  is  that  there  are  many 
employee-based  Saccos  that  provide  credit  facilities  to  farmers  and  other  rural 
enterprises. SASRA is interested in understanding the sectoral performance of Saccos 
and has commissioned work to this extent.  
29. When using total assets and total deposits as parameters, teacher-based- Saccos 
continue  to  be  the  best  performing.  Their  market  share  in  total  deposits  and  total 
assets increased by 2.84%,  from 34.84%  in 2018 to  35.82%  in 2019 and 2.11%, 
from 35.93% in 2018 to 36.69% in 2019, respectively. Government-employee DT-
Saccos recorded a marginal decrease of 0.78%, from a market share of 38.37% in 
2018 to 38.07% in 2019, while the total deposits saw a marginal decline in market 
share of 0.31%, from 37.67% in 2018 to 37.55% in 2019.  On the other hand, the 
market share of farmer-based Saccos declined by 2.18%, from 10.11% in 2018 to 
9.89% in 2019.  On its part, the market share of total assets for the same category 
of Saccos declined by 2%, from 10.39% in 2018 to 10.19% in 2019.   
30. The  market  share  of  total  deposits  for  private  sector  employee  Saccos  saw  a 
decline 0f 4.11%, from 10.21% in in 2018 to 9.79% in 2019, while the market share 
of total assets saw a 4.41% decrease from 9.51% in 2018 to 9.09% in 2019. Lastly, 
the market share of community-based Saccos decreased by a marginal 0.78% and 
their total assets also saw a small decline of 0.31%, from 7.65% in 2018 to 6.48% 
in 2019.  
31. The performance of Saccos is quite often dependent on the performance of the 
sector, industry, profession, or occupation from which the members are drawn.  The 
picture that emerges from the above analysis is that the best-performing Saccos in 
terms  of  assets  and  deposits  are  teacher-based  Saccos,  followed  closely  by  the 
government  employee-based  ones.  The  best  performing  categories  of  Saccos  are 
those that draw their membership from public teachers and government employees, 
whose pay, wages and allowances have risen in the last few years. Their pay, wages 
and allowances are not so intricately tied to the performance of the sector from which 
the Sacco members are drawn, or to the industry where they work, or even to the 
economy as a whole. This is not the case for Saccos that draw their members from 
farmers, businesses and communities, whose performance is directly affected by the 
10 See attached list at the Annex II 
9 
performance  of  their  particular  sector  and  by  the  performance  of  the  economy 
generally.   
32. The case of farmer-based Saccos is quite challenging given that, according to the 
Sacco  Demographic  Survey  2019  conducted  by  SASRA,  47.81%  of  the  total 
membership  of  DT-Saccos  is  from  farmer-based  Saccos.  Teacher-based  and 
government  employee-based  Saccos  had  16.32%  and  16.62%  share  of  the 
membership of DT-Saccos respectively, while the share of the membership of private 
sector employee-based and community-based Saccos was 9.86% and 9.38% of the 
membership of DT-Saccos, respectively.  
33. For farmer-based Saccos, matters were made worse by the fact that the country 
experienced a mixed weather phenomenon, characterised by drought during the first 
half  of  the  year,  followed  by  high  rainfall  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  This 
culminated  in  reduced  production  of  selected  crops  and  pasture  for  livestock. 
Consequently, the agriculture sector’s performance decelerated from 6.1% in 2018 
to 3.6% in 2019. The value of marketed production at current prices contracted by 
6.5%, from KES 498.3 billion in 2018 to KES 465.7 billion in 2019.  This could buttress 
poor performance of the farmer-based case. The situation was certainly made worse 
in 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic shock. 
34. However, not all is rosy for the rest of the DT-Saccos. The efficient and effective 
operations  of  many  DT-Saccos  is  continuously  being  undermined  by  the  perennial 
failure by various employer  institutions to promptly remit the  Sacco deductions by 
employers  to  respective  Saccos  on  behalf  of  the  depositors/employees.  There  has 
been  a  drastic  increase  of  37.4  %  in  the  non-remitted  deductions  due  to  Saccos 
amounting to KES 3.86 billion for the period up to September 2019, from KES 2.81 
billion for the period ending in September 2018. The regulator is greatly concerned 
that  over  74%  of  the  total  non-remitted  deductions  in  2019  were  owed  by  public 
universities and tertiary colleges, yet these institutions serve only 5 key DT-Saccos 
with huge membership. It is therefore apparent that the financial operations, service 
delivery,  soundness  and  sustainability  of  these  f5  DT-Saccos,  will  continue  to  be 
hampered in the immediate to short term, unless the trend is drastically changed. If 
this matter is not sorted out and the non-remitted amounts continue to accumulate, 
it can cause serious challenges to the confidence of members in the Sacco sub-sector 
and the financial services sector in the country.  
35. While  the  performance  and  operations  of  DT-taking  Saccos,  have,  to  a  large 
extent, been desirable, they still face challenges. According to the Supervisory Report 
(2019), their performance is being undermined  by the perennial failure by various 
employer-institutions  to  promptly  remit  employee  deductions.  The  non-remitted 
amounts have been increasing on an annual basis from KES 2.81 billion for the period 
ending  in  September  2018  to  KES  3.86  billion  (an  increase  of  37.4%).  To  make 
matters worse, over 74% of the total non-remitted amounts in 2019 was owed by 
public universities and tertiary colleges, yet these employer-institutions serve five 5 
key  DT-Saccos  with  huge  membership,  which  greatly  affects  the  capitalisation  of 
10 
those  Saccos  and  their  capacity  to  serve  their  members.  Indeed  the  financial 
operations, service delivery, soundness and sustainability of the affected DT-Saccos, 
will  continue  to  be  hampered  in  the  immediate  to  short  term,  unless  the  trend  is 
drastically changed.  
36. The  government  has  directed  the  institutions  and  agencies  to  prioritise  the 
budgeting for, and settlement of, non-remitted Sacco deductions and it is hoped the 
most  affected  institutions  and  agencies,  such  as  public  universities  and  tertiary 
colleges, shall comply with the directive, so as to reduce, if not to totally eliminate, 
the  perennial  menace  of  non-remitted  deductions  in  the  Sacco  sub-sector. 
Additionally,  SASRA  has  issued  an  advisory  note  to  Saccos  on  the  appropriate 
administrative  measures,  which  individual  Saccos  must  henceforth  put  in  place  in 
order  to  reduce  these  perennial  incidences  of  default  in  remittances  of  Sacco 
deductions.  
37. An analysis of the performance of the DT-Saccos based on the original fields of 
membership and common bonds from where they draw a substantial portion of their 
membership  shows that the teacher-based DT-Saccos registered marginal increase 
in their respective market share of the total assets and total deposits within the DT-
Saccos  system.  The  teachers-based  DT-Saccos  total  asset  market  share  increased 
from 35.93% in 2018 to 36.69% in 2019, while the total deposits share increased 
from 34.83%  in  2018 to 35.82%  in 2019.  It is also  important to observe that the 
increase in the market share for teacher-based DT-Saccos was registered despite the 
fact  that  the  number  of  DT-Saccos  within  the  system  remained  the  same,  at  43 
institutions, between 2018 and 2019. 
11 
Table 1: Performance of clusters of DT-Saccos based on original area 
of membership (common bonds)  
Cluster  per 
original 
common 
of 
bond 
membership  
No.  of  DT- 
Saccos in the 
cluster  
% of Total Assets   Total  Deposits 
Total 
(billions)  
% 
of 
Deposits  
(billions)  
Assets 
Total 
2018   2019   2018   2019  
2018  
2019  
2018   2019   2018  
2019  
Government 
employee-
based  DT- 
Saccos  
Teacher- 
based  DT- 
Saccos  
Farmer- 
based  DT- 
Saccos  
Private 
sector- 
based  DT- 
Saccos  
Community 
based  DT- 
Saccos  
35  
36  
186.57   209.07   37.67%  
37.55%  
131.18   144.83   38.37%  
38.07%  
43  
43  
177.92   204.25   35.93%  
36.69%  
119.10   136.27   34.83%  
35.82%  
50  
49  
51.44  
56.713   10.39%  
10.19%  
34.57  
37.63  
10.11%  
9.89%  
25  
24  
47.11  
50.612   9.51%  
9.09%  
34.90  
37.26  
10.21%  
9.79%  
21  
20  
32.21  
36.072   6.50%  
6.48%  
22.17  
24.45  
6.48%  
6.43%  
Total 
174  
172  
495.25   556.71   100.00%   100.00%   341.92   380.44   100.00%   100.00%  
Source: Annual Sacco Supervision Report, 2019  
38. In order to further deepen the regulatory regime and strengthen the supervision 
of Saccos, the government in July 2019 issued a policy directive for the establishment 
of  a  Sacco  Societies  Fraud  Investigations  Unit  (SSFIU)  to  be  domiciled  within  the 
authority. The objective is to fight corruption and financial malpractices in the Sacco 
sub-sector. Besides the existing prudential regulatory framework, the establishment 
and operationalisation of SSFIU for the Sacco sub-sector will go a long way in instilling 
integrity, accountability, transparency and good governance in the sub-sector.  
39. The absence of a functional central liquidity facility for Saccos has for long been 
identified as the missing financial infrastructural cog in the evolution of the Kenya’s 
Sacco sub-sector, and whose absence has largely contributed to the inefficiencies of 
Saccos, particularly in the areas of ease of accessibility of their financial services as 
well as mobilisation of deposits.  
12 
40. In order to address this challenge and to further deepen the integration of DT-
Saccos  into  the  financial  system,  the  government  in  2019  took  steps  towards  the 
establishment of a central liquidity facility for Saccos in Kenya, which will have the 
effect of integrating DT-Saccos in to the national payment system infrastructure.  The 
central liquidity facility for Saccos, and associated infrastructural components, such 
as  a  shared  technological  services  platform,  and  access  to  the  national  payments 
services, will greatly improve the capacity of DT-Saccos to efficiently mobilise, retain 
and intermediate savings and deposits from their membership.  The facility will see 
Saccos lending to one another and many of the DT-Saccos have shown interest in 
joining it. 
ii)  Non-deposit-taking Saccos  
41. The  overriding  challenge  facing  the  cooperative  movement  is  to  reverse  the 
recent  decline  in  performance,  particularly  for  commodity-based  cooperatives. 
Following  the  liberalisation  of  the  cooperative  sub-sector  in  the  early  1990s,  and 
withdrawal  of  direct  government  intervention,  many  societies  found  themselves 
unprepared  to  cope  with  the  challenges  of  a  liberalised  market  economy.  Poor 
management  systems, 
in  financial  management  skills, 
precipitated chronic losses and heavy indebtedness. Other factors included a weak 
capital base due to societies’ inability to mobilise adequate resources for investment 
and low members’ equity occasioned by lack of guaranteed returns and poor credit 
management. 
including  deficiency 
42. In  order  to  further  improve  the  prudence  governance  of  all  Saccos,  the 
government  has  continued  to  introduce  reforms  in  the  Sacco  sub-sector.  In  2020, 
the Minister for Agriculture. Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives gazetted the Sacco 
Societies  (Non  Deposit-Taking  Business)  Regulations,  2020.  The  regulations 
prescribe  the  prudential  and  market  conduct  measures  to  be  complied  with  by  all 
Saccos undertaking specified non-deposit-taking business, popularly known as Back 
Office Service Activity (BOSA), which took effect on 1st January 2021. Specifically, 
they regulations specify that all non-DT-Saccos in which the total non-withdrawable 
deposits from members is at least KES 100 million, non-DT-Saccos that mobilise their 
membership and subscription through digital or other electronic payment platforms, 
and non-DT-Saccos who mobilise membership and subscription from Kenyans living 
outside the country (popularly referred to as Diaspora Saccos), will be regulated by 
SASRA. This class of non DT-Saccos must comply with these regulations within six 
months  of  the  commencement  of  the  regulations  2020,  that  is,  on  or  before  30th 
June,  2021.  The  regulation  requires  that  the  Saccos  put  in  place  appropriate 
institutional measures and infrastructure, a management information system (MIS) 
for  the  purpose  of  performing  and  acting  on  all  transactions  and  providing  the 
minimum  requirements  by  SASRA,      appropriate  risk  management  policies  and 
internal  control  systems,  and  suitable  organisation,  governance  and  management 
structures.  
13 
43. The government has moved further to regulate the Saccos by tabling the Draft 
Cooperative Development Policy whose ultimate objective is to bring all the financial 
cooperatives/Saccos  under  the  regulation  of  SASRA.  Except  for  the  deposit-taking 
and non-deposit-takin, Saccos discussed above, which are regulated by SASRA, all 
the  other  classes  of  Saccos  are  regulated  by  the  Commissioner  for  Cooperative 
Development (CCD). The import of the draft policy is to expand the reach of SASRA 
to regulate all Saccos mainly as Saccos expand their services from back office to front 
office operations, in which case the role of SASRA will be brought to bear. The draft 
policy proposes the creation of a Cooperative Regulatory Authority for non-financial 
cooperatives.  
44. Smallholder  farmers  are  generally  poorly  organised,  lack  transparent  pricing, 
have  low  technical/husbandry  of  the  commodities  they  are  producing,  have  low 
financial  literacy  rates  and  have  a  limited  understanding  of  banking  requirements. 
Therefore,  it  would  be  imperative  to  acknowledge  the  situation  obtaining  in  the 
ground with respect to financial service provision. In some cases, FIs have to invest 
resources in capacity building of farmers in financial literacy or support the hiring of 
technical  extension  agents.  For  example,  Tower  Sacco  in  Nyandarua  County 
facilitated an agronomist to be part of the field team to ensure that the farmers who 
receive  financial  investments  knew  what  was  supposed  to  be  done  in  order  to 
optimise production, repay the loan and make a profit for themselves. 
45. Despite  the  challenges,  Saccos,  with  their  farmer-friendly  products,  are  still 
among  the  main  financial  partners  of  Kenyan  farmers.  However,  improving  the 
liquidity of both farmer-based DT-Saccos and non DT-taking Saccos can go  a long 
way  in  improving  their  capacity  and  capability  in  on-lending  funds  to  farmers. 
Capacity building and policy initiatives are needed to create an enabling environment 
for  innovation  to  flourish  and  to  address  the  financial  needs  of  low-income 
populations and SMEs.  
b)  Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) 
46. The  microfinance  sector  registered  8%  growth  in  total  assets,  from  KES.70.8 
billion in 2018 to KES 76.4 billion in 2019. Net advances increased by 6%, from KES 
44.2 billion in 2018 to KES 46.7 billion in 2019, while customer deposits increased by 
7%,  from  KES  41.0  billion  in  2018  to  KES43.9  billion  in  2019.  This  growth  was 
attributed mainly to increased demand for credit by the various economic sectors and 
the  usage  of  technology  as  a  lending  platform,  with  lending  remaining  the  single 
largest activity undertaken by microfinance banks, as the net loan portfolio accounted 
for  61%  of  microfinance  banks’  total  assets.  The  growth  in  deposits  was  due  to 
deposit mobilisation through agency banking and mobile phone platforms, as well as 
expansion of branch networks across the country.  Customer deposits and borrowing 
were  the  main  sources  of  funding,  accounting  for  58%  and  20%  respectively  of 
microfinance banks’ total funding sources (Banking Supervision Annual Report 2019). 
14 
(i) Deposit-taking MFIs 
47. Kenya  has  three  large  MFB’s  including  Kenya  Women,  Faulu  and  Rafiki, 
three mid-sized including Caritas, Sumac and SMEP and smaller ones like Key, 
Uwezo, Maisha, Century, U&I, Daraja and Choice. Muungano the new entrant 
was registered in October last year. In terms of market share, there were three 
large  microfinance  banks  with  an  aggregate  market  share  (comprising  assets, 
deposits,  capital,  number  of  active  deposit  and  loan  accounts)  of  84.6%  in  2019. 
Kenya Women’s Finance Trust (KWFT) had the  largest share (39.2%), followed by 
Faulu MFB (36.9%) and Rafiki MFB (8.5%).  The 5 medium microfinance banks with 
a  combined  market  share  of  13.9%  were  SMEP  MFB  (4.2%),  Maisha  MFB  (3.4%), 
Caritas MFB (2.5%), Sumac (2.3%) and U&I MFB (1.1%). In addition, there were 5 
small MFBs with an aggregate market share of 1.6%. Maisha MFB made a seven-fold 
increase in market share from 0.5% in 2018 to 3.4% in 2019. 
48. Microfinance banks (MFBs) are deposit-taking MFIs. They are regulated by 
the Central Bank of Kenya through the Microfinance Act, 2006 the Microfinance 
(Deposit-Taking  Microfinance  Institutions)  Regulations.  The  MFIs  have 
promoted  financial  inclusion,  which  in  turn  has  assisted  the  poor  to  build 
assets, extend their financial depth and diversity, and improve the range of 
tools available for financial intermediation in the country. 
49. The  non-deposit-taking  MFIs,  otherwise  known  as  credit-only  MFIs,  are 
some  of  the  largest  microfinance  providers  in  the  country.  The  category 
remains unregulated though the Microfinance Act 2006 mandates the Minister 
of Finance to issue regulations for this category. 
(ii) Non-Deposit-taking Microfinance Institutions  
50. A  discussion  on  the  financial  landscape  in  Kenya  cannot  be  complete  without 
looking at the role that microfinance institutions (MFIs) play in deepening financial 
inclusion in the country. In Kenya, MFIs are classified into: (i) deposit-taking MFIs, 
which are also called microfinance banks (MFBs), which are regulated by the Central 
Bank of Kenya (CBK); and (ii) non-deposit-taking MFIs, also called credit-only MFIs, 
which are non-regulated.  
51. There are 31 credit-only MFIs in the country, out of which 10 (32.25%) have rural 
branches.  These  are  Longitude,  Neema  Heep,  Vision  Fund  Kenya,  Yehu,  Juhudi 
Kilimo, Jiweze, Hand-in-Hand, Bimas, ECLOF Kenya and SISDO. In total, the 10 MFIs 
have 163 fully-fledged branches in the country. ECLOF Kenya is the largest credit-
only  MFI  in  the  country,  with  42  branches  spread  across  33  of  the  country’s  47 
counties. Juhudi Kilimo has the second largest branch network, with 39 branches in 
15 
28 counties after Kenya Women Finance Bank. These MFIs provide asset-based loans 
and basic business and finance training to smallholder farmers and enterprises that 
allow  the  latter  to  purchase  wealth-generating  financial  solutions  for  their 
agribusinesses. Microfinance in Kenya was started by K-Rep Bank (now Sidian Bank) 
and has since been spun out into a sustainable non-bank financial institution (NBFI). 
Table  2  below  summarises  the  MFIs  and  their  branch  and  county  coverage  in  the 
country.  
52. Out  of  the  10  credit-only  MFIs  which  have  a  rural  network,  8  (80%)  have 
agricultural loan products and 156 branches in the country. ECLOF Kenya has many 
agricultural products in many value chains such as bananas, dairy, fruits, oil seeds, 
fruits, vegetables and soya beans. The second largest, Juudi Kilimo, has Kilimo Fresh: 
Horticulture Product, a loan accessible to smallholder farmers in the horticulture crops 
value chain. The purpose of this product is to allow borrowers to: a) purchase farm 
inputs;  b)  acquire  labour  and  services;  c)  purchase  equipment;  d)  Construct 
structures; e) gain working capital; f) procure Transport; and g) procure water and 
storage facilities. The benefits include a favourable grace period, technical assistance, 
market linkages, and client training. 
53. In terms of county coverage, Kiambu County has the largest number of branches 
of  credit-only  MFIs  with  12  rural  branches,  followed  by  Tharaka–Nithi  (11),  Narok 
(10), Meru (9), Machakos (8) and Mombasa, Makueni, and Siaya with 7 each, with 
the rest having between 1 to 6 branches. The distribution of the MFIs and their branch 
network is shown in Table 2 below. 
Table 2: Distribution of MFIs and their branch network in counties  
of 
Credit-only MFIs 
County 
presence 
33 
28 
13 
14 
7 
12 
4 
1 
Source: Association of Microfinance Institutions, 2021 
ECLOF Kenya  
Juhudi Kilimo 
Bima 
Hand-in-Hand 
Yehu 
Vision Fund  
Longitude 
SISDO 
No. 
branches 
42 
39 
22 
20 
14 
13 
5 
1 
16 
c)  Development Finance Banks 
Agricultural Finance Corporation 
54. The  Agricultural  Finance  Corporation  (AFC)  is  a  wholly  government-owned 
development finance institution (DFI), established in1963, primarily to provide credit 
facilities to the agricultural sector. However, its agricultural credit product policy and 
structure  somehow  mirror  those  of  commercial  banks.  Therefore,  given  the 
overwhelming  need  for  credit,  this  corporation  has  fallen  short  of  discharging  its 
mandate effectively. Its main product is crop loans (seasonal credit), although it has 
loan products from livestock industry and for farm development. For a long time the 
AFC  was  lending  to  individual  farmers  but  in  the  recent  past  it  has  ventured  into 
group lending through Saccos. This has significantly improved its outreach and the 
loan repayment capacity while also considerably bringing down the level of its non-
performing loan portfolio.  
55. AFC  provides  development  loans  for  farm  purchase  and  infrastructure  for 
irrigation and livestock. It also provides seasonal crop loans, which are loans that are 
provided  for  the  production  of  maize,  wheat,  potatoes,  rice  and  other  foods  crops 
that have a maturity of not more than 12 months, and agribusiness loans designed 
to  benefit  agri-business  traders.  It  is  meant  to  provide  start-up  capital  for  those 
seeking  to  start  farming,  or  are  engaged  in  agricultural  microenterprises;  and 
microfinance  group  loans  (a  micro-credit  facility)  targeting  groups  trading  in 
agricultural produce and agricultural inputs, particularly the youth and women who 
have no tangible security to secure credit. The Stawisha group loan is in 3 levels and 
allows groups to access a higher amount as they successfully grow their business.  
Horticulture  and  floriculture  development  loans  and  cash  crop  loans  are  loans  to 
finance  horticultural  and  floricultural  projects  and  production  of  tea,  coffee, 
sugarcane, pyrethrum, cashew nuts, citrus, mango trees, bananas, stevia and other 
cash  crops.    Machinery  loans  are  for  the  purchase  of  farm  machinery  to  facilitate 
production and transport of farm produce. 
d)  Government funds targeted at women and youth 
56. In  addition  to  the  commercial  banks,  Saccos  and  MFIs,  there  are  government 
funds targeted at women, youth and persons living with disabilities. This is part of 
the Vision 2030 flagship programme  aimed at enabling women, youth and persons 
with  disability  to  access  finances  to  promote  businesses  and  enterprises  at  the 
constituency level, thereby enhancing economic growth towards the realisation of the 
same  and  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  1  (eradicate  extreme  poverty  and 
hunger) and 3 (promote gender equality and empower women). 
Given  their  importance  in  agricultural  production  and  family  food  security,  it  is 
important  to  improve  financial  access  among  rural  women.  Women  tend  to  seek 
smaller amounts of finance than men, so savings and group lending are particularly 
17 
important.  And given the growing  youth population  in Kenya,  special efforts have 
been  made  to  help  rural  youth  engage  productively  in  rural  and  agricultural 
businesses.  Developing  young  rural  and  agribusiness  entrepreneurs  requires  a 
holistic  support,  including  access  to  business  training  and  technical  assistance, 
coaching and networking, in addition to access to financial services (ideally starting 
with savings and financial education).  
i)  Women Enterprise Fund (WEF) 
57. The Women Enterprise Fund is an initiative of the Government of Kenya that was 
established  through  Legal  Notice  No.  147:  Government  Financial  Management 
(Women Enterprise Fund) Regulations, 2007. The Public Finance Management Act, 
2012  categorises  the  organisation  as  a  National  Fund.  The  Fund  is  a  Vision  2030 
flagship project under the social pillar that seeks to make fundamental changes  in 
four  areas,  namely,  Opportunities,  Empowerment,  Capabilities  and  Vulnerabilities. 
The  Fund  contributes  towards  the  1st,  2nd,  5th,  8th  and  10th  Sustainable 
Development Goals, namely, No Poverty, Zero Hunger, Gender Equality & Women’s 
Empowerment,  Inclusive  and  Sustainable  Economic  Growth,  Full  and  Productive 
Employment and Decent Work for All, and Reducing Income Inequalities. 
ii)  Youth Enterprise Development Fund 
58. The  Youth  Enterprise  Development  Fund  (YEDF)  was  established  through  the 
Public Financial Management Act (Youth Enterprise Development Fund) Regulations 
in  2006  and  transformed  into  a  state  corporation  in  2007.  The  Fund’s  objective  is 
employment  creation  for  the  youth  and  it  is  tasked  with  promoting  enterprise 
development as a key strategy towards increasing economic opportunities, and the 
participation of youth in nation building. 
59. The  specific  objectives  of  the  Fund  are  to  (i)  provide  funding  and  business 
development  services  to  youth-owned  or  youth-focused  enterprises;  (ii)  provide 
incentives  to  commercial  banks  through  appropriate  risk  mitigation  instruments  to 
enable them to increase lending and financial services to youth enterprises;  and (iii) 
provide  loans  to  existing  microfinance  institutions,  registered  non-governmental 
organisations  involved  in  micro  financing,  and  savings  and  credit  cooperative 
organisations  for  on-lending  to  youth  enterprises.  The  YEDF  uses  a  revolving  fund 
model for lending. 
iii) UWEZO Fund 
60. The  Uwezo  Fund  was  established  under  the  Public  Finance  Management  Acts 
(Uwezo Fund) Regulations in 2014. It is a flagship programme of Kenya’s Vision 2030 
aimed  at  enabling  women,  youth  and  persons  living  with  disabilities  (PLWDs)  to 
access  finances  to  promote  their  businesses.  The  financing  is  mainly  through 
revolving funds aimed at women and youth groups. 70% of the funds are targeted 
at  these  groups  while  30%  at  targeted  at  men  or  those  older  than  35  years.  The 
18 
groups  must  be  registered  by  the  Department  of  Social  Services,  the  State 
Department of Cooperatives or the Registrar of Societies. Individuals do not qualify 
for membership or to receive Uwezo funds.  The groups can on-lend the funds they 
receive at an interest to their members.  Members make monthly contributions to the 
groups, which are later used as qualification for loans, which ranges from KES 50,000 
to KES 500,000 per group. Groups are given a grace period of six months to start 
paying the loans and should repay the loan in 24 months (after the end of the grace 
period). 
e. Digital finance 
61. The  mapping  of  financial  services  in  Kenya  cannot  be  complete  without 
mentioning the role that digital technology has played in deepened financial inclusion 
in the country. M-Pesa was first developed as a mobile money transfer platform in 
2007.  The  platform  has  since  revolutionised financial  inclusion in Kenya and  the 
technological platform has enabled financial transactions with ease and in real time 
efficiently.  
62. Other products have been developed and rolled out on this platform, providing a 
virtual  savings  network  and  a  virtual  system  of  applying  and  receiving  short-term 
credit.  The  platform  has  developed  in  four  stages  of  a  virtuous  process:  from  a 
payment’s  platform  to  a  virtual  banking  and  saving  services,  to  a  credit  supply 
platform  and  finally  to  a  platform  for  cross-border  payments/transfers  and 
international remittances.  
63. In the beginning, M-Pesa was viewed as a technological platform that would allow 
a menu of financial services that would be offered to Kenyans for money transfers. 
However,  it  has  developed  into  an  ubiquitous  platform  that  has  driven  financial 
inclusion,  in  effect  making  the  mobile  phone  not  only  an  instrument  of 
communication, but also an efficient and effective tool for providing a wide range of 
financial  services,  such  as  money  transfers,  including  transfers  to  other  users, 
payments  for  goods  and  services,    conversion  to  and  from  cash,  payments  for 
products  and  services,  and  virtual  savings  accounts  in  commercial  banks,  Saccos, 
MFIs/MFBs, taking credit and harnessing information and demonstrating the power 
of big data. M-Pesa now also operates as a channel of credit supply by commercial 
banks, MFIs and Saccos.  
64. In addition to domestic financial services, M-Pesa allows users to send and receive 
cross-border  remittances  by  using  their  mobile  phones.  M-Pesa  and  similar  digital 
financial  services  represent  a  significant  improvement  in  the  national  payments 
technology,  reducing  transaction  costs  and  lowering  the  barriers  to  entry  into  the 
formal financial system. The financial institutions (FIs) in the country have embraced 
the  M-Pesa  platform  to  manage  micro  accounts,  build  customer  deposits,  and 
broaden their customer network. This enables users to store value on their mobile 
phones. In effect the evolution of M-Pesa from a mere payment service to an access 
point for a wide range of formal financial  services has been essential  in  increasing 
19 
financial inclusion. Today, most Kenyans are able to access their bank accounts, save 
money, buy insurance, and take out credit using their mobile phones.  
65. The  use  of  mobile  financial  services  allows  banks  and  telecommunications 
companies  to  gather  transactions  and  savings  data  from  customers.  This  in  turn 
allows financial intermediaries to evaluate customer behaviour in order to generate 
individual  credit  scores  and  customise  the  price  of  credit.  In  the  past  the  lack  of 
collateral acted as a major obstacle to credit access for many would-be borrowers. 
Leveraging  big  data  as  a  substitute  for  collateral  allows  banks  to  undertake 
sophisticated  risk  assessment  and  extend  credit  to  a  much  greater  share  of  the 
population.  
3.  DRAFT CRITERIA FOR SELECTING/QUALIFYING FOR FIs TO PARTICIPATE 
IN RK FINFA 
and 
(physical 
harvesting 
technologies, 
climate 
water 
improved  environmental  management,  and 
66. The sustainable transformation of the economy lies in the adaptation of climate 
change  mitigating  innovative  technologies,  which  include  interventions  to  promote 
clean  energy,  such  as  energy-saving  jikos,  solar  energy,  biogas  production,  soil 
change 
conservation 
adaptation/mitigation, 
improved 
efficiencies in the use of natural resources. The smallholder agricultural development 
and smallholder and microenterprise investments that qualify for green lending would 
include  efficient  water  use  (drip  irrigation/sprinkler  or  micro-jet  systems);  flood 
protection  measures 
resilient 
and 
infrastructure/increased  robustness  of  infrastructure;  climate  smart  farming 
(including drought or flood tolerant inputs); soil and water conservation measures; 
renewable  energy;  water  harvesting/water  storage  systems;  energy  efficient 
systems;  agro-forestry  and  afforestation/reforestation;  reduction  of  post-harvest 
food  losses;  rural  insurance  products;  as  well  as  cleaner  transport  solutions.  The 
Rural  Kenya  Financial  Inclusion  Facility  (RK  FINFA)  proposes  to  support  such 
interventions  that  will  contribute  to  sustainable  rural  transformation,  growth,  and 
income generation.  This could be done by improving to access to finance provided 
by Saccos and MFIs that are working to alleviate the liquidity constraints of non-bank 
financial  institutions  and  that  are  working  with  smallholders  and  rural  micro-
enterprises, and by  promoting and encouraging small-scale farmers and micro-firms 
to invest in climate-smart and environmentally friendly activities (such as the ones 
mentioned  above).  
biophysical); 
climate 
67. This  financing  will  provide  wholesale  capital  to  Saccos  operating  in  rural  areas 
and  MFBs/MFIs  for  on-lending  to  the  smallholder  sub-sector  and  rural  micro-
enterprises  to  support  climate-smart  agricultural  interventions.  The  funds  will  be 
managed  by  a  commercial  bank  to  provide  capital  to  the  Saccos  and  MFIs/MFBs, 
which will meet an eligibility criteria to be developed by the project. The selection of 
the  host  institution  will  be  finalised  after  the  approval  of  the  RK-FINFA  financing 
package by the GoK and IFAD. The selection criteria will, among others, include: 
20 
i) 
Summary  of  performance  information  based  on  audited  accounts  and  other 
reports, and proof of financial soundness of the institution; 
ii)  The participating financial institutions (PFI’s active rural and agriculture sector 
portfolio: The financial institution (FI) should have a rural branch network, an 
agent network in rural areas, or a strong mobile banking platform. They are 
therefore more likely to consider partnerships with last mile projects such as 
the proposed RK FINFA;  
iii)  The PFI’s strategy, opportunities and obstacles for the expansion of inclusive 
agriculture and rural portfolios: FIs with stated interest in agriculture or bottom 
of the pyramid (BoP) clients in rural areas are often looking for cost effective 
methods to increase market share in these areas. Access to rural populations 
would be a key factor in financial services delivery;  
iv)  The PFI’s current sources and cost of liquidity;  
v)  The PFI’s demand and capacity to invest social and especially green financing; 
vi)  Availability of suitable lending products for RK-FINFA target groups: FIs with a 
history and culture of innovation that is reinforced by senior management FIs 
that are rooted in a culture of innovation are likely to have less rigidity in their 
structure,  a  greater  ability  to  design  new  products,  and  more  willingness  to 
understand new customer segments, such as smallholder farmers;  
vii)  The PFI staff capacity; 
viii)  Quality  of  the  PFI’s  management  information  system  (MIS)  system  and  the 
PFI’s  ability  and  willingness  to  submit  the  required  regular  performance 
indicators to RK-FINFA during implementation;  
ix)  Proof that the PFI needs the increased investment from RK-FINFA; 
x)  Technical  services  requirements  and  opportunities  for  the  PFI  to  upgrade   
agriculture and rural banking as well as digital tools; the PFI’s ability to reach 
smallholders, women, youth and other interest groups using tailored products 
e.g. the Muslim/Sharia-compliant products; and  
xi)  Demonstrate that they have robust systems (e.g., IT, MIS, investment in risk 
management, etc.).  
4.  PROFILES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS (MFIS) 
68. The Central Bank of Kenya proposes to start vetting shareholders in microfinance 
banks  who  own  at  least  a  10%  stake,  if  proposed  regulations  seeking  to  boost 
governance are adopted. The regulator says in the draft Microfinance Bill, 2019 that 
people holding at least a 10% stake will be regarded as significant shareholders. This 
is the first time the regulator has defined a significant owner of microfinance banks 
and upgraded the current law that only limits individual ownership at 25%. 
21 
i)  Kenya Women Microfinance Bank    
69. Kenya  Women  Microfinance  Bank  (formerly  known  as  Kenya  Women  Finance 
Trust or KWFT) is a tier 1 microfinance bank offering banking services that include 
both savings and credit products that cater for the needs of micro, small and medium-
sized entrepreneurs. It has a branch network of 241 branches that operate in 45 of 
the 47 counties and 80% of its operations are in rural areas. The bank predominantly 
targets  women,  which  is  expected,  since  its  history  is  founded  primarily  on  the 
economic empowerment of women through access to finance. Although its main focus 
is not necessarily on agriculture, it has increased its interest in lending to agriculture 
and has a diversified menu of profits for the farming community. It is the leading and 
the largest MFI that has a great command in the market share, with over 800,000 
clients across the country. Currently its products and services are open to organised 
groups, organisations and individuals.   
70. The total income of the bank rose from KES 5.985 billion in 2018 to KES 5,982 
billion  in  2019,  while  its  net  loss  dropped  from  KES  729.56  million  to  KES  401.59 
million (a decrease of about 45%). Its total assets increased from KES 29.76 billion 
to KES 30.61 billion, while its total liabilities increased from KES 25.51 billion to KES 
36.77 billion in the same period. Its liquidity ratio improved from 20.5% in 2018 to 
24% in 2019, while its non-performing portfolio improved from KES 52.18 million in 
2018 to KES 113.0 million in 2019. 
71. The  bank  plays  a  key  role  in  supporting  the  smallholder  farmers  in  their 
agribusiness operations through offering credit  facilities and training to boost their 
economic value and to ensure food security both at the household and the society 
level.  The  bank  intends  to  deepen  its  agriculture  lending  and  has  a  strategy  to 
increase agricultural lending to 10% of its overall bank portfolio. In order to achieve 
this, the bank has developed an agribusiness strategy, and created an agribusiness 
department  with  a  detailed  programme  on  staff  capacity  building.  It  also  has  a 
management information system (MIS) in place to track deposits, credit facilities and 
liquidity; these reports can be customised as the need arises.   
72. The bank would be willing to participate in any initiative, programme, or project 
aimed  at  increasing  agriculture  lending  and  to  finance  the  expansion  of  its 
agribusiness product offering. Some of the challenges the bank has faced in lending 
to  farmers,  agriSMES  and  MSMEs  in  the  rural  and  agriculture  sectors  include  high 
cost of funds and the cost of delivering financial services, lack of adequate market 
linkages and non-predictability of the agricultural markets, and limited technology. 
Therefore, the bank is required to invest in technology to deliver these services to 
rural  populations,  which  can  be  quite  expensive  and  a  high  credit  risk  due  to 
production  risk,  market  risk,  weather  risk  etc.  In  order  to  mitigate  some  of  these 
challenges,  the  bank  has  provided  micro  insurance  (agriculture  insurance),  has 
continued to build the capacity of staff for agricultural lending, and has continued to 
mobilise funds for on-lending and entering into partnership and alliances with other 
institutions and organisations.  
22 
73. The bank provides a  wide range of  agribusiness products for both savings and 
credit facilities and has a unique business model for both groups, and individual and 
SME clients, and has the capacity to absorb additional funds that can be targeted at 
farmers, especially smallholder farmers. Some of the financial services and products 
offered by the bank include: 
  Dairy  farming  loans  that  enables  dairy  farmers  to  invest  in  high  breed  dairy 
cows. 
  Maziwa Plus Loans to facilitate dairy groups/ associations, societies, individuals 
and  dairy  companies  to  access  loans  for  dairy  production  and  value  addition 
equipment, including buying additional cows and chilling equipment.  
  Green  House  Farmers  Kit  is  a  loan  facility  that  enables  farmers  to  acquire  a 
complete farmer’s kit that provides modern farming solutions. It includes quality 
seeds as well as advanced technology adjusted to customer needs and capacity. 
  Dairy  goat  farming  that  supports  dairy  goat  farming  by  enabling  farmers  to 
purchase quality dairy goats.  
  Aquaculture  (fish  farming)  loans  that  are  input  loans  offered  to  clients  for 
excavated ponds or liner ponds as well as affordable fingerlings.  
  Apiculture (bee-keeping) loans that finances modern bee keeping through the 
purchase of improved hives and other bee-keeping equipment.  
  Agricultural  input  loans  are  a  product  targeting  farmers  to  help  them  acquire 
quality inputs for their farming activities affordably.  
  Agro-dealer  loans  targets  financing  of  agro-dealers  involved  in  agricultural 
value-chains, such as agro-vets, commodity traders‚ etc. 
74. The  bank  participated  in  the  PROFIT  Programme  implemented  by  the  national 
Treasury, which injected KES 205 million in 2012 for on-lending to farmers and other 
players in the agricultural sector. Since agricultural lending was not one of the bank’s 
core areas, it started by developing agricultural products. Luckily the programme had 
a technical assistance package which helped in building the capacity of the staff to 
develop  an  agricultural  strategy,  policy  and  operational  manual.  Initially  the  bank 
started  by  lending  to  dairy  farmers  but  later  expanded  to  crop  farmers  and  other 
players, such as input suppliers. By 2019 the bank had lent KES 1.9 billion, which 
decreased to KES 1.5 billion the following year due to the COVID-19 pandemic.  
75. Of importance to note is that the bank seeks to improve its green finance footprint 
by providing loans for solar lighting solutions and biogas to farmers to enable them 
to purchase bio-digesters, to use clean cooking and lighting in order to reduce costs 
and  save  time,,  to  reduce  indoor  and  environmental  pollution,  to  use  slurry  as 
fertilizer and to improve the lifestyles of farmers.  
76. In  addition  to  the  bank’s  support  to  farmers,  it  has  also  partnered  with  other 
organisations. It has signed an agreement with the Feed the Future Kenya Crops & 
Dairy  Market  Systems  Activity  (KCDMS),  a  United  States  Agency  for  International 
Development (USAID) - funded programme to extend tailored financial services to 
farmers in Busia and Homa Bay counties. The partnership is intended to benefit at 
23 
least 10,000 farmers in both counties within three years. To achieve this target, Faulu 
Kenya  is  working  with  farmer  groups,  with  each  group  having  between  30  and  50 
farmers. The bank aims to recruit 100 groups annually over the three-year life cycle 
of the project. Under the partnership, farmers will also benefit from training, capacity 
building and market access.  
77. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has affected MFIs adversely. The impact 
on the MFIs’ business was significant. The bank was on a recovery path when  the 
pandemic struck. The measures taken by the government to mitigate the effects of 
the  pandemic  included  movement  restriction,  restricting  of  gathering  of  people, 
imposition of curfews and closure of business  premises, which had a far-reaching 
impact  on  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  from  hotels,  transport,  construction,  and 
MSMES, which are the MFI’s main clientele. The effects of these measures was that 
the bank was unable to meet clients or disburse and collect loans for three months 
from April, May and June 2020. The liquidity constraints hampered operations of the 
bank’s business. In the meantime the bank gave lenders moratoriums, which meant 
additional costs in terms of interest payments.  
78. Some  of  the  negative  impacts  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  on  the  bank  include 
reduced interest income, and reduced loan uptake, reduced cash flows.  The overall 
loan  book  reduced  significantly  from  2019  to  2020.  In  numerical  terms,  the  loss 
before tax increased by 73%, from KES 401 million in 2019 to KES 1.485 billion in 
2020. Net interest income reduced by 29%, t from KES 3.513 billion to KES 2.728 
billion, while impairment losses increased by 98%, from KES 11 million to KES 642 
million in the same period11.  
79. However,  business  operations  started  to  recover  in  July  2020  and  the  MFI 
undertook strategic changes to ensure that it could endure the COVID-19 pandemic. 
These changes include a determined shift to use digital technology to deliver services, 
cost management, revamping of the products and services, mobilization of savings 
and building strategic partnerships.  
ii) FAULU MFB   
80. Faulu Microfinance Bank, a  Tier 1  microfinance bank,  is part of the Old Mutual 
Group. It provides business training for its SME and individual customers to empower 
them with skills to grow their businesses.  It was the leading microfinance bank in 
profitability and deposits in 2019. Its profit before tax recorded in 2019 was KES 482 
Million,  which  was  up  by  76%  as  compared  to  2018  when  the  bank  recorded  a 
profitability of KES 287 million. The bank’s balance sheet closed at KES 29.7 billion, 
up  by  9%  compared  to  KES  27.2  billion  in  2018.  Gross  loans  and  advances  to 
customers increased by 10% to KES 21 billion while customer deposits were up by 
8% to reach KES 20 billion. The liquidity ratio closed at 26% on account of increased 
customer deposits, while the bank’s capital position remains strong with all metrics 
11 KWFT Financial Statements, 2020 
24 
above the regulatory thresholds. The core capital to risk weighted ratio of 15.5 % 
was lower than the prior year when it was 16.9%. This was driven by higher profits 
and high-risk weighted assets, which improved from 13.07%.  
81. In  addition  to  lending  to  individuals,  the  MFB  also  offers  wholesale  lending 
services to Saccos and MFIs, with rural clients as the ultimate beneficiaries, based on 
portfolio  performance  review  of  the  existing  book,  full  security  for  the  loan  and 
pipeline of potential clients. The interest rate charged is dependent on the level of 
engagement,  ranging  (currently)  from  7%  to  11%,  with  the  level  of  risk  exposure 
being the biggest determinant. The Saccos and MFIs are free to set their own interest 
rates  when  they  issue  the  loans  from  these  funds  to  their  clients  (smallholders, 
SMEs.). However, the intermediary party is free to set the interest rate, with Faulu 
making recommendations for the same.  
82. Faulu Bank participated in the PROFIT programme financed by IFAD and GoK. It 
has received a credit facility (CF) of KES 200 million and leveraged it to KES 1 billion. 
It loaned the money to about 13,764 beneficiaries. The loan amount also helped to 
stabilise its operations. The loan amounts given and the number of loan beneficiaries 
increased  significantly  after  the  bank  was  given  capacity  building  training.  During 
these trainings, the financial institutions were supported to develop specific products 
aligned to the agricultural value chain actors.  
83. Faulu believes that the resources may have contributed to increased incomes and 
food  security  among  the  beneficiaries.  Outcomes  from  the  farmer  group  model 
showed that a significant number of beneficiaries not only gained valuable incomes 
but also showed tremendous resilience. This was evidenced by the fact that a majority 
of the beneficiaries were still able to  generate money from their business, provide 
adequate  food  for  their  families,  and  still  had  their  assets  acquired  before  project 
completion.  In  the  PROFIT  programme,  the  identified  four  value  chains,  namely, 
cereals, dairy, horticulture and livestock, revamped the products on these lines. The 
use of aggregators gave the bank and farmers confidence on the marketing of the 
produce.  
84. The  bank  has  an  array  of  products  directed  towards  wholesale  lending  and 
agribusiness value-chain clients in its SME and agribusiness products, which include: 
Kilimo bora loans that are targeted towards groups and individuals for all agribusiness 
activities;  Maziwa  bora  loans  that  address  the  financing  needs  of    dairy  farmers, 
cooperatives and Saccos; and Nafaka loans, a financial solution that meets the needs 
of  cereal  farmers,  groups,  farmer  societies  and  Saccos  and  that  are  structured  to 
meet  seasonal  and  financial  cycles.  The  bank  is  increasing  its  agricultural  lending 
portfolio  and  towards  this  end  it  has  a  fully-fledged  department  for  institutional 
banking and a treasury that oversees deposits and the liquidity aspect of the bank. 
Through training of the bank’s staff internally and by various partners, the bank has 
now revamped agriculture lending around four value chains, which include, cereals, 
livestock, dairy and horticulture. The proposition is centred on the aggregator model 
(cooperative, large buyer of the produce, SME, CBO, a factory etc.). The merits of 
25 
the  aggregator  model  are  its  ability  to  reach  a  larger/bigger  clientele  base  and  to 
ensure  that  payments  are  processed  centrally,  thereby  reducing  transaction  costs. 
The  model  also  ensures  that  capacity  building  can  be  conducted  centrally.  Other 
benefits  include  offering  agriculture  insurance  through  its  linkages  with  UAP 
Insurance; payments are channelled through the borrower’s account in Faulu, further 
securing its interest and de-risking its portfolio. 
85. Some of the challenges in lending to agriSMES, and agriculture sectors include 
information  asymmetry/gap  among  farmers,  financial  illiteracy/understanding  on 
finance needs and loan repayment structure among smallholder farmers, on boarding 
and remoteness of farmers, inadequate market linkages and locking of repayments 
between the farmer, off-taker and the bank. The challenges faced are generic and 
cut across the industry in that farmers will opt for substandard farm inputs and thus 
poor  yield.  The  farmers  also  lack  information  about  crop  insurance,  which  would 
cushion them in case of weather perils. However, there are interventions that have 
been  put  in  place  by  the  bank.  These  include  partnerships  with  organisations  that 
provide  inputs  and  offtake  products,  aggressive  farmer  training  and  working  with 
agronomists in the field.  
iii)  ECLOF Kenya  
86. ECLOF Kenya is currently a credit-only microfinance institution providing financial 
and related non-financial services in Kenya and to all sectors of the economy. ECLOF 
Kenya has a rural presence, with 42 branches in 33 countries and serving over 60,000 
clients. The MFI has a portfolio in excess of KES 1 billion (~ USD 10 million), of which 
KES  231  million  (23%)  is  invested  in  agriculture.  It  is  currently  a  Microfinance 
Company  Limited  by  Guarantee  but  is  in  the  process  of  becoming  a  shareholder-
owned institution, with the objective of becoming a deposit-taking institution in the 
coming years12.  
87. ECLOF is deepening its presence in lending to agriculture and other players in the 
rural sector and is scaling up dairy lending across all viable business clusters, with 
farmer groups and cooperatives being the product nerve centres. The MFI plans to 
roll  this  out  through  a  robust  capacity  development  programme  that  targets  staff, 
partner cooperative leaders and farmers across its network of branches. ECLOF Kenya 
has worked with numerous partners, in line with its mission to enable clients to realise 
their dreams and experience the abundance of life through the provision of financial 
and  related  non-financial  services.  These  partners  include  DFID,  the  USAID-
supported  Kenya  Crops  and  Dairy  Market  System  (KCDMS),  Kiva,  Unilever,  Water 
org, and ORB Energy, among others.  
88. ECLOF’s main loan products include monthly climate smart agriculture (a dairy 
loan started in 2015 that had lent KES 29 million to over 200 farmers by May 2018. 
Its loan pricing and structure is a 3-9 month farmer input loan at below market rate, 
12 Service Delivery Model Assessment -Public Report September 2018 
26 
enabled by a repayable grant from DFID to eliminate the loan cost of the capital. No 
collateral  is  required,  only  six  weeks  of  savings  and  proof  of  six  months  of  milk 
deposits  to  an  aggregator.  The  loans  are  disbursed  either  directly  to  the  farmer 
through  their  loan  group  –  via  a  combination  of  various  delivery  channels,  for 
example the mobile money transfer platform M-Pesa, and subject to assessment of 
intended dairy farming expenditures – or through the partner aggregator for feed or 
purchase of a new cow. 
89. The  loan  is  repaid  monthly  through  the  partner  aggregator  who  tracks  the 
deposited milk and pays the farmers after subtracting the loan repayment. There are 
additional  services  offered  by  the  MFI,  including  access  to  livestock  insurance, 
guaranteed off-take by the partner aggregator and access to climate smart and good 
agricultural  practices  training,  including  farm  diversification  training,  demo  farms, 
and financial literacy training access to veterinary services provided by the partner 
aggregator.  
90. The  MFI  is  also  moving  into  green  financing  by  providing  loan  products  for 
improving  access  to  clean  water,  proper  sanitary  facilities,  such  as  construction  of 
environmental-friendly toilets, including ventilation improved pit (VIP) latrines, roof 
water catchment, water tanks, water purifiers, tanks and collectors, or shallow wells, 
in addition to financing energy-efficient cooking stoves (jikos) and  solar panels for 
charging  phones  and  operating  a  lamp,    a  small  radio  or    a    solar-powered  TV. 
Children now have light to do their homework, solar and heating. Towards this end, 
since  2011,  ECLOF  Kenya  has  disbursed  loans  worth  over KES  260  million  to  over 
6,200 clients (the average loan size is around KES 40,000). As a result, some clients 
enjoy greater comfort and hygiene; others collect water for farm or family use while 
yet others start a small business as water vendors. 
iv)  Juhudi Kilimo MFI  
91. Juhudi Kilimo is the second largest non-deposit-tracking (credit-only) MFI in the 
country  in  terms  of  branch  and  county  coverage.  The  MFI  has  a  variety  of  loan 
products that enable farmers to acquire a wide range of farm animals and invest in 
high breed dairy cows, poultry, goats, sheep, donkeys, rabbits, bee keeping, animal 
feeds and fish farming among others. They include: 
  Animal  farming  loans  that  enable  farmers  to  acquire  a  wide  range  of  farm 
animals and invest in high breed dairy cows, poultry, dairy goat farming, sheep, 
rabbits, bee keeping and fish farming among others; 
  Farm  equipment  loans  targeting  farmers  to  help  them  acquire  quality  farm 
equipment, such as generators, water tanks, water pumps, milking cans, biogas 
digesters,  motor  cycles,  posho  mills,  chaff  cutters,  green  houses,  irrigation 
equipment,  milk  freezers,  milking  machines,  ATM  milk  dispensers,  ploughing 
tools/equipment, and animal housing structures.  
  Working capital loans targeting farmers and micro entrepreneurs to enable them 
to expand their businesses and invest in agri-processors, agrovets, animal trade, 
27 
cereals,  groceries,  milk  vending,  transport  services  and  veterinary  services, 
among others. . 
In addition to deepening financial literacy for the sound management of loans, Juhudi 
provides  business  management,  technical  and  financial  literacy  training  to  rural 
smallholder farmers and micro entrepreneurs. This loan product enables farmers to 
acquire a wide range of farm animals and invest in high breed dairy cows, poultry, 
goats, sheep, donkeys, rabbits, bee keeping, animal feeds and fish farming, among 
others. 
92. Juhudi  Kilimo’s  main  focus  is  predominantly  smallholder  farmers.  It  uses  the 
group lending methodology and the results have been impressive.   Its loan book has 
grown  from  KES  497  million  in  2013  to  KES  1.77  billion  in  2020  (an  increase  of 
256%), while its customer base has increased from 12,375 to 45,672 (an increase of 
269%) in the same period. Its strategic thrust in the next few years is on growth, 
sustainability  and  impact.  The  MFI  assesses  or  qualifies  clients  to  receive 
progressively higher loans as farmers repay their loans, reassessing a farmer’s debt 
capacity at each level. Starting with loans of, for example, KES 100,000, farmers can 
apply for up to double the earlier amount at each successful full repayment, with a 
cap at KES 100,000. Every loan goes through a new credit appraisal, and approval is 
not automatic. It also offers top-up loans for energy devices (such as solar lanterns 
and improved cooking stoves), education and emergencies to its most loyal clients.  
93. Juhudi Kilimo is already working in the green finance space by providing loans for 
investment in green/clean energy investment and to customers seeking financing for 
eco-friendly  products,  such  as  solar  water  pumps,  solar  home  systems,  modern 
cooking  stoves,  solar  TVs,  and  biogas  systems  that  use  energy  generated  from 
natural  resources  that  are  renewable  (naturally  replenished).  The  areas  of  focus 
include solar panels, solar pumps, sola lanterns, solar installations, solar batteries, 
solar TVs, and improved cooking stoves.  
v)  SUMAC MFB  
94. Sumac Microfinance Bank was established in 2002 by a group of 14 investors who 
initially formed an investment group to help chart out a better future for themselves. 
In 2004, the institution opened its doors to the public as Sumac Credit Limited with 
a  mission  to  empower  businesspeople  who  couldn’t  match  the  stringent  loan 
requirements by commercial banks. In 2012, we were duly licensed as a Microfinance 
Bank by the Central Bank of Kenya to take deposits. We have since been referred to 
as  Sumac  Microfinance  Bank  Ltd.  The  P+MFB  has  continued  to  expand  and  has  4 
branches (Ngara, Nairobi, Githunguri, Nakuru and Thika) and plans are underway for 
the opening of more branches across the country with targeted.  
95. Since  2012  the  MFB’s  customer  base  has  grown  and  the  bank  is  currently 
managing over KES 500 million worth of customer deposits, loan book standing at 
28 
KES 900 million and operating a balance sheet of KES 1.3 billion. Sumac has been 
able to team up with local and international partners for funding and currently the 
bank has a customer base of 10,000. 
96. These include Regmifa Fund Triple Jump, both from the Netherlands. For strategic 
reasons, the firm has just partnered with Badoer Investments Limited from Dubai, 
UAE which has taken over 15.6% shareholding. As part of its expansion the bank is 
also targeting diaspora banking and partnering with local commercial banks and other 
organisation,  which  include  Micro  Enterprises  Support  Programme  Trust  (MESPT), 
Development Bank and Credit Bank. 
97. The MFB’s expansion will continue in coming years in a strategic approach to seek 
to meet the needs of its clients countrywide. The bank has a strong presence in asset 
financing products, especially on motor vehicles and agricultural equipment that as 
well  as  business  loans  with  clients  paying  a  30  per  cent  deposit  on  all  vehicle 
purchases  while  Sumac  Microfinance  Bank  finances  the  remainder  70  per  cent.  In 
addition,  the  MFB  has  ventured  in  agricultural  financing  with  a  facility  for  dairy 
farmers, that include financing farmers to acquire dairy cattle in a facility that is also 
insured, to cushion them against any animal losses and which has also opened credit 
lines to women and the youth in the rural areas where they own no other form of 
security except livestock, allowing them once they have cleared paying for a facility 
to take up new ones. 
98. It  is  worth  noting  that  Sumac  has  been  able  to  team  up  with  other  local  and 
international partners for funding as well. These include Regional MSME Investment 
Fund for Sub-Saharan Africa (Regmifa) and Triple Jump, both from the Netherlands. 
Local Sumac partners include Micro Enterprises Support Programme Trust (MESPT), 
Development Bank and Credit Bank. The MFI has already received KES 150 million 
from  the  Regmifa,  KES  45  million  from  the  Development  Bank  of  Kenya,  KES  30 
million from the Micro Enterprises Support Programme Trust (MESPT) USD2 million 
(KES  200  million)  from  US-based  Social  Investment  Managers  &  Advisors 
(SIMA) LLC. 
99. The MFB is also moving into green finance and is providing finance for acquisition 
of  green  energy  assets.  The  bank  is  providing  Kawi  loan  (a  clean  energy  product) 
which  is  meant  to  help  individuals  access  clean  (solar)  energy  equipment  and 
installation,  including  cooking  stove,  biogas,  solar  panel,  and  installation  of 
generators for the same. The loan product targets dairy farmers for biogas and light 
industries and micro client for cooking stoves.  
100.  To  further  deepen  the  green  finance  business  the  MFB  entered  a  long-term 
agreement with the Kenya Biogas Programme (KBP)13 to sell biogas to both existing 
13 The Kenya Biogas Program (KBP), a constituent of the Africa Biogas Partnership Program 
(ABPP) aims to achieve the development of a commercially viable domestic biodigester sector 
in Kenya by 2019. 
29 
and potential clients throughout the country. Plans are at an advanced stage to roll-
out the project, in which farmers will access funding from Sumac MFB to acquire the 
biogas facilities, and then pay the loan monthly over a convenient period of time.  
101.  Digitization  provides  an  opportunity  for  microfinance  providers  to  leverage 
their license, customer base and outreach to rural areas and low-income clients and 
digital solutions help financial institutions deepen customer engagement and product 
usage,  and  in  turn  promote  and  increase  financial  inclusion.  Sumac  MFB  has 
leveraged on innovation through its M-banking platform, which is integrated into a 
vibrant  core  banking  system  in  order  to  provide  financial  services  more  efficiently 
and effectively.  
102.  Businesses across the world and country in almost all sector s of the economy 
have gone through particularly rough stretch in the last fifteen months since March 
2020.  The  diminished  earning  capacity  of  their  clients  threatens  to  undermine  the 
strong repayment culture on which microfinance depends. Sumac has not been an 
exception  but  the  management  and  board  of  the  bank  is  still  hopeful  of  a  bright 
future.  The  bank  responded  to  the  pandemic  in  two  ways,  that  is,  by  providing 
repayment deferrals and restructuring loans, which is being review on a need-basis 
and case-by case basis.   
5.  SUMMARY OF MFIs’ POTENTIAL TO PARTICIPATE IN RK-FINFA 
Strategies, challenges and opportunities 
103.  The  MFIs  that  have  been  profiled  play  a  key  role  in  supporting  smallholder 
farmers in their agribusiness operations through offering credit facilities and training 
to boost their economic value and ensure food security both at the community and 
household levels. The MFIs provide a wide range of agribusiness products for both 
savings and credit facilities and have unique business models for groups, individual 
and SME clients and have the capacity to absorb additional funds that can be pushed 
towards farmers, especially smallholder farmers.  
104.  Although  for  most  of  MFIs  farmers  are  not  their  main  clientele,  they  are 
increasingly becoming keen to lend to the stakeholders operating in the sector. They 
have subsequently diversified their lending to agriculture and have a broader menu 
of products for the farming community.  They provide a variety of delivery channels 
and  operations  and  their  products  and  services  are  open  to  organised  groups, 
organisations and individuals.   
105.  Some of the MFIs, such as Kenya Women Microfinance Bank, Faulu and SMEP 
participated  in  the  PROFIT  Programme  implemented  by  the  National  Treasury  and 
IFAD. They received funds in 2012 for on-lending to farmers and other players in the 
agricultural sector, which luckily was accompanied by a technical assistance package 
that helped in building the capacity of the staff to develop an agricultural strategy, 
policy and operational manual.  
30 
106.  Some of the MFIs are moving into green financing by providing loan products 
for improving access to clean water, proper sanitary facilities, such as construction 
of environmental-friendly toilets, ventilation improved pit (VIP) latrines, roof water 
catchment,  water  tanks,  water  purifiers,  tanks  and  collectors,  or  shallow  wells,  in 
addition  to  financing  energy  cooking  stoves  (jikos),  and  solar  panels  for  charging 
phones and operating lamps, radios or solar-powered TVs. 
Assessment of the technological/operational capacity of the MFIs and quality of 
the MIS system  
107.  The  MFIs  would  be  willing  to  participate  in  RK  FINFA  in  order  to  increase 
agriculture lending and to finance the expansion of its agribusiness product offering. 
Some of the challenges they have faced in lending to farmers, agriSMES and MSMEs 
in the rural and agriculture sectors include high cost of funds and delivering financial 
services, lack of adequate market linkages and non-predictability of the agricultural 
markets,  and  limited  technology.  They    therefore  they  are  required  to  invest  in 
technology  to  deliver  these  services  to  rural  populations,  which  can  be  quite 
expensive and a high credit risk due to production risk, market risk, weather risk etc.  
108.  In  the  age  of  data-driven  services,  some  MFIs,  such  as  Musoni  have 
demonstrated  that  providers  of  digital  inclusive  financial  services  can  embrace 
technology,  and  reach  out  to  ever-greater  numbers  of  low-income  people,  while 
mitigating  risks  and  implementing  client  protection  principles.  Client  protection 
policies are a useful tool in the efforts to improve the lives of low-income people and 
their communities, enabling microfinance institutions to maximise their social impact. 
109.  A summary of the profiles of 5 MFIs active in agricultural finance is shown in 
the table below. 
31 
Table 3: Summary of the profiles of 5 MFIs active in agricultural finance 
MFIs 
KWFT  FAULU  SUMAC 
Financial soundness1 
Have an agriculture strategy? 2 
   
   
   
   
Staff has agri-capacity2 
   
   
Rural outreach (branches)  
Already offering agricultural loans  
finance 
agricultural 
Targeted 
product development 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
X 
   
   
   
X 
ECLOF  Juhudi 
Kilimo 
   
X 
   
X 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
technical 
Need 
services 
/opportunities to participate in the 
RK FINFA programme  
Quality of MIS3  
   
1  Although the financial statements are fine, it is important to point that it is not feasible to deeply 
interrogate financial statement in this kind of exercise. They are taken as-is. The RK FINFA would 
need to undertake due diligence of  financial institutions to participate in the RK FINFA programme 
during implementation  
   
   
   
   
X 
X 
X 
   
2  KWFT and Faulu participated in the PROFIT programme 
3  The quality of the MIS will have to be vouched for after due diligence if the MFIs were to participate 
in the RK FINFA programme 
6.  PROFILES OF 5 Deposit-Taking Saccos 
110.  This section profiles a sample of 5 farmer-based DT Saccos that are regulated 
by SASRA. The section does not review the performance information of the individual 
Saccos. However, it was assumed that since these Saccos had renewed their licences 
for  2019,  they  were  in  good  financial  standing.  SASRA  regularly  reviews  the 
performance of Saccos based on the following parameters: (i) capital adequacy (core 
capital,  core  capital/total  assets,  core  capital/total  deposits  and  institutional 
capital/total assets; (ii) asset quality (non-performing  loans (NPLs) to gross loans, 
NPLs net of provisions to core capital, and earning assets to total assets; (iii) earning 
rating – return on assets (ROA), interest margin to gross income , cost income ratio 
, non-interest expenses to gross income, operating expense to total assets ratio; and 
(iv)  liquidity  ratio  (liquid  assets/savings  deposits  and  short-term  liabilities,  liquid 
assets/total deposits, external borrowings/total assets, liquid assets/total assets and 
total loans/total deposits. 
i) UNAITAS DT-Sacco 
111.  Unaitas initially registered on 14 May 1993 as a cooperative society. The Sacco 
started its branch operations in Muranga and has expanded to have a network of 28 
32 
branches spread across 13 counties, serving over 340,000 members. In 2007, it was 
rebranded to Muramati Sacco. . It would  later change its common bond, diversify, 
and  recruit  more  farmers,  small  and  medium-size  entrepreneurs  and  salaried 
employees. In line with its growth and expansion strategy, Muramati rebranded to 
Unaitas in 2012, adopting a strong, bold brand and recruiting from a more diverse 
geographical area and population.  
Unaitas’ performance overview 
112.  Unaitas  has  continued  to  register  steady  and  sustainable  growth  in  all  key 
performance parameters. Currently the Sacco has an asset base of KES 14 billion and 
it serves about 300,000 members. The society's deposits increased by 7.08%, from 
KES  7.48  billion  in  2018  to  KES  8.05  billion  in  2019.  The  Sacco  has  continued  to 
invest in technology and to update its systems in order to serve its members more 
effectively and efficiently. It has diversified and currently has members drawn from 
diverse sectors, such as agriculture – farmers growing tea, cereals coffee and dairy 
– which accounts for 27% of the KES 11 billion loan book to members. It also has 
personal lending, which targets salaried Kenyans (accounting for 30% of the Sacco’s 
loan book). However, SMEs form the bulk of the Sacco’s portfolio and it has 10,000 
chamas (organised groups) that have accounts with the Sacco.  
Table 4: Key Financial and Statistical Information (KES millions)  
As at 31 December  
Membership 
Number of branches 
Number of employees 
Interest income 
Interest expense 
Other income 
Total operating income  2,211 
1,555 
Operating expenditure 
656 
Profit Before Tax 
2019 
2018 
2017 
2016 
2020 
340,034  316,437  277,145  275,708  261,001 
27 
310 
2,199 
(303) 
336 
21 
292 
1,249 
(152) 
369 
1,465 
1,113 
352 
20 
339 
1,324 
(193) 
364 
1,496 
1,216 
280 
26 
298 
1,313 
(147) 
622 
1,789 
1,330 
458 
26 
347 
1,908 
(197) 
333 
2,044 
1,437 
607 
33 
Table 5: Growth and performance parameters (KES millions)  
10,727 
6,455 
7,426 
Capitalisation  FY2016 
Total assets 
Total deposits 
Gross loans 
Allowance 
loan loss 
Net loans 
Core capital 
409 
7,454 
4,063 
for 
FY2017 
11,844 
7,013 
7,657 
FY2018 
12,735 
7,480 
9,288 
FY2019 
14,196 
8,049 
11,372 
FY2020 
16,566 
8,920 
14,130 
522 
7,135 
4,572 
756 
8,532 
4,851 
773 
10,599 
5,345 
1,012 
13,118 
5,801 
113.  Saccos have beaten the pandemic after SASRA cut capital adequacy by 50% 
and  liquidity  requirements  by  50%.  The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  (CBK)  also  took  a 
similar measure by lowering the cash reserve ratio, injecting more liquidity into the 
banking system. 
Table 6: Key performance indicators (KES Millions)  
2019 
8% 
10% 
38% 
Prescribed 
Minimum   2020 
Stability 
Indicator 
Capital adequacy 
Core 
capital/total 
assets 
Core 
capital/total 
deposits 
Institutional 
capital 
assets 
Liquidity ratio 
Liquid 
assets/total 
deposits 
Operating efficiency /loan quality ratios 
Total 
expenses/total 
revenue 
/total 
65% 
10% 
16% 
15% 
74% 
8% 
35% 
66% 
10% 
22% 
74% 
2018 
2017 
2016 
38% 
39% 
38% 
65% 
65% 
63% 
9% 
7% 
8% 
20% 
34% 
33% 
80% 
47% 
55% 
114.  The summary of information based on audited accounts show the following for 
the Saccos: 
i)  The profit before tax grew by 8% to reach KES 656 million in 2020 from KES 
607 million in 2019. 
34 
ii)   Total  assets  grew  by  16%  to  reach  KES  16.5  billion  in  2020  from  KES  14.1 
billion in 2019.  
iii) Total deposits grew by 11% to reach KES 8.9 billion in 2020 from KES 8 billion 
in 2019.  
iv) Total gross loans grew by 24% to reach KES 14.1 billion in 2020 from KES 11.3 
billion in 2019, indicating a positive demand for lending from the members of 
Unaitas.  Allowance  for  loan  loss  grew  by  31%  to  reach  KES  1  billion  in  2020 
from KES 773 million in 2019 as a result of increasing provisions based on the 
volatile  and  declining  economic  environment  occasioned  by  the  COVID-19 
pandemic. 
v)  Core capital grew by 9% to reach KES 5.8 billion in 2020 from KES 5.3 billion in 
2019, indicating stability of Unaitas. 
vi) Unaitas  has  maintained  aggregate  level  of  compliance  with  the  prescribed 
capital adequacy ratios requirements of the regulator SASRA.  
vii) The Sacco has continued to grow its institutional capital over the years through 
retention  of  surpluses  from  profit  gains  made  over  the  years  to  build  a  solid 
capital base for the organisation.  
ii) Tower DT-Taking Sacco 
115.  Tower Sacco was registered in 1976, and licensed by SASRA as a DT Sacco in 
2011 after fulfilling all the conditions set by the regulatory body. This has enabled 
the Sacco to achieve some positive milestones, including an increased capital base 
due to retention and raising of more share capital. It has become self-reliant due to 
retention of surplus and mobilisation of capital, leading to reduced external borrowing 
and has become more efficient in service delivery and the granting of loans. And it 
has divested from non-core activities. 
116.  With support from a partnership between the Government of Kenya and the 
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) and Programme for Rural Outreach 
of  Financial  Innovations  and  Technologies  Programme  (PROFIT),  the  staff  were 
introduced  to  the  programme.  S  staff  from  the  credit  and  marketing  departments 
were  trained  and  exposed  to  insights  on  how  agriculture  value  chains  work,  the 
different players in the value chains and their roles at different levels of production. 
After the training, the Sacco started developing farmer-oriented and friendly financial 
products.  Since  then  it  has  been  able  to  disburse  over  2,000  short-term  loans  to 
small-scale farmers in groups in Nyandarua County, amounting to KES 200 million. 
The  Sacco  has  a  loan  book  of  about  KES  80  million  being  serviced  by  small-scale 
farmer  groups  and  value  chain  players  like  small  agrovet  shops,  while  premium 
customers, including SME members and dairy marketing cooperatives are servicing 
a combined loan book of about KES 3 billion. The Sacco also advanced credit to some 
of the farmers’ cooperatives in the county. It is therefore no coincidence that, of the 
large-tier  DT-Saccos,  Tower  Sacco  was  the  fastest  growing  for  the  second  year 
running, with a growth rate of about 31% in 2019, compared with a growth rate of 
35 
28.1% recorded in 2018. This growth rate led Tower Sacco to move from the 11th 
position  in  2018  to  13th  position  in  2019.14    This  report  does  not  want  to  be 
speculative but it is likely that among the factors that led to the fast growth of the 
Sacco  was  the  diversification  into  investing  and  the  partnership  with  the  PROFIT 
programme.  This  cements  the  argument  that  investing  in  well-targeted  Saccos, 
capacity  building  and  injecting  liquidity  can  significantly  improve  the  outreach  of 
Saccos  in  working  on  supporting  farmers  and  rural  stakeholders.  The  Sacco  has 
spread to other agricultural counties such as Laikipia, Nakuru, Nyeri and Narok and 
is now targeting farmers in Nairobi and Kiambu counties. 
Table 7: Tower Sacco’s performance in the last three years  
Parameter/Year 
Capital adequacy  
Asset quality  
Earning  rate/Return  on  assets 
(ROA)  
Liquidity ratio  
Loan book (KES billions)  
Asset base (KES billions) 
Membership  
2018  
14.6%  
83.3%  
2%  
2019  
14.3%  
82.4%  
2%  
2020  
14.6%  
86%  
3%  
Growth (%)1  
2.10 
4.37 
50.00 
64.73%  
7.095  
8.524 
83,333  
-20.58 
49.4%  
62.2%  
28.44 
11.804 
9.190 
23.05 
13.729 
11.157 
105,580   147,614   39.81 
1 Growth between FY2019 and FY2020 (%) 
Effects of COVID-19 on Tower Sacco’s Performance  
117.  Covid-19 has had negative impact in the following key areas indicated below, 
thus greatly affecting its normal operations: 
Savings/Deposits  
118.  Due  to  movement  restrictions,  the  agriculture  value  chain  experienced  a 
limitation  in  free  flow  of  both  goods  and  services.  This  led  to  strained  cash  flows, 
strained earnings, especially in Nyandarua County whose main economic activity is 
agriculture, and as a result, strained savings and deposits. The culture of savings has 
been compromised.  
 Loan repayments  
119.  With strained cash flows, the ability to meet loan obligations is not there. This 
means  that  most  loans  will  either  miss  some  monthly  payments  or  monthly 
instalments  or  will  be  paid  partially.  This  has  led  to  a  slight  regression  of  Tower 
Sacco’s portfolio at risk to the loan book held by farmers and SMEs in the agriculture 
value chain.  
Revenues  
14 Sacco Supervision Report 2019 
36 
120.  With  strained  earnings  and  cash  flows,  the  Sacco’s  businesses  experienced 
diminishing returns, thus they were unable to service their loans in a timely manner. 
This  increased  its  provisioning  and  as  a  result,  revenues  were  also  negatively 
affected.  
Liquidity  
121.  This  is  directly  affected  by  all  the  three  factors  above.  If  savings,  share 
deposits, loan repayments and revenues are negatively affected, it is automatic that 
liquidity  will  also  be  affected  negatively.  This  is  reflected  by  the  ratio  declining  by 
20.58% (see Table 6 above) 
iii)  AMICA DT-Sacco 
122.  This  Sacco  was  started  by  small-scale  farmers  as  the  Murang’a  Farmers’ 
District  (currently  Murang’a  County)  Cooperative  Union  (MFDCU)  to  offer  union 
banking services (UBS) to their members in 1966.  
123.  The Union Banking Section (UBS) transformed into a separate legal entity from 
Murang’a Farmers District Co-operative Union (MFDCU) and was registered as Murata 
Farmers Sacco Society Limited in 1970. In 1997, the Union Banking Section (UBS) 
transformed into a separate legal entity from Murang’a Farmers District Cooperative 
Union (MFDCU) and was registered as Murata Farmers Sacco Society Limited. 
124.  Then  in  2006,  the  Sacco  changed  its  name  from  Murata  Farmers  Sacco  to 
Murata Sacco Ltd. The Sacco was licensed by Sacco Societies Regulatory Authority 
(SASRA) as a deposit-taking Sacco in 2011. The Sacco has now been rebranded as 
Amica Sacco. The Sacco has a solid history of more than 50 years serving small-scale 
farmers. 
Amica’s performance overview 
125.  Amica  Sacco  has  strong  foundations  and  is  among  the  top  fifteen  medium-
tiered  DT-Saccos  by  total  assets  (KES  3.82  billion)  and  total  deposits  (KES  3.02 
billion) in 2019. The Sacco has continued to invest in technology and to update its 
systems in order to serve its members more effectively and efficiently.  The ratios of 
the Sacco have shown a positive trend overs the last three years, as shown in Table 
7 below.   
37 
Table 8: Amica’s Performance 
CAPITAL  COMPONENTS 
(KES)  
Surplus after tax  
Core capital 
Dec 2020 
166,550,036.00 
Dec 2019 
110,551,659.00 
Dec 2018 
172,738,699.00 
12,020,246.00 
(199,326,777.21)  (149,334,694.00) 
(521,923,458) 
Institutional capital 
ON  -  BALANCE  SHEET 
ASSETS  
Deposits  and  balances  at 
other institutions 
Gross loans and advances   3,524,264,582.00  2,786,214,844.00  2,446,130,100.00 
4,549,314,918.00  3,819,682,653.06  3,062,950,949.66 
128,493,436.00 
417,893,876.00 
349,562,621.00 
Dec-18 
Dec-19 
Dec-20 
(566,163,046) 
(662,168,350) 
Total assets 
Total liquid assets 
486,843,502.00 
436,747,403.00 
356,742,891.00 
Loan loss provision 
450,974,406.00  
436,442,796.00  
481,643,926.00  
Members’ deposits  
3,505,505,874.00  
3,024,616,387.00  
2,621,230,612.00  
Dec-20 
Ratios 
Core capital to  assets ratio   0.3% 
Institutional 
assets ratio 
Core  capital  to  deposits 
ratio  
capital 
to 
0.34% 
-11.47% 
Liquidity ratio 
Earning rate 
Asset quality 
13.89% 
3.66% 
11.34% 
iv)  K-Unity Sacco 
Dec-19 
-5% 
Dec-18 
-5% 
-17.34% 
-18.48% 
-6.59% 
14.44% 
2.89% 
13.54% 
-5.70% 
13.61% 
5.64% 
16.45% 
126.  K-Unity  (formerly  Kiambu  Unity  Finance  Co-operative  Union  Ltd)  is  a 
cooperative union established in 1974 as a result of the amalgamation of the then 
Limuru Marketing Co-operative Union and Kiambu Dairy Marketing Union to act as a 
means  of  facilitating  savings  and  credit  facilities  for  dairy  and  pyrethrum  societies 
within Kiambu County. In 2019 it had an asset base of over KES 2.9 billion. Its total 
deposits grew by 10.5% from KES 2.72 billion in 2018 to KES 3.04 billion in 2019. It 
has more than 100,000 members in five counties, namely Kiambu, Nairobi, Nakuru, 
Narok, and Nyandarua. 
v) Bingwa DT Sacco 
127.  Bingwa  Sacco  Society  Ltd  (Formerly  Kirinyaga  Tea  Growers  Sacco  Ltd)  was 
registered in 1984, being the first of its kind in the country and in Africa. Initially, it 
38 
started its operations with back office savings activity (BOSA) services. It introduced 
BOSA  services  in  1993  to  meet  the  increasing  demand  by  the  growing 
membership. The Sacco was first licensed by SASRA to undertake deposit-taking in 
2011, and was among the first Saccos to be registered to do so in the country. The 
Sacco’s  gross  loans,  total  assets  and  totals  deposits  were  KES  3,826  million,  KES 
5,821  million  and  KES  2,937  million  in  2019,  respectively.  The  total  membership 
increased  from  187,488  in  2018  to  201,558  in  2020.  The  Sacco  provides  both 
financial  and  non-financial  services  to  its  members  and  it  has  19  branches  in 
Kirinyaga and Nairobi counties.   
7.  SUMMARY OF SACCOS’ POTENTIAL TO PARTICIPATE IN RK FINFA 
An assessment of the profiled DT-taking Saccos starts at the point of annual licencing. 
The fact that they were licensed for FY2019 meant that they met the Sacco legal and 
regulatory threshold for annual licencing that SASRA looks at in order to approve the 
annual licence for Saccos. Some of the conditions include a minimum requirement on 
capital  adequacy  that  requires  Sacco  societies  to  comply  with  and  maintain  at  all 
times the minimum capital requirements as required by the law and regulations. For 
Saccos to acquire the  annual  licence, they  also need to maintain a certain  level of 
liquidity, and comply with proper asset and liability management.  All the Saccos that 
were profiled in this report met this licensing threshold. In addition, all the five Saccos 
had solid total assets and total deposits and were classified as belonging in the top 
and medium tiers in both of these two parameters, as shown in Table 8 below. 
Table 9: Saccos’ financial information    
No.   Name  of 
DT-
the 
Sacco  
Total  Assets  (KES 
billions)  
Growth 
(%) 
2019 
Total 
(KES billions)  
deposits 
Growth 
(%) 
2019 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
UNAITAS  
TOWER  
BINGWA  
AMICA 
K-UNITY  
2018 
12.88  
8.52  
5.15  
3.06 
3.64 
2019 
2018 
2019 
14.23   10.48  
11.16   30.99  
13.01 
5.82 
3.82 
4.09 
24.84 
12.36 
7.48 
6.55 
2.78 
2.62 
2.72 
8.05 
8.63 
2.94 
3.02 
3.04 
7.62 
31.83 
5.76 
15.27 
11.76 
Strategies, challenges and opportunities 
128.  The five Saccos were originally registered as farmers’ Saccos and continued to 
hold a large portion of their memberships as well their plan portfolio directed at small-
scale farmers and the rural sector in general.  In that respect, they satisfy the RK 
FINFA requirements for support. As can be seen from their assets and deposits, they 
are  strong  organisations.  But  their  performance  is  directly  proportional  to  the 
39 
performance of the agriculture sector, which has not done particular well in the last 
few years. They have also been hit by the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The Saccos are also in a tough business in terms of competition from other financial 
service  providers,  changing  demands  from  customers,  technological  advancement, 
and political and legal changes. These changes have posed opportunities as well as 
threats to the Saccos. In order to address these obstacles, the Saccos have diversified 
into growth areas such as SMEs, since the opening up of the common bond, including 
having salaried members.  
129.  Most  of  the  Saccos  profiled  here  have  diversified  into  lending  for  climate 
change interventions, such as water harvesting structures and facilities, solar energy, 
biogas etc., whose uptake is increasing as farmers become aware of the challenges 
and as the price of electricity continues to increase. Two of them were able to interact 
with  the  PROFIT  programme:  the  Saccos  benefited  from  capacity  from  the 
programme while AMICA Sacco received KES 100 million from the AFC for on-lending 
to farmers.  
Assessment of the technological/operational capacity of the Saccos and quality 
of MIS systems 
amenable 
130.  The consultant did not assess this aspect but took the Saccos’ word that they 
have  a  robust  systems  that  include  core  banking  systems.  However,  most  of  the 
Saccos  were 
the 
technological/operational capacity of the Sacco and the quality of the MIS system if 
they  were  to  take  part  in  the  RK  FINFA  facility.  These  five  Saccos  have  been 
leveraging on the core banking system to improve their performance and would be 
willing  to  have  due  diligence  carried  out.    They  would  be  willing  to  have  technical 
services  provided  when  needed,  including  in  assessing  the  pipeline  of  potential 
clients. 
undertaking 
assessment 
and 
to 
of 
8.  EFFECTS/IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON THE CREDIT MARKET 
IN KENYA  
131.  Kenya’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is expanded by 5.4% per cent in 2019 
compared to a growth of 6.3% in 2018. The growth was spread across all sectors of 
the economy but was more pronounced in service-oriented sectors. The agriculture, 
forestry and fishing sectors accounted for a sizeable proportion of the slowdown, from 
6.0% growth in 2018 to 3.6% in 2019. The manufacturing sector grew by 3.2% in 
2019  compared  to  4.3%  in  2018.  Despite  most  sectors  recording  decelerated 
growths,  the  economy  was  supported  by  accelerated  growth  in  financial  and 
insurance services (6.6%) and real estate activities (5.3%)15. 
15 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 2020 
40 
132.  Up till 2019 one of the challenges that FIs faced was the capping of interest 
rates by the CBK. A few months after the lifting of the interest rate capping, COVID-
19 struck. In order to reduce the spread of the pandemic, the government put in a 
raft of measures, including curfews, restricting inter-country travel, lockdowns, and 
closing of schools, colleges and universities, among other measures. Businesses rely 
both on the steady demand for their goods and services, and the provision of goods, 
services, financing, and information to their business. In 2002, the COVID-19 crisis 
disrupted both of these critical needs. 
133.  Across value chains, the biggest impact of COVID-19 on agriculture small and 
medium enterprises (agri-SMEs) is changes in demand, followed by disruptions in the 
flow  of  commodities,  information,  and  capital.  A  few  businesses  and  farmers 
benefitted from increased demand for staple foods, but, for many, the supply chain 
disruptions had a negative effect. Lack of access to financing meant that agri-SMEs 
and  smallholder  farmers  were  particularly  exposed  to  changes  in  demand  or 
operations. The adverse impacts of COVID-19 on these businesses were felt all along 
the  supply  chain,  from  producers  to  consumers,  with  significant  long-term 
consequences  for  rural  livelihoods  and  food  security.  The  volatility  in  demand  for 
products has also disrupted the ability of smallholders to maintain their businesses 
across  all  types  of  value  chains.  The  only  beneficiaries  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic 
were the producers of staple foods, since consumers were expected to remain steady 
(demand for staple foods is inelastic, although this could also have been affected by 
reduced incomes, given that lot of people lost their jobs). Changes in demand were 
noticeable in local markets. Reduced demand was driven by both decreased incomes 
and social distancing regulations. Demand for staple foods, such as maize and rice, 
has  increased;  however,  markets  struggled  to  fulfil  the  demand  in  the  face  of 
government  regulations  limiting  transport.  The  decrease  in  income  also  created  a 
shift  in  demand  from  higher-value  horticulture  toward  more  basic  vegetables  and 
staple crops.  
134.  In business markets (hotels, restaurants, etc.) tourism has been halted across 
most  countries,  and  social  distancing  or  curfew  measures  have  forced  many 
businesses  to  close. This  has  forced  agri-SMEs  to  think  differently  about  how  they 
can serve local customers.  In addition, the flow of agricultural inputs and availability 
of labour has been disrupted as government regulations around social distancing are 
enforced. This includes inputs such as seeds and fertilizer for commercial farms, and 
raw  materials  for  processors.  These  disruptions  forced  businesses  to  proactively 
manage their inventory, stocking up when they can. This is difficult, however, without 
access to credit lines, especially as the price of some inputs, notably fertilizer, goes 
up. It is particularly difficult for cereal growers in Kenya, for whom the arrival of their 
inputs  is  very  time-sensitive  due  to  the  planting  season.  For  aggregators  and 
processors that source from smallholder farmers, there is a particular constraint to 
their access to raw materials if the farmers are keeping their harvest for their own 
consumption rather than selling it to traders or processors.  
41 
135.  The COVID-19 pandemic has created even more financial pressure on farmers 
and agri-SMEs in Kenya. The volatile markets and ongoing restrictions on movement 
are putting additional pressure on farmers and agri-SMEs’ finances. They could face 
financial challenges and experience difficulties servicing their loans and scaling down 
their  operations.  FIs  are  also  facing  challenges  in  serving  customers  as  their  own 
credit lines are constrained. FIs’ risk appetites to serve the farming community have 
traditionally been constrained, as they have argued that the sector is risky to advance 
credit to and costly to serve. This has greatly been aggravated by the pandemic as 
FIs needed to reach rural clients while adhering to safety measures set by the Ministry 
of  Health.  Ultimately,  the  flow  of  finances  to  the  agricultural  sector  is  now  further 
constrained as the sector becomes more risky and FIs further retreat from it.  
136.  The COVID-19 shock posed significant downside risks to banks’ performance. 
Although most of the banking sector’s reports were not yet in when this assessment 
was being conducted (April 2021), a reading of reports from a sample of the first-tier 
banks  do  not  present  a  very  rosy  picture  of  the  state  of  affairs.  For  example, 
Cooperative Bank reported a 24% decline in profit-before tax of KES 14.3 billion for 
the financial year 2020 compared to KES 20.7 billion recorded in 2019, and a profit 
after tax (net profit) of KES 10.9 billion in 2020 compared to KES 14.3 billion in 2019.  
At the same time loan loss provisioning increased by 235% from KES 2.54 billion in 
2019, while the financial institution also had to restructure KES 49 billion in loans in 
order  to  support  customers  impacted  by  the  pandemic.  Kenya  Commercial  Bank 
(KCB), on the other hand, reported a net profit of KES 19.6 billion in 2020, compared 
to KES 25.2 billion that the listed lender posted in 2019, which is a 22% decline.  
137.  COVID-19 hit the sector when it was recovering from the effects of the interest 
rate cap implemented by the Central Bank of Kenya in 2016.  The pandemic shock 
reversed the potential benefits for banks from the repeal of the lending rate cap in 
November  2019,  including  being  able  to  price  risk  appropriately.  The  cap  was 
introduced  by  Parliament  in  2016  to  curb  high  lending  rates  but  had  unintended 
consequences, with banks pulling back loans to certain riskier sectors, such as SMEs, 
thus  restricting  private  sector  credit  growth.  The  repeal  was  expected  to  enhance 
access to credit among the private sector.  
138.  Meanwhile, borrowers in the country will soon need to regularise repayment of 
their  loans  after  the  CBK  announced  the  expiry  of  emergency  measures  on  the 
restructuring of loans on 23rd March, 2021. These emergency measures included the 
provision of regulatory flexibility to banks by CBK. The interventions involved various 
restructuring options, including an extension of the repayment period, a moratorium 
on principal or interest and waivers on interest or fees. According to the regulator, 
these  measures  have  provided  space  to  borrowers  to  ride  through  the  pandemic, 
mitigate job losses and pivot their business models to the new normal. In total, loans 
amounting to KES 1.7 trillion were restructured by end of February 2021, accounting 
for 57% of the banking sector’s gross loans. The outstanding restructured loans as 
at end February amounted to KES 569.3 billion, or 19% of the total gross loans and 
42 
more  than  95%  of  the  outstanding  restructured  loans,  which  are  being  repaid  in 
accordance with the restructured terms. 
139.  While the CBK had taken measures to reduce the adverse effects of the COVID-
19  pandemic  on  commercial  banks,  and  the  measures  could  have  contributed  on 
stabilising the Saccos sub-sector, there were no specific interventions put in place to 
shield the Saccos. SASRA had put in place and established a daily liquidity monitoring 
report to closely follow the performance of this indicator.  
140.  A summary of the profiles of 5 DT-saccos in agricultural finance is shown in 
the table below 
Table  10:  Summary  of  the  profiles  of  5  DT  Saccos  active  in  agricultural 
finance 
MFIs 
UNAITAS  TOWER   AMICA 
K-Unity   Bingwa 
Financial soundness1 
Have an agriculture strategy? 2 
 
       X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
Staff has agri-capacity2 
      X 
      X 
      X 
     X 
     X 
Rural outreach (branches)  
Already offering agricultural loans  
Targeted 
product development 
agricultural 
finance 
 
 
       X 
 
 
     X 
 
 
 X 
 
 
     X 
 
 
     X 
 
technical 
services 
Need 
/opportunities  to  participate  in  the 
RK FINFA programme  
Quality of MIS3  
4  Although the financial statements are sound and the saccos were licensed by SASRA or FY 2019, it 
is important to point that it is not feasible to deeply interrogate such financial statements in this 
kind of assignment. They are taken as-is. The RK FINFA would need to undertake due diligence of  
financial institutions to participate in the RK FINFA programme during implementation  
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
5  TOWER  and  AMICA  DT-saccos  participating  in  PROFIT  programme  with  benefiting  from  capacity 
building and AMICA receiving KES 100 million from AFC 
6  The quality of the MIS will have to be vouched for after due diligence if the MFIs were to participate 
in the RK FINFA programme 
9.  JUSTIFICATION/RATIONALE FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE PROJECT 
141.  Farmers and other stakeholders in the agricultural/rural sector continue to be 
constrained  by  inadequate  access  to  financial  services.  The  primary  target  group 
should  be  made  up  of  rural  poor  households  with  a  member(s)  who  has  actual  or 
potential capacity to generate income through economic activities. The target group 
will include, in particular, smallholder farmers engaged in crop or livestock production 
43 
with some marketable surplus, those who receive occasional remittances from other 
household members or relatives, retrenched mine workers who have resettled in rural 
areas, 
landless  households  with  sporadic  wage  employment  opportunities, 
households headed by women,  and unemployed young people.  
142.  On the supply side, there are many types of FIs in the agriculture/rural space. 
However, it is doubtful that they are fully satisfying the demand for financial services. 
Additionally, from the profiling undertaken, they seem to be concentrated in a small 
geographical  space  (limited  geographical  diversification)  and  the  product  offerings 
seem  to  be  quite  limited.  There  is  a  need  to  have  FIs  who  have  the  appetite  to 
increase  not  just  their  product  offerings,  models  and  channels  of  delivery  but  also 
their geographical space.  
143.  The FIs to be selected to receive the investment funds from RK FINFA must 
therefore have an inclusive targeting approach in order to ensure the targeted groups 
are  reached  with  financial  services.  The  FIs  should  also  be  willing  to  develop  and 
implement products and services that will be accessible and responsive to the needs 
of targeted groups. The FIs to be selected should improve access to financial services, 
which means increasing outreach (increasing number of targeted beneficiaries), and 
improving  the  depth  of  outreach,  portfolio  quality,  and  financial  sustainability  that 
will be essential if FIs are to reach significant numbers of the targeted groups and 
realise long-term social returns. This means, among other things, charging interest 
rates  that  cover  costs  in  order  to  ensure  profitability  and  growth  and  efficiency. 
Improving  the  efficiency  of  rural  finance  operations  translates  into  higher-quality, 
lower-cost services for the targeted groups. FIs can achieve greater efficiencies, and 
thus  reduce  costs,  by  investing  in  quality  management  information  systems,  the 
development  of  relevant  products,  technological  improvements  and  well-trained 
staff.  RK FINFA is designed to put in place interventions that address some of the 
challenges and constraints that have been identified in this report.   
144.  Saccos and MFIs have started showing interest in agricultural lending. During 
the implementation of the recently concluded PROFIT programme, there were a few 
MFIs and Saccos that participated and accessed resources from the AFC. However, 
these  FIs  have  inadequate  finances  to  enable  them  to  serve  farmers  and  other 
agricultural value chain (AVC) players adequately. If they could partner with more 
and  better  capitalised  FIs,  such  as  commercial  banks,  through  participation  in  a 
project such as RK FINFA, they can deepen their financial outreach in the rural areas, 
where  penetration  is  still  low.  To  ensure  that  the  injection  of  credit  meets  its 
objectives  in  RK  FINFA,  it  should  be  accompanied  by  capacity  building  by  way  of 
technical support  services in aspects such as (i) technical assistance at both the pre- 
and post-investment stage for agri-SMEs to strengthen their business and financial 
management capacity to qualify for and manage financing; (ii) capacity building for 
FIs to adapt their product offering, enhance their staff expertise, and improve their 
systems  and  processes  so  they  are  better  suited  for  the  agri-SME  market;  (iii) 
innovative  investments  to  promote  technological  and  other  business  model 
improvements  that  will  drive  down  the  costs  of  agri-SME  lending;  (iv)  design  and 
44 
implementation  of  demand  for  and  supply  of  agricultural  finance  to  help  the  MFIs 
understand different smallholder segments and their needs; (v) product design and 
piloting  to  reduce  the  costs  and  risks  of  new  market  entry  and  innovation;  (vii) 
systems  improvements  to  adapt  MIS/core  banking  systems  and  use  technology 
solutions, such as automation of data capture and analysis, to accommodate tailored 
credit  assessment,  portfolio  monitoring  requirements,  and  loan  repayment 
schedules; (viii) design of staff incentive plans to promote agricultural lending; (ix) 
introduction  of  product-costing  practices  to  inform  product  and  programme  design 
and to help to make the business case for new market entrants; and (xi) design and 
piloting of new delivery channels to reduce the costs and risks of lending. 
145.  In conclusion, there are great opportunities for Saccos and MFIs/MFBs to fill 
the gap in financial service provision that exits in the rural and agricultural sectors in 
Kenya.   
45 
Attachment 1 to Appendix 1 of PIM 
Landscape document for Participation of Rural SACCOs in 
the Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility 
MAY 2021 
46 
Introduction 
146.  Kenya’s  financial  sector  is  the  third  largest  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  and  is  a 
significant contributor to economic growth and job creation. This sector is driven by 
increased adoption of technology, emergence of alternative channels of distribution, 
increased financial inclusion levels and a stable regulatory environment. As of January 
2021, the Kenyan financial sector comprised a wide variety of players including: (i) 
38  commercial  banks;  (ii)  one  mortgage  finance  company;  (iii)  a  large  number  of 
Microfinance Institutions (MFI), notably 14 deposit-taking Microfinance Banks (MFB); 
(iv)  a  vibrant  Savings  and  Credit  Cooperatives  (SACCO)  sector,  also  comprising 
deposit-taking  SACCOs,  nine  representative  offices  of  foreign  banks,  offices  of 
international financial institutions, (v) insurance companies, (vi) 68 foreign exchange 
bureaus;  (vii)  19  money  remittance  providers  and  (viii)  three  credit  reference 
bureaus16. These various types of financial  institutions serve different segments of 
the  Kenyan  agriculture  sector,  comprising  in  particular:  (a)  small-scale  lending  to 
smallholders and microentrepeneurs by small rural financial institutions (SACCOs and 
MFBs), and (b) medium-size lending to SME-agribusinesses, by commercial banks. 
147.  The  banking  industry  was  resilient  in  2020,  as  reflected  by  high  capital  and 
liquidity  buffers  of  18.5  percent  and  53.1  percent  against  the  statutory  minimum 
requirements of 14.5 percent and 20 percent, respectively. However, profit declined 
by 30.0 percent in the year to June 2020 and assets quality deteriorated, with the 
ratio of non-performing loans to gross loans increasing from 12 percent in December 
2019 to 13.1 percent in June 2020. Similarly, the SACCOs industry was resilient in 
2019,  with  enhanced  capital  and  liquidity  buffers.  However,  the  industry’s  high 
interest expenses to income ratio and disruptions in members’ livelihoods elevated 
funding and credit risks, respectively.  
148.  Kenya’s SACCO sector is among the biggest in Africa with 5.7 per cent of total 
assets-to-GDP  ratio.  Growth  of  this  sector  has  leveraged  on  rapid  adoption  of 
technology and innovations in the provision of financial services and products coupled 
with  the  opening  up  of  the  common  membership  bond.  In  addition,  an  enabling 
regulatory  environment  has  helped  SACCOs  to  grow  and  be  accessed  by  28.4  per 
cent of the adult population as of December 2019, the highest level in Africa17. Total 
assets for all deposits taking SACCOS grew by 11.8 per cent, to KSh555.9 billion in 
2019, and the gross loans, mainly funded from members’ contributions and deposits, 
grew  by  11.3  per  cent  in  201918.  Overall,  SACCOs  have  played  a  critical  role  in 
improving  the  financial  inclusion  of  the  Kenyan  rural  population.  However  these 
16 The Kenya Financial Stability Report (October 2020, Issue No.11) 
https://www.centralbank.go.ke/uploads/financial_sector_stability/1560356005_Financial%20Stability%20Report.pdf.; 
17 Ibid. 
18 Ibid 
47 
institutions’  further  growth  is  limited  by  their  challenges  to  access  affordable  and 
long-term wholesale financing. 
149.  The  Sacco  sub-sector  is  currently  well  regulated  by  the  Saccos  Societies 
Regulatory  Authority,  which  is  mandated  to  undertake  licensing,  regulation  and 
superstition of Saccos. Under its watch the sector has grown and stabilized and has 
become  one  of  the  most  important  pillars  in  the  offering  financial  services  in  the 
country.  Other  policy  instruments  that  guide  the  sub-sector  in  the  Co-operative 
Societies Act and its regulation and the Co-operative Development Policy  
150.  Saccos are classified as either deposit-taking (DT) or non-deposit-taking (non-
DT) Saccos. The DT-Saccos are those that take deposits, and thus offer withdraw-
able savings accounts services similar to those offered by banks. They also offer front 
office service activities (FOSAs) here members can walk into their banking halls as 
they withdraw or deposit money into their accounts. These saccos are licensed and 
regulated  by  SASRA  and  besides  the  basic  saving  and  credit  products  they  also 
provide  basic  banking  services  that  is,  they  demand deposits,  provide  payment 
services and some even provide ATMs. It is because of this intermediation, and the 
systemic  risks  they  pose  in  the  market,  that  deposit-taking  Saccos  are  regulated 
prudentially by the Sacco Societies Regulatory Authority (SASRA). 
151.  On  the  other  hand,  the  non-DT-Sacco  comprises  those  saccos  that  mobilize 
savings from their members; these savings are strictly utilized as collateral for credit 
facilities advanced to such members. The non-deposit taking Saccos do not offer front 
office  services  as  members  do  not  hold  accounts  where  they  deposit  or  withdraw 
money.  Non-deposit  taking  Saccos  accept  long-term  deposits,  which  are  used  as 
collateral  that  members  use  to  borrow  loans  against.  These  deposits  cannot  be 
withdrawn unless a member leaves the Sacco altogether.  
is 
that 
to  note 
important 
It 
the  main difference  between  depository 
institutions and non-depository  institutions lies  in  their  demand  for  deposits  from 
members.  DT saccos require you to open a savings account and deposit money that 
you can easily withdraw similar to what commercial banks do.  But non-DT saccos, 
require you to buy shares into the Sacco and become a member and save your money 
–  but  you  cannot  withdraw  it  unless  you  are  leaving  the  Sacco.   The  only  way  to 
access funds here is through loans and dividends.  
152.  The  Sacco  Sub-Sector  Demographic  Report  has  given  new  insights  hitherto 
unknown or sometimes more generally assumed by the country. For instance, one 
third of the DT-Sacco membership are below 35 years and 19.35 per cent of the adult 
population  were  members  of  DT-saccos  (conversely  80.65  per  cent  of  the  adult 
population do not belong to a DT-Sacco), meaning there is a huge untapped potential 
from which these saccos can recruit new membership.   
153.  Kenya is estimated to have between 4,000 and 5,000 SACCOs in Kenya, with 
over  3  million  members  that  shows  the  key  role  the  rural  SACCOs  could  play, 
48 
particularly  in  the  high  and  medium-potential  areas  of  rural  Kenya.  Saccos  have 
grown rapidly in the past decades and depot-taking ones are now better regulated 
under SASRA.  Their participation in deepen financial inclusion in the areas can be 
enhanced  in  the  new  IFAD  rural  finance  program.  A  few  saccos  accessed  financial 
resources from AFC under the now concluded PROFIT programme.  
i)  Deposit-Taking Saccos  
154.  The Kenya financial services sector is becoming increasingly competitive and 
technologically sophisticated. It has multiple providers and stakeholders - commercial 
banks,  MFIs,  Saccos  and  digital  (mobile  money  transfer  and  lenders).  There  were 
172 licensed DT-saccos operating in the country in 2019. This cluster of saccos have 
shown  resilient  and  stability  in  provision  of  financial  services  in  the  midst  of  stiff 
completion  from  other  types  of  financial  service  providers  (FSPs).  In  spite  of 
competition DT-Saccos continued to show great depth of resilience and stability as 
evidenced by their double-digit growth rate in all the key parameters or metrics of 
performance  in  2019.  Their  total  assets  increased  by  12.4%  to  KES  556.7  billion, 
while the total deposits increased by 11.27% to KES 380.4 billion19. 
155.  In addition, these saccos have continued to be stable and sound when assessed 
against capital adequacy (core capital), with their core capital having grown from KES 
54.94 in 2016 to KES 79.20 in 2019. In terms of liquidity, only nine DT-saccos had a 
liquidity  ratio  of  less  than  the  prescribed  15%  with  the  remaining  163  DT-saccos 
recording liquidity rations of well above that 15% threshold. This is an improvement 
from 25 DT-saccos, which were unable to meet the liquidity threshold in 2018.   
156.  The performance of  DT-saccos continued  to grow resulting  in  an  increase  in 
the  gross  loans  by  12.1  percent  to  KES  419.6  billion,  while  net  loans  and  credit 
advances constituted 71.9 percent of the total assets in 2019 and which was largely 
financed by the non-withdrawable deposit portfolio of the saccos. On the other hand, 
deposits grew by 11.3% to KES 380.4 billion in 2019. Indeed, the DT-saccos total 
assets  share  of  the  national  nominal  GDP  was  5.6  percent  in  2018,  while  it  was 
projected that this share of the national nominal GDP will increase to about 5.72% in 
2019, further underscoring the importance of DT-saccos in the economy20. 
157.  In  order  to  compare  performance,  risk  assessment  and  compliance  of  DT-
saccos they are categorised into three groups: (i) the large-tiered banks with assets 
in excess of KES 5 billion; (ii) medium-tiered saccos whose total assets are between 
KES 1 billion and KES 5 billion and (iii) DT-saccos whose total assets are less than 
the KES 1 billion threshold. In 2019, 31 DT-saccos in the large-tiered saccos had total 
assets worth KES 390.29 billion (70.11%) of the total portfolio for DT-taking Saccos, 
while the medium-tiered saccos had 58 saccos controlling KES 135.70 billion worth 
of assets and had a market share of 24.38%. The small-tiered saccos category had 
19 SACCO Supervision Annual Report, 2019 
20 Kenya Financial Sector Stability Report, 2018 
49 
83 saccos, which controlled only KES 30.72 billion worth of assets and a market of a 
meagre 5.52%. 
158.  It is instructive to note that the market share of total assets of the large-tiered 
saccos  increased  by  6.55%  from  65.8%  in  2018  to  70.11%  in  2019,  while  the 
medium-tiered category had its market share reduced by about 11% from 27.37% 
to 24.38% and the small-tiered category suffered the largest decline in market share 
of 19.2% from 6.83% to 5.52%. 
159.  SASRA has categorises in to three categories in terms of total deposits: as in 
the case of total assets, with the large-tier comprising of saccos with more than KES 
5billion, medium-tier are those saccos with total deposits of between KES 1 and KES 
5  billion  and  small-tier  is  composed  of  saccos  with  less  than  KES  1  billion  of  total 
deposits. As was the case with total assets, the large–tier saccos increased in number 
from 13 to 20 and controlled KES 224.75 billion worth of deposits and a market share 
of  59.08%,  while  medium-tier  saccos  had  their  numbers  reduce  from  54  to  53, 
controlled asserts worth KES 123.73 billion and a market share of 32.52%. The third 
tier saccos had their  numbers reduce from 107 to  99, controlled  KES 31.96  billion 
and a market share of a paltry 8.4%.  
160.  As was the case with total assets the largest DT-saccos saw their market share 
increase by 8.1% from 54.64% in 2018 to 59.08% in 2019, while the middle (2nd) 
tiered saccos saw an 8.0% decrease in their market from 35.35% to 32.52%. The 
third tier saccos saw an erosion of their market share of 16.1% from 10.01% to 8.4% 
during the same period. 
161.  In  Kenya  saccos  are  founded/formed  along  certain  “common  bond” 
characteristics  such  as  occupation,  profession,  industry,  geographical  area  of 
operations, among others. They can be grouped into five main categories based on 
this classification or clustering: (i); Government employee-based saccos; (ii) teacher-
based saccos; (iii) farmer-based (coffee, tea, dairy, sugar, cotton, horticulture, etc.); 
(iv)  private  sector-employee  based  saccos  and  (v)  community-based  (social 
association or membership) saccos. Many DT-saccos have, in the last decade or so 
opened  their  common  bond  to  membership  of  a  more  diverse  group  of  people. 
However,  the  bulk  of  the  DT-Sacco  membership  is  still  drawn  from  the  original 
common bond members. This categorisation has been retained by the regulator for 
the purposes of analysis and understanding the general and individual performance 
of  saccos  in  each  cluster  (even  when  the  composition  of  membership  may  have 
changed significantly). This is important for purposes of assessing the performance 
of  an  individual  Saco  and  the  general  performance  of  a  cluster  of  saccos.  This 
classification/clustering  also  assists  in  the  analysis  and  identification  of  risks 
associated  with  a  particular  cluster  of  DT-SACCOs,  as  well  as  the  development  of 
mitigation strategies to such risks.  
162.  The government is interested in having a properly regulated Sacco sub-sector 
in  the  country.  SASRA  continues  to  do  a  good  job  in  licensing,  supervising  and 
50 
regulating  the  DT-saccos.  In  order  to  further  efforts  to  fight  corruption,  reduce 
financial  malpractices  and  improve  the  governance  of  the  Sacco  sub-sector  the 
government has proposed several measures. This is in tandem with the government 
objective  of  having  a  better  legal  and  regulatory  regime  for  this  section  of  the 
financial  services  sector.  There  are  several  measures  that  have  been  proposed 
towards this end. One of the measures is the development of new rules/regulations 
to bring board non-DT Sacco under SASRA supervision. The Regulations specified a 
number of BOSA businesses, as the non-deposit taking SACCOs as defined by Section 
3(2) of the SACCO Societies Act. These are the Non-Deposit Taking business (BOSA) 
in which the total non-withdrawable deposits from members is equal to or KES 100 
million, Non-Deposit Taking business (BOSA) in which the SACCO Society mobilises 
membership and subscription to its share capital through digital or other electronic 
payment  platforms  and  Non-Deposit-Taking  business  (BOSA)  in  which  the  Sacco 
mobilises  membership  and  subscription  to  its  share  capital  from  persons  who  are 
ordinarily  resident  outside  the  country.  The  potential  saccos  have  been  given  six 
months to comply (up to 30th June 2021), from which time SASRA will start applying 
the regulations. Already there are about 45 non-DT-saccos have shown interest by 
supplying pre-licensing data and information. However none has formally made the 
application.  According  to  SASRA,  there  are  approximately  300  non-DT-saccos  that 
could  potentially  be  brought  under  SASRA’s  purview,  according  to  their  unaudited 
returns. 
163.  The  second  new  measures  proposed  is  the  planned  Sacco  Central  Liquidity 
Facility  (CLF).  The  objective  will  facilitate  cooperation  amongst  SACCOs  through 
pooling of liquidity and connected services to enhance the financial soundness and 
competitiveness  of  the  SACCOs  as  deposit  taking  institutions.  The  guidelines  and 
polices on bringing Saccos together have already been developed. It is worth noting 
that over fifty (50) SACCOs have already shown interest in participating in the facility 
and are working with the Regulator on this initiative and have already developed By-
laws to govern the CLF and shared services business amongst themselves. A Cabinet 
Memorandum  has  already  been  prepared  for  ministerial  consideration  and 
processing. The Office of the Attorney General, in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Agriculture,  Livestock,  Fisheries  and  Co-operatives  (State  Department  of  Co-
operatives) will then prepare a draft legal framework to be tabled in Parliament to 
amend the current Co-operative Societies and the Sacco Societies Act.  
ii)  Non-deposit-taking saccos  
164.  The overriding challenge to the co-operative movement is to reverse the recent 
decline in performance, particularly for commodity-based cooperatives. Following the 
liberalization of the co-operative sub-sector  in the early 1990’s, and withdrawal of 
direct  Government  intervention,  many  societies  found  themselves  unprepared  to 
cope  with  the  challenges  of  a  liberalized  market  economy.  Poor  management 
systems,  including  deficiency  in  financial  management  skills,  precipitated  chronic 
losses  and  heavy  indebtedness.  Other  factors  include  a  weak  capital  base  due  to 
51 
societies’ inability to mobilize adequate resources for investment and low members 
equity occasioned by lack of guaranteed returns and poor credit management. 
165.  In  order  to  further,  improve  the  prudence  governance  of  all  saccos  the 
government has continued reforms in the Sacco sub-sector. In 2020 the Minister for 
Agriculture.  Livestock,  Fisheries  and  Co-operatives  gazetted  the  Sacco  Societies 
(Non-Deposit-Taking  Business)  Regulations,  2020.  The  regulations  prescribe  the 
prudential  and  market  conduct  measures  to  be  complied  with  by  all  saccos 
undertaking specified non-deposit-taking business, popularly known as Back Office 
Service  Activity  (BOSA),  which  took  effect  on  1st  January  2021.  Specifically,  they 
regulations  specify  that  all  non-DT-saccos  in  which  the  total  non-withdrawable 
deposits from members is at least KES 100 million, non-DT-saccos who mobilize their 
membership and subscription through digital or other electronic payment platforms 
and non DT-saccos who mobilise membership and subscription from Kenyans living 
outside  the  country  (popularly  referred  as  Diaspora  Saccos),  will  be  regulated  by 
SASRA. This class of non-DT Saccos must comply with these regulations within six 
months of the commencement of the regulations 2020, that is, on or before 30th June 
2021. The regulation requires that the saccos put in place appropriate institutional 
measures  and  infrastructure,  a  management  information  system  (MIS)  for  the 
purpose  of  performing  and  acting  for  all  transactions  and  providing  the  minimum 
requirements  by  SASRA  and  appropriate  risk  management  policies  and  internal 
controls systems and suitable organisation, governance and management structure. 
iii)  Farmer-based DT– Saccos 
166.  There are 49 farmer-based DT-SACCOs21 accounting for slightly more than 28 
per cent of the current 172 DT-saccos that were licensed in 2019. While the farmer-
based  DT-saccos  account  for  47.8  per  cent  of  total  DT-taking  saccos  membership 
(about 2.25 million members), they only have a market share of 10.2% per cent of 
total assets and 9.9 per cent of total deposits in 2019. A critical point to note is that 
there are many employee-based Saccos that provide credit facilities to farmers and 
other  rural  enterprises.  SASRA  is  interested  in  understanding  the  sectoral 
performance of Saccos and has commissioned work to this extent.  
167.  Farmer-based DT-saccos were founded along the agricultural activities of its 
would-be members, such as coffee, tea or sugarcane farming, or dairy production. 
The  fact  that  Kenya  is  largely  an  agriculturally  based  economy  explains  why  this 
category  accounts  for  the  majority  of  members  in  the  DT-Sacco  system  (52%)22. 
Although  these  DT-saccos  controlled  only  13.8%  and  13.0%  of  the  DT-Sacco 
system’s  total  assets  and  deposits  respectively,  it  is  possible  that  some  members 
who belong to other categories of DT-saccos (government, teachers, private sector 
and community) also belong to farmer-based DT-saccos and vice-versa.  
21 See attached list at the Annex II 
22 SASRA Demographic Survey 2019 
52 
168.  Using  that  classification,  teacher-based  saccos  continue  to  be  the  best 
performing using total assets and total deposits as a parameter. Their market share 
in total deposits and total assets increased by 2.84% from 34.84% in 2018 to 35.82% 
in  2019  and  2.11%  from  35.93%  in  2018  to  36.69%  in  2019  respectively.  For 
government -employee DT-saccos, a marginal decrease of 0.78% was recorded from 
a market share of 38.37% in 2018 to 38.07% in 2019, while the total deposits saw 
a  marginal  decline  in  market  share  of  0.31%  from  37.67%  in  2018  to  37.55%  in 
2019.    On  the  other  hand,  the  market  share  of  farmer-based  saccos  declined  by 
2.18%  from  10.11%  in  2018  to  9.89%  in  2019.    On  its  part,  the  market  share of 
total assets for the same category of Saccos declined by 2% from 10.39% in 2018 
to 10.19% in 2019.   
169.  The market share of total deposits for the private-sector employee Saccos saw 
a decline 0f 4.11% from 10.21% in in 2018 to 9.79% in 2019, while the MS of total 
assets  saw  a  4.41%  decrease  from  9.51%  in  2018  to  9.09%  in  2019.  Lastly,  the 
market share of community-based Saccos decreased by a marginal 0.78% and their 
total assets also a small decline of 0.31% from 7.65% tin 20918 to 6.48& in 2019.  
170.  The  performance  of  a  particular  category  of  Saccos  dependent  on  the 
performance  of  the  sector,  industry,  profession,  or  occupation  from  which  the 
members are drawn.  The picture that emerges from the above analysis is that the 
best-performing  saccos  in  terms  of  assets  and  deposits  are  teacher-based  saccos, 
followed  closely  by  the  government-employee  based  ones.  The  best  performing 
categories of saccos are those that draw their membership from public teachers and 
government employees, whose pay, wages and allowances have risen in the last few 
years. The pay, wages and allowances are not so intricately tied to the performance 
of  the  sector  from  which  the  Sacco  members  are  drawn,  or  industry  or  even  the 
economy  as  a  whole,  as  would  be  the  case  saccos  who  draw  their  members  from 
farmers,  business  and  community,  whose  performance  is  directly  affected  by  the 
performance of the particular sector specifically of the performance of the economy 
generally.   
171.  The case for the farmer-based saccos is quite challenging given that, according 
to the Sacco Demographic Survey, 2019 conducted by SASRA, 47.81% of the total 
membership  of  DT-saccos  are  from  farmer-based  saccos,  teacher-based  and 
government employee-based saccos had 16.32% and 16.62 respectively, while the 
membership  of  private-  sector  employee-based  and  community-based  Sacco  was 
9.86% and 9.38% of the membership of DT-saccos respectively.  
172.  For farmer-based saccos matters were made worse by the fact that the country 
experienced a mixed weather phenomenon, characterized by drought during the first 
half,  followed  by  high  rainfall  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  This  culminated  in 
reduced  production  of  selected  crops  and  pasture  for  livestock.  Consequently,  the 
agriculture sector performance decelerated from 6.1 per cent in 2018 to 3.6 per cent 
in 2019. The value of marketed production at current prices contracted by 6.5 per 
cent from KES 498.3 billion in 2018 to KES 465.7 billion in 2019. This could buttress 
53 
the case for poor performance of the farmer-based case. The situation would certainly 
be made worse in 2020 by the Covid-19 pandemic shock. 
173.  The  analysis  of  the  performance  of  the  DT-Saccos  shows  that  the  teacher-
based DT-saccos registered marginal increase in their respective market share of the 
total assets and total deposits within the DT-saccos system. The teachers-based DT-
saccos total asset market share increased from 35.93% in 2018 to 36.69% in 2019; 
while the total deposits share increased from 34.83% in 2018 to 35.82% in 2019. It 
is also important to observe that the increase in the market share for Teachers-based 
DT-saccos was registered despite the fact that the number of DT-saccos within the 
system remained the same at 43 institutions between 2018 and 2019. The market 
share of the total assets attributable to farmer-based Saccos declined by 1.92  per 
cent (that is, from 10.39% in 2018 to 10.19% in 2019) and declined by 2.18 per cent 
(that is, 10.11% in 2018 to 9.89%) (see Figure 1 below).  
54 
Table  1:  Performance  of  Clusters  of  DT-Saccos  based  on  original  areas  of 
membership (common-bonds) 
Performance of Clusters of DT-Saccos based on original fields of membership (common-bonds)  
Cluster  per 
original 
common 
bond 
membershi
p  
of 
Governmen
t employees 
-based  DT- 
Saccos  
Teacher 
based  DT- 
Saccos  
Farmer 
Based  DT- 
Saccos  
Private 
sector 
Based  DT- 
Saccos  
Community 
Based  DT- 
Saccos  
No  of  DT- 
Saccos 
in 
the cluster  
Total 
(Billions)  
Asset 
% to Total Assets   Total 
Deposits 
% to Total Deposits  
(Billions)  
201
8  
201
9  
2018  
2019  
2018  
2019  
2018  
2019  
2018  
2019  
35  
36  
186.5
7  
209.07   37.67
37.55%   131.18   144.83   38.37%  
38.07%  
%  
43  
43  
177.9
2  
204.25   35.93
36.69%   119.10   136.27   34.83%  
35.82%  
%  
50  
49  
51.44   56.713   10.39
10.19%   34.57  
37.63  
10.11%  
9.89%  
%  
25  
24  
47.11   50.612   9.51%   9.09%  
34.90  
37.26  
10.21%  
9.79%  
21  
20  
32.21   36.072   6.50%   6.48%  
22.17  
24.45  
6.48%  
6.43%  
Totals  
174   172   495.2
100.00
%  
5  
Source: Annual Sacco supervision report, 2019  
556.71   100.00
%  
341.92   380.44   100.00%   100.00%  
174.  Of importance to note is that, in spite of the positive developments in Kenya’s 
overall  financial  sector  landscape,  prudentially  regulated  financial  institution 
investments into the agricultural sector remains low. Less than 5 per cent of formal 
credit targets the sector23 despite the large share of agriculture to GDP. According to 
the “Enterprise Survey” for Kenya24, 27 per cent of small enterprises have accessed 
a bank  loan, and the FinAccess survey report 201925  indicates that only about 3.2 
per cent of Kenyan farmers secure loans through formal MFBs and commercial banks 
to finance their agriculture activities. This is despite the fact that about 29 per cent 
of rural households in general access bank/MFB broader range of services including 
23 FAOSTAT, 2017 
24 Enterprise Surveys, Kenya Profile, World Bank 2019 
25 Central Bank of Kenya and Financial Sector Deepening Kenya, 2019. https://www.centralbank.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/2019-FinAcces-Report.pdf 
55 
savings and transactions. Instead of formal lending, the household data shows that 
the  primary  sources  of  households’  financing  to  agriculture  investments  comprise 
savings, sales of assets, support from family and friends, as well as the widespread 
informal  financial  services  such  as  chamas  (groups),  moneylenders  or  shopkeeper 
credit26. Some of the challenges of increasing lending to the sector include: (i) low 
productivity;  (ii)  lack  of  comprehensive  credit  data  to  properly  assess  client  credit 
worthiness often leading to rejection or excessive collateral requirements or higher 
rates;  (iii)  low  capacity  in  agricultural  lending,  by  financial  institutions;  (iv)  high 
perceived and real risk of commercial bank lending to agriculture and rural sector; 
(v) high service costs due to relatively small deal sizes linked to smallholders; (vii) 
limited market attractiveness relative to perceived higher investment returns outside 
agriculture27;  (vii)  limited  liquidity  available  to  rural  MFBs  sand  SACCOs,  the  last 
mile rural financial service providers who are interested and able to serve this market 
segment; and  (viii) limited access to interbank lending wholesale resources by MFBs 
ans SACCOs28. 
175.  On the demand side, households reported key obstacles to accessing formal 
financial  institution  lending  include:  (i)  insistence  on  land  as  collateral  in  many 
institutions; (ii) limited understanding of the application processes, (iii) existing debt 
at a financial institution, remaining to pay off, (iv) lacking guarantor or collateral, (v) 
limited or bad credit history and accounting records, (vi) insufficient demonstrated 
income or savings29. 
Rural saccos participation in a wholesale finance mechanism 
176.  Given that saccos are now well regulated under SASRA many of farmer/rural 
saccos  have  met  the  prudential  guidelines  and  are  fairly  well  managed.  However, 
they  are  unable  to  meet  the  demands  of  their  members  for  agricultural  credit. 
Therefore, capital from other financial institutions can be of much help in improving 
their capital base so that they can on-lend to the farmers. The PROFIT programme 
has demonstrated that it is possible for banks to reach the  small-scale farmers and  
micro  and  medium  enterprises  (MSMEs)  using  saccos  in  a  well-structured    model. 
The  AFC  made  the  lines  of  credit  available  to  a  few  saccos  for  the  purpose  of  on-
lending  to  their  members.  In  this  innovative  model  AFC  lent  KES  552  million  to 
selected Saccos and expected to leverage KES 2 billion. The Sacco default are was 1 
per  cent  and  profitability  at  maturity  for  AFC  was  31  per  cent.  AFC  recovered  the 
costs of capital  and overall corporate default rate was below 5 per cent down from 
40 per  cent  and AFC achieved a turnaround. Current all the 49 farmer-based are 
interested in the pipeline credit amounting KES 4 billion.  
26 Ibid. 
27 Kenya Bankers Association Centre for Research on Financial Markets and Policy, 2018: Realization of Full Potential of the 
Agriculture Sector. 
28 Information based on interviews held during the Concept Note mission and needs to be verified during the full design. 
29 29 Central Bank of Kenya and Financial Sector Deepening Kenya, 2019. https://www.centralbank.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/2019-FinAcces-Report.pdf 
56 
177.  One of the challenges that was faced during this innovative lending was the 
lack  of  a  robust  management  information  system  at  AFC.  However,  the  program 
supported the upgrading of AFC’s MIS so that it could be vibrant and robust enough 
to track, monitor and report on the application of the credit. So there is latent demand 
for this kind of green credit line and Saccos have demonstrated that they can be good 
channels  through  which  this  credit  can  be  supplied.  However,  it  is  important  to 
accompany this support with technical, support to the Sacco and the beneficiaries. 
Through the technical assistance it received, AFC made strides in several areas and 
results  included:  (i)  development  of  wholesale  financing  delivery  models  geared 
towards saccos and MFIs for greater outreach to smallholder farmers. AFC previously 
experienced  challenges  in  lending  to  smallholder  farmers  due  to  their  small  land 
holding,  lack  of  tangible  collateral  and  poor  record  keeping;  (ii)  with  the  PROFIT 
capacity interventions and loan from AFC, saccos increased their lending portfolio to 
the target value chains; (iii) saccos increased their risk appetite for lending to the 
PROFIT  value  chains  by  using  unique  AVCF  products  and  Risk  Management 
Framework  and (iv) the loan from AFC has boosted the saccos’ liquidity and enabled 
them  to  de-risk  lending  to  smallholder  farmers  by  using  innovative  products  an 
offering technical services to the borrowers. 
178.  As far as green credit is concerned, it is important to appreciate that some of 
the  saccos  are  already  for  items  and  activates  such  as  provision  of  solar  panels, 
construction of on-farm water harvesting structures, construction of on-farm biogas 
digesters for providing energy for cooking, heating and lighting,  water harvest small-
scale drip irrigation pipes and equipment.  
179.  In order for the Saccos to participate in this arrangement provision of Technical 
assistance on the supply side would be critical.   The best-case scenario would be to 
not  only  match  the  facilities  with  technical  assistance  but  also  to  ensure  that  the 
technical assistance precedes the provision of the wholesale green credit line to the 
Sacco. This will ensure that the sacco take up the credit line and implement it and  
that it has the capacity to track, document and report on them. This will minimize 
pilferage and diversion of funds to non-related activities.  
57 
Table 2: SWOT Analysis for the Saccos in agri-Finance in Kenya 
Strengths  
  Loyalty in membership 
  Ready  market  for  products 
Weakness 
  Duplication of products  
  Poor 
recruitment 
and services 
development 
and 
staff 
  Improved governance  
  Experience,  good  reputation 
and branch 
  Resilient    and  hardworking 
membership 
Opportunities   
  Unmet 
demand 
from 
members  
  Improved 
enabling 
environment ( better policies,  
legal 
regulatory 
framework) 
and 
  Opening up the common bond 
diverse 
theorem 
and 
membership 
  Agency banking  
  Advancement  and  growth  in 
technology  (such  as  Mpesa 
platform) 
  Poor research and development 
  Inadequate IT capacity 
  Low brand awareness 
  Small  
  Poor marketing and adaptability 
Threats  
  Competition from MFIs/Banks  
  and 
  Change  of  policies 
framework 
legal 
  Technological changes in the financial  
and business sector 
  Ageing membership 
  High rated of member withdraws 
  Depended on  the  performance  of  the 
value chain 
  Lack of financial literacy 
Profiles of DT-saccos 
180.  This section profiles a sample of 5 farmer-based DT saccos that are regulated 
by SASRA. The section does not review the performances information of the individual 
saccos.  However,  it  was  assumed  that  since  these  saccos  had  their  renewed  their 
licenses  for  2019  then  it  is  assumed  that  the  saccos  on  good  financial  standing. 
SASRA  regularly  reviews  the  performance  of  saccos  based  on  the  following 
parameters:  (i)  capital  adequacy  (core  capital,  core  capital/total  assets,  core 
capital/total  deposits  and  institutional  capital/total  assets;  (ii)  asset  quality  (non-
performing loans (NPLs) to gross loans; NPLs net of provisions to core capital; and 
earning assets to total assets; (iii) earning rating - return on assets (ROA), interest 
margin to gross income , cost income ratio , non-interest expenses to gross income, 
operating  expense  to  total  assets  ratio;  (iv)  liquidity  ratio  (liquid  assets/savings 
deposits & short term liabilities, liquid assets/total deposits, external borrowings/total 
assets, liquid assets/total assets and total loans/total deposits. 
58 
vi)  Tower DT-Taking Sacco 
181.  Tower  Sacco  was  registered  in  1976  and  licensed  by  SASRA  as  a  DT-Sacco 
in 2011 after fulfilling all the conditions set by the regulatory body. This has enabled 
the Sacco to achieve some positive milestones including increased capital base due 
to retention and raising of more share capital, self-reliance has become self-reliant 
due  to  retention  of  surplus  and  mobilization  of  capital  leading  to  reduced  external 
borrowing and became more efficient in service delivery and granting of loans. And 
has divested from non-core activities. 
182.  With  support  from  a  partnership  between  the  Government  of  Kenya  and 
Alliance for Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) and Programme for Rural Outreach of 
Financial Innovations and Technologies Program (PROFIT), the staff were introduced 
to the programme where their staff from the credit and marketing departments were 
trained and exposed to insights on how agriculture value chains work, the different 
players in the value chains and their roles at different levels of production. From the 
training the Sacco started developing farmer-oriented and friendly financial products. 
Since then they have been able to disburse over 2,000 short term  loans to small-
scale  farmers  in  groups  in  Nyandarua  County,  amounting  to  KES  200  million.  The 
Sacco has a loan book of about KES 80 million, being serviced by small-scale farmer 
groups  and  value  chain  players  like  the  small  agrovet  shops,  while  premium 
customers including SME members and dairy marketing co-operatives are servicing 
a combined loan book of about KES 3 billion. The Sacco also advanced credit to some 
of the farmers’ co-operatives in the county. It is therefore no coincidence that, of the 
large-tier DT-saccos Tower Sacco was the fastest growing for the second year running 
with a growth rate of about  31%  in 2019, compared with a growth rate of  28.1% 
recorded in 2018. This growth rate led to Tower Sacco to move from the 11th position 
in 2018 to 13th position in 201930.  This report does not want to be speculative, but 
it is likely that among the factors that led to the fast growth of the Sacco was the 
diversification into investing and the partnership with the PROFIT programme. This 
cementing  the  arguments  that  investing  in  the  well-targeted  Saccos,  capacity 
building and injecting liquid can significantly improve the outreach of Saccos working 
with farmers and other rural stakeholders. The Sacco has spread to other agricultural 
counties such as Laikipia, Nakuru, Nyeri and Narok and is now targeting farmers in 
Nairobi and Kiambu counties. 
30 Sacco Supervision Report 2019 
59 
Tower Sacco Performance  
Table 3: Tower Sacco Performance for Last Three Years  
Parameter/Year 
2018  
2019   2020   Growth 
Capital Adequacy  
14.6%  
14.3%   14.6%  
(%) 
2.10 
Asset Quality  
83.3%  
82.4%  
86%  
4.37 
Earning Rate/Return on Assets 
(ROA)  
Liquidity Ratio  
2%  
2%  
3%  
50.00 
64.73%  
62.2%   49.4%  
-20.58 
Loan Book (KES billions)  
Asset Base (KES billions) 
Membership  
7.095  
9.190  11.80
4 
11.157  13.72
9 
83,333   105,580   147,6
8.524 
28.44 
23.05 
39.81 
14  
183.  Covid-19  has  had  negative  impact  on  Tower  Sacco  performance  in  the 
following key areas indicated below thus greatly affecting our normal operations: 
Savings/Deposits  
184.  Due to Government restrictions highlighted above, the agriculture value chain 
experienced a limitation in free flow of both goods and services. This led to strained 
cash flows, strained earnings, especially in Nyandarua County whose main economic 
activity is agriculture and as a result, strained savings and deposits. The culture of 
savings has been compromised.  
 Loan repayments  
185.  With strained cash flows, the ability to meet loan obligations is not there. This 
means  that  most  loans  will  either  miss  some  monthly  payments  or  monthly 
instalments paid partially. This has led to a slight regression of our Portfolio at Risk 
to the loan book held by farmers and SMEs in the Agriculture Value Chain.  
Revenues  
186.  With  strained  earnings  and  cash  flows,  the  Sacco’s  businesses  experience 
diminishing returns thus they were unable to service their loans timely. This increases 
our provisioning and as a result, revenues are also negatively affected.  
Liquidity  
60 
187.  This  is  directly  affected  by  all  the  three  factors  above.  If  savings,  share 
deposits, loan repayments and revenues are negatively affected, it is automatic that 
liquidity  will  also  be  affected  negatively.  This  is  reflected  by  the  ratio  declining  by 
20.58% (see Table above). 
vii)   UNAITAS DT-Sacco 
188.  Unaitas  initially  registered  on  14  May  1993  as  a  cooperative  society.  The 
SACCO started its branch operations in Muranga and has expanded to have a network 
of 28 branches spread across 13 counties, serving over 340,000 members. In 2007, 
it was rebranded to Muramati Sacco in 2007. It would later change its common bond, 
diversify,  and  recruit  more  farmers,  small  and  medium-size  entrepreneurs  and 
salaried  employees.  In  line  with  its  growth  and  expansion  strategy,  Muramati 
rebranded to Unaitas in 2012 adopting a strong, bold brand and recruit from a more 
geographical and population.  
189.  Unaitas  has  continued  to  register  steady  and  sustainable  growth  in  all  key 
performance parameters. Currently the sacco has an asset base of KES 14 billion and 
serving about 300,000 members. In the last year, the society's deposit increased by 
7.08%  from  KES  7.48  billion  in  2018  to  KES  8.05  billion  in  2019.  The  sacco  has 
continued  to  invest  in  technology  and  update  its  systems  in  order  to  serve  its 
members more effectively and efficiently. The sacco has diversified h and currently 
has members drawn from diverse sectors such as agriculture in which we have those 
growing tea, cereals coffee and dairy, which accounts for 27 percent of the KES 11 
billion  loan  book  to  members.  It  also  has  personal  lending,  which  targets  salaried 
Kenyans (accounting for 30 percent) of the sacco’s loan book. However, SMEs form 
the bulk of the saccos portfolio and have 10,000 chamas (organised groups) having 
accounts with the Sacco.  
Growth and performance parameters (KES Millions)  
Capitalization  FY2016 
Total assets 
10,727 
FY2017 
11,844 
FY2018 
12,735 
FY2019 
14,196 
FY2020 
16,566 
Total deposits 
6,455 
7,013 
7,480 
8,049 
8,920 
Gross loans 
7,426 
7,657 
9,288 
11,372 
14,130 
Allowance 
loan loss 
for 
409 
522 
756 
773 
1,012 
Net loans 
7,454 
7,135 
8,532 
10,599 
13,118 
Core capital 
4,063 
4,572 
4,851 
5,345 
5,801 
61 
190.  The summary of information based on audited accounts show the following for 
this Sacco: 
  The profit before tax grew by 8% to reach KES 656 million in 2020 from KES 
607 million in 2019. 
  Total  assets  grew  by 16%  to  reach KES  16.5  billion  in  2020  from  KES  14.1 
billion in 2019. Total deposits grew by 11% to reach KES 8.9 billion in 2020 
from KES 8 billion in 2019. 
  Total  gross  loans  grew  by  24%  to  reach  KES  14.1  billion  in  2020  from  KES 
11.3 billion in 2019 indicating a positive demand for lending from the members 
of Unaitas.  
  Allowance for loan loss grew by 31% to reach KES 1 billion in 2020 from KES 
773 million in 2019 as a result of increasing provisions based on the volatile 
and declining economic environment occasioned by the COVID 19 pandemic. 
  Core capital grew by 9% to reach KES 5.8 billion in 2020 from KES 5.3 billion 
in 2019 indicating stability of Unaitas. 
  Unaitas  has  maintained  aggregate  level  of  compliance  with  the  prescribed 
capital adequacy ratios requirements by the regulator SASRA.  
  The Sacco has continued to grow its institutional capital over the years through 
retention of surpluses from profit gains made over the years to build a solid 
capital base for the organization.  
Strategies, challenges and opportunities 
191.  The Sacco continues to lend to farmers and currently agriculture forms 35% of the 
loan book, that about KES 3.5 billion and still sees opportunities in subsectors such as 
dairying  which  famers  continue  to  show  interest  in.  The  business  environment 
surrounding  the  Sacco  been  dynamic  because  of  high  competition,  changing  demands 
from customers, technological advancement, political and legal changes. These changes 
have posed opportunities as well as threats to Unaitas Sacco. It has been competing with 
established banks, other Saccos and MFIs for customers. Last year (and this is continuing 
challenge)  it  had  to  content  with  challenges  posed  by  Covid-19  pandemic.  In  order  to 
address these obstacles the Sacco has been diversifying into growth areas such as SMES 
since the opening up of the common bond. It currently has members who include salaried 
members who form about 30 percent of our loan book. However, SMEs form the bulk of 
the  Sacco’s  portfolio  and  the  intension  is  to  see  the  growth  of  the  SME  portfolio.  The 
Sacco also has about 10,000 chamas (self-help groups) that have accounts with it. 
192.  Through continuous research and innovativeness and is leveraging on the core 
banking  system  to  ensure  that  has  been  rolled.  The  Sacco  would  be  agreeable  to 
have due diligence undertaken and assessment of  its system  including the MIS. It 
would  be  willing  to  have  technical  services  provides  when  needed  including  in 
assessing the pipeline of potential clients. 
62 
193.  The global pandemic has redefined how people interact with one another, how 
they conduct business and has had a negative impact to most household disposable 
income.  However,  it  is  an  indication  of  Unaitas  resilient  and  stability  that  this 
performance  was  achieved  against  a  backdrop  the  global  Covid-19  which  severely 
impacted operating environment in 2020. This has led to reduced ability of members 
and savers to service their loans for most SMEs and famers. All the same during the 
year 2020 the Sacco received loan restructuring requests totalling to KES 2.1 billion.  
viii) AMICA DT-Sacco 
194.  The  Sacco  stated  by  small-scale  farmers  as  Murang’a  Framers  District 
(currently Murang’a County) Co-operative Union (MFDCU) to offer banking services 
to their members in 1966 and operated under Murang’a Farmers District Co-operative 
Union (MFDCU) as a Union Banking Section (UBS). 
195.  The Union Banking Section (UBS) transformed into a separate legal entity from 
Murang’a Farmers District Co-operative Union (MFDCU) and was registered as Murata 
Farmers Sacco Society Limited in 1970. In 1997, the Union Banking Section (UBS) 
transformed into a separate legal entity from Murang’a Farmers District Co-operative 
Union (MFDCU) and was registered as Murata Farmers Sacco Society Limited. 
196.  Then in 2006 Murata Sacco Ltd the common bond was opened and changed 
name from Murata Farmers Sacco to Murata Sacco Ltd. The Sacco was licensed by 
Sacco Societies Regulatory Authority (SASRA) as a deposit taking Sacco in 2011. The 
Sacco rebranded to Amica and logo and name from Murata Sacco Ltd to Amica Sacco. 
The Sacco has a solid history of more than 50 years serving small-scale farmers. 
 Sacco’s performance overview 
197.  AMICA  Sacco  has  strong  foundations  and  is  among  the  top  fifteen  medium-
tiered DT-Sacco by total assets (KES 3.82 billion) and total deposits (KES 3.02 billion) 
in 2019. The Sacco has continued to invest in technology and update its systems in 
order to serve its members more effectively and efficiently.  The ratios of the Sacco 
has shown a positive trend overs the last three years as shown in the table below.   
63 
Table 5: AMICA Performance  
CAPITAL  COMPONENTS 
(KES)  
Surplus after tax  
Core Capital 
Dec-20 
166,550,036.00 
Dec-19 
110,551,659.00 
Dec-18 
172,738,699.00 
12,020,246.00 
(199,326,777.21) 
(149,334,694.00) 
(521,923,458) 
Institutional Capital 
ON  -  BALANCE  SHEET 
ASSETS  
Deposits  and  Balances  at 
Other Institutions 
Gross Loans and Advances   3,524,264,582.00  2,786,214,844.00 
4,549,314,918.00  3,819,682,653.06 
349,562,621.00 
417,893,876.00 
Dec-19 
Dec-20 
(662,168,350) 
Total Assets 
(566,163,046) 
Dec-18 
128,493,436.00 
2,446,130,100.00 
3,062,950,949.66 
Total Liquid Assets 
Loan Loss Provision 
Members Deposits  
486,843,502.00 
436,747,403.00 
356,742,891.00 
450,974,406.00 
436,442,796.00 
481,643,926.00 
3,505,505,874.00  3,024,616,387.00 
2,621,230,612.00 
Ratios 
Core capital to Assets Ratio  
Institutional  Capital 
to 
Assets Ratio 
Core  capital  to  Deposits 
Ratio  
Liquidity Ratio 
Earning Rate 
Asset Quality 
Dec-20 
0.3% 
Dec-19 
-5% 
-11.47% 
-17.34% 
0.34% 
13.89% 
3.66% 
11.34% 
-6.59% 
14.44% 
2.89% 
13.54% 
Dec-18 
-5% 
-18.48% 
-5.70% 
13.61% 
5.64% 
16.45% 
Strategies, challenges and opportunities 
198.  The Sacco continues to have farmers as the main clientele, and it is one of the 
few  Saccos  that  have  been  able  to  access  credit  (KES  100  million)  from  the  AFC. 
Whereas the Sacco is diversifying its portfolio and clients from small-scale farmers 
they still remain the main clientele. How it is facing a lot of competition from other 
FIs  (Saccos,  MFIs/MFBs  and  commercial  banks)  especially  in  its  main  catchment 
areas or Muranga, Thika and to smaller extent Kiambu and Nairobi counties.  
199.  The Sacco is leveraging on the core banking system to improve its performance 
and would be willing to have due diligence undertaken and assessment of its system 
including the MIS. It would be willing to have technical services provides when needed 
including in assessing the pipeline of potential clients. 
64 
ix)  K-Unity Sacco 
200.  K-Unity  (formerly  Kiambu  Unity  Finance  Co-operative  Union  Ltd)  is  a  co-
operative  union  established  in  1974  as  a  result  of  the  amalgamation  of  the  then 
Limuru Marketing Co-operative Union and Kiambu Dairy Marketing Union to act as a 
means of facilitating savings and credit facilities for dairy & pyrethrum societies within 
Kiambu County. In 2019 it had an asset base of over KES 2.9 billion. It total deposits 
grew  by  10.5%  from  KES  2.72  billion  (2018)  to  KES  3.04  billion  in  2019  and  has 
more  than  100,000  members  in  five  counties,  namely  Kiambu,  Nairobi,  Nakuru, 
Narok, and Nyandarua. 
x) Bingwa DT Sacco.   
201.  Bingwa  Sacco  Society  Ltd  (Formerly  Kirinyaga  Tea  Growers  Sacco  Ltd)  was 
registered in 1984, being the first of its kind in the country and in Africa. Initially, it 
started its operations with back-office savings activity (BOSA) services. It introduced 
BOSA  services  in  1993  to  meet  the  increasing  demand  by  the  growing 
membership. The Sacco was first licensed by SASRA to undertake deposit-taking in 
2011 and was among the first Saccos to be registered to do so in the country. The 
Sacco’s  gross  loans,  total  assets  and  totals  deposits  were  KES  3,826  million,  KES 
5,821  million  and  KES  2,937  million  in  2019,  respectively.  The  total  membership 
increased  from  187,488  in  2018  to  201,558  in  2020.  The  Sacco  provides  both 
financial  and  non-financial  services  to  its  members  and  it  has  19  branches  in 
Kirinyaga and Nairobi counties.   
Overall Impact of Covid -19 on Saccos  
202.  The global pandemic has redefined how people interact with one another, and 
how they conduct business, and this has had a negative impact on most households’ 
disposable income. However, it is an indication of Saccos’ resilience and stability that 
their performance was achieved against a backdrop of the global COVID-19, which 
severely impacted the operating environment in 2020. This has led to reduced ability 
of members and savers, including SMEs and farmers, to service their loans.  Some 
of the Saccos had to undertake some loan restructuring requests in the last financial 
year.   
203.  Overall, non-performing loans (NPLs) in the sub-sector increased from 5.2% 
of the loan book to 9.1% in June 2020. In order to help the sub-sector ride out the 
pandemic, SASRA reduced capital adequacy by  50% and  liquidity requirements by 
50%.    SASRA  also  allowed  Saccos  to  restructure  and  renegotiate  loans  to  ease 
pressure on their members facing difficulties in repaying loans due to the pandemic. 
On  their  part,  Saccos  restructured  their  loans  in  order  to  assist  their  members. 
Overall Saccos restructured loans worth KES 4.7 billion in the three months to June 
2020, reflecting the difficulties members were facing in loan repayment. 
65 
204.  Like  most  other  institutions  and  organisations,  Saccos experienced  adverse  effects 
brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic. After the first case was reported in the country in 
March  2020,  the  government  declared  a  lockdown  that  included  restricted  movement  in 
certain counties, and curfew was declared. The Saccos that suffered immediate effects were 
those that drew the majority of members from sectors such as aviation, tourism, horticulture, 
small businesses, and transport. 
205.  According  to  the Kenya  Financial  Sector  Stability  Report,  October  2020, 
agriculture and micro and small enterprises (SMEs) were among those sectors that 
were most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, making it difficult for members to 
service their loans and make deposits. The report warns that while the Sacco sub-
sector has strong capital adequacy levels, and sufficient liquidity and earning capacity 
to withstand shocks and vulnerabilities, credit risks remain elevated.  
206.  Like  most  other  institutions  and  organisation  saccos  experienced  adverse  effects 
brought about by the Covid 19 pandemic. After the first case was reported in the country in 
March  2020  the  government  declared  a  lockdown  that  included  restricted  movement  to 
certain counties and curfew was declared. The saccos that suffered immediate effects are 
those  that  draw  their  majority  of  members  from  sectors  such  as  aviation,  tourism, 
horticulture, small businesses, and transport. 
207.  According to the Kenya Financial Sector Stability Report 2020, October 2020, 
agriculture and Micro and Small Enterprises (SMEs) sectors were among those sectors 
that were affected most by the COVID-19 pandemic, making it difficult for members 
to service their loans and make deposits. The reports warns that while  Sacco sub-
sector has strong capital adequacy levels, sufficient liquidity and earning capacity to 
withstand shocks and vulnerabilities, credit risks remained elevated.  
208.  Overall  for  the  sub-sector,  the  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  had  increased 
from 5.2% of the loan book to 9.1% in June 2020. In order to help the sub-sector 
ride  out  the  pandemic  SASRA  reduced  capital  adequacy  by  50%  and  liquidity 
requirements  by  50%  and  SASRA  allowed  SACCOs  to  restructure  and  renegotiate 
loans to ease pressure on their members facing difficulties in repaying loans due to 
the  pandemic.  On  their  part  Saccos  restricted  their  loans  tin  order  to  assist  their 
members  and  overall  saccos  restructured  loans  worth  KES  4.7  billion  in  the  three 
months  to  June  2020,  reflecting  the  difficulties  members  were  facing  in  loan 
repayment. 
209.  A summary of the profiles of 5 DT-saccos in agricultural finance is shown in 
the table below. 
Table 6: Summary of the profiles of 5 DT Saccos active in agricultural finance 
MFIs 
UNAITAS  TOWER   AMICA  K-
Bingwa 
Unity  
66 
Financial soundness1 
Have an agriculture strategy? 2 
 
       X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
Staff has agri-capacity2 
      X 
      X 
      X 
     X 
     X 
Rural outreach (branches)  
Already  offering  agricultural 
loans  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Targeted  agricultural 
product development 
finance 
       X 
     X 
 X 
     X 
     X 
technical 
Need 
services 
/opportunities  to  participate  in 
the RK FINFA programme  
Quality of MIS3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
7  Although the financial statements are sound and the saccos were licensed by SASRA or FY 2019, it 
is important to point that it is not feasible to deeply interrogate such financial statements in this 
kind of assignment. They are taken as-is. The RK FINFA would need to undertake due diligence of 
financial institutions to participate in the RK FINFA programme during implementation  
8  TOWER  and  AMICA  DT-saccos  participating  in  PROFIT  programme  with  benefiting  from  capacity 
building and AMICA receiving KES 100 million from AFC 
9  The quality of the MIS will have to be vouched for after due diligence if the MFIs were to participate 
in the RK FINFA programme 
Justification to participate in the R-FINFA  
210.  Saccos  have  proved  to  be  resilient  institutions  in  the  agricultural  and  rural 
sector. This is especially true of farmer-based saccos whose main clients are small-
scale  farmers  spread  across  the  country.  However,  these  saccos  have  inadequate 
finances  to  enable  them  serve  farmers  and  other  AVC  players  adequately.  If  they 
could  partner  with  more  and  better  capitalised  financial  institution  through 
participating in a project such as RK FINFA they can reach deepen financial inclusion 
in the rural areas, where penetration is still low. To ensure that the injection of finance 
meets its objectives it should be accompanied by capacity building by way of technical 
support  services in aspects such as (i)  design and implementation of demand for 
and  supply  agricultural  finance  to  help  the  MFIs  understand  different  smallholder 
segments and their needs; (ii) product design and piloting to reduce the costs and 
risks  of  new  market  entry  and  innovation;  (iii)  systems  improvements  to  adapt 
MIS/core banking systems and use technology solutions, such as automation of data 
67 
capture and analysis to accommodate tailored credit assessment, portfolio monitoring 
requirements, and loan repayment schedules; (iv) design of staff incentive plans to 
promote agricultural lending; (v) introduction of product-costing practices to inform 
product and program design and to help to make the business case for new market 
entrants; and (vi) design and piloting of new delivery channels to reduce the costs 
and risk of lending. 
68 
Attachment 2 to Appendix 1 of PIM 
Landscape  document  for  Participation  of  Microfinance 
Institutions in the Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility  
MAY 2021 
69 
Introduction 
211.  Kenya’s  financial  sector  is  the  third  largest  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  and  is  a 
significant contributor to economic growth and job creation. This sector is driven by 
increased adoption of technology, emergence of alternative channels of distribution, 
increased financial inclusion levels and a stable regulatory environment. As of January 
2021, the Kenyan financial sector comprised a wide variety of players including: (i) 
38  commercial  banks;  (ii)  one  mortgage  finance  company;  (iii)  a  large  number  of 
Microfinance Institutions (MFI), notably 14 deposit-taking Microfinance Banks (MFB); 
(iv) a vibrant Savings and Credit Cooperatives (MFI) sector, also comprising deposit-
taking  MFIs,  nine  representative  offices  of  foreign  banks,  offices  of  international 
financial  institutions,  (v)  insurance  companies,  (vi)  68  foreign  exchange  bureaus; 
(vii) 19 money remittance providers and (viii) three credit reference bureaus31.  
212.  The  banking  industry  was  resilient  in  2019,  as  reflected  by  high  capital  and 
liquidity  buffers  of  18.5  percent  and  53.1  percent  against  the  statutory  minimum 
requirements of 14.5 percent and 20 percent, respectively. However, profit declined 
by 30.0 percent in the year to June 2020 and assets quality deteriorated, with the 
ratio of non-performing loans to gross loans increasing from 12 percent in December 
2019 to 13.1 percent in June 2020. Similarly, the MFIs industry was resilient in 2019, 
with  enhanced  capital  and  liquidity  buffers.  However,  the  industry’s  high  interest 
expenses to income ratio and disruptions in members’ livelihoods elevated funding 
and credit risks, respectively. 
213.  Like the other sectors of the economy, the financial services sector has been 
negatively  impacted  by  the  effects  of  the  Covod-19  pandemic.  While  the  industry 
While in 2019 the banking industry registered a 9.6 per cent growth in assets and 
9.1 per cent growth in deposits32, in 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic eroded the banks’ 
assets  quality  gains  made  in  2019,  and  the  share  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs) 
increased  from  12  per  cent  in  December  2019  to  13.1  per  cent  in  June  2020.  
However  the  sector  remains  resilient  with  a  liquidity  ratio  against  total  assets 
standing  at  55  per  cent  as  of  December  2020,  predominantly  held  in  government 
bonds.  This  is  well  above  the  minimum  regulatory  requirement  of  20  per  cent. 
However, despite this liquidity, formal financial sector lending to rural and agriculture 
actors  as  well  as  wholesale  lending  to  smaller  rural  finance  institutions,  which  are 
directly  funding  these  actors,  remain  low  due  to  a  high  perceived  risk  and  to 
limitations in the inter-bank lending market. The potential benefits of increasing the 
31 The Kenya Financial Stability Report (October 2020, Issue No.11)  
https://www.centralbank.go.ke/uploads/financial_sector_stability/1560356005_Financial%20Stability
%20Report.pdf. 
ibid  
32 The increase in deposits is attributed to more usage of digital finance including mobile money and 
agency banking. 
70 
share of formal financial sector productive investments in agriculture, and obstacles 
hindering such increase is further explained below. 
214.  The  microfinance 
institutions  (MFIs)  have  continued  to  exploit  the 
opportunities  and  gaps  created  by  commercial  banks’  unwillingness  to  adequately 
address  the  financial  needs  of  smallholder  farmers  and  agribusiness  (agri-SMEs). 
They now provide a wide range of rural finance services including microcredit, small 
loans, savings and checking accounts, microinsurance and payment systems, hence 
reaching excluded, poor, and geographically isolated population segments. 
215.  There are two categories of MFIs in Kenya: the Deposit-taking MFIs also known 
as  microfinance  banks  (MFBs)  and  the  non-deposit  taking  MFIs,  also  called  credit-
only MFIs. The former are regulated by CBK (under the Microfinance Act, 2006 and 
the  Microfinance  Deposit  Taking  Institutions  Regulations  2008)  and  hence  tend  to 
exercise more prudence in their affairs and therefore tend to be more stable. There 
are 14 MFBs (See List of Annex 1) which have contributed substantially to the quality 
and volume of rural financial services in Kenya.  
216.  The  microfinance  sector  registered  8  percent  growth  in  total  assets  from 
Ksh.70.8  billion  in  2018  to  KES  76.4  billion  in  2019;  net  advances  increased  by  6 
percent from KES 44.2 billion (2018) to KES 46.7 billion (2019), while the customer 
deposits increased by 7 percent from KES 41.0 billion in 2018 to KES.43.9 billion in 
2019.  This  growth  was  attributed  mainly  to  increased  demand  for  credit  by  the 
various  economic  sectors  and  the  usage  of  technology  as  a  deposit  and  lending 
platform,  with  lending  remaining  the  single  largest  activity  undertaken  by 
microfinance  banks,  as  the  net  loan  portfolio  accounted  for  61  percent  of  the 
microfinance  bank’s  total  assets.  The  growth  in  deposits  was  due  to  deposit 
mobilization  through  agency  banking  and  mobile  phone  platforms,  as  well  as 
expansion  of  branch  network  across  the  country,  while  customer  deposits  and 
borrowings  were  the  main  sources  of  funding,  accounting  for  58  percent  and  20 
percent of the microfinance banks’ total funding33. 
217.  In terms of market share, there were three (3) large MFBs with an aggregate 
market share (comprising assets, deposits, capital, number of active deposit and loan 
accounts) of 84.6 percent with KWFT (39.2%), Faulu MFB (36.9%) and Rafiki MFB 
(8.5%).  Five medium microfinance banks with a combined market share of 13.9% 
with SMEP MFB (4.2%), Maisha MFB (3.4%), Caritas MFB (2.5%), Sumac (2.3%) U&I 
MFB (1.1%), while five small MFBs with an aggregate market share of 1.6 per cent. 
Maisha MFB made a seven-fold increase in market share from 0.5% in 2018 to 3.4% 
in 2019. 
33 Annual Banking Supervision Annual Report 2019 
71 
(ii)  Non-Deposit-taking (credit-only) Microfinance Institutions  
218.  These MFIs play in deepening financial inclusion in the country and they are 
popular among the more resource poor Kenyans in the urban and rural setting. The 
credit-only MFIs cover a  larger proportion  of microfinance providers in Kenya. The 
category  remains  unregulated  though  the  Microfinance  Act  2006  mandates  the 
minister  for  finance  to  issue  regulations  for  this  category  and  the  Association  of 
Microfinance Institutions of Kenya (AMFI) at some point in had drafted the regulations 
to promote a strong and viable credit only microfinance industry the country. in the 
meantime  AMFIK  has  developed  a  Code  of  Conduct  and  Ethics  which  guides  the 
operations of the institutions.  
219.  There  are  11  credit-only  MFIs  that  offer  agricultural  lending  (See  Table  1 
below, summarizes the MFIs and their branch and county coverage in the country) 
in the country, out of which 10 (32.25%) have rural branches. These are Longitude, 
Neema Heep, Vision Fund Kenya, Yehu, Juhudi Kilimo, Jiweze, Hand-in-Hand, Bimas, 
ECLOF Kenya and SISDO. In total, the 11 MFIs have 163 fully-fledged branches in 
the country. Juhudi Kilimo has the second largest branch network with 39 branches 
in 28 counties. The MFIs provides asset-based loans and basic business and finance 
training to smallholder farmers and enterprises that allow them to purchase wealth 
generating  financial  solutions  for  their  agribusiness.  It  was  started  by  K-Rep  Bank 
(now Sidian Bank) and has since been spun-out into a sustainable NBFI.  
220.  Out of the 11 credit-only MFIs which have a rural network, 8 have agricultural 
loan products and have 156 branches in the country. ECLOF Kenya has the largest 
coverage in the country, with network of 42 branches in 33 counties. It has many 
agricultural products in many value chains such as bananas, dairy, fruits, oil seeds, 
fruits, vegetables and soya beans. In terms of county coverage, the Kiambu has the 
largest number of branches of Credit-only MFIs, with rural branch network, with 12 
branches,  followed  by  Tharaka-Nithi  with  11,  Narok  (10),  Meru  (9),  Machakos  (8) 
and Mombasa, Makueni, and Siaya with 7 each, with the rest having between one to 
six branches.  
221.  The distribution of the MFIs and their branch network is as shown in the table 
below. 
72 
Table  1:      Credit-Only  MFIs  involved  in  agriculture  lending/agri-finance  in 
rural Kenya 
No.  Credit -      
Only 
Institution 
1. 
Juhudi Kilimo 
Co. Ltd  
Agri loans 
portfolio 
(KES 
millions) 
1,600.0 
2. 
Hand in Hand 
Eastern Africa  
600M  
600.0 
3. 
Eclof Kenya  
363.6 
4. 
Musoni Kenya 
Ltd  
300.0 
Branch network 
Nandi  Hills,  Eldoret  East  and  West.  Kapsowar, 
Bomet,  Kericho,  Nyamira,  Sotik,  Thika,  Kerugoya, 
Matuu, Nkubu, Machakos Maua, Nyahururu, Nakuru, 
Molo,  Limuru,  Engineer,  Kitale  Main,  Kitale  Central, 
Bungoma,  Kapcherop,  Kakamega,  Vihiga,  Kisumu, 
Busia,  Kitengela,  Kitui,  Wote,  Eldama  Ravin,  Meru, 
Kitengela, Matuu, Chuka, Ruiru  
Busia, Bomet, Eldama Ravine, Kibwezi, Embu, 
Nakuru East, Nakuru West, Njambini, Kawangware, 
Homa Bay, Kabarnet, Kiambu, Kitengela, Machakos, 
Voi, Nyahururu, Tala, Kitui, Nanyuki, Thika  
Kiambu,  Ruiru,  Kirinyaga,  Muranga,  Nyandarwa, 
Nyeri,  Kilifi,  Kwale,  Lamu,  Taita  Taveta,  Embu, 
Makueni, Machakos, Mwala, Marsabit, Meru,  
Chuka, Homabay, Kisii, Migori, Nyamira,  
Siaya,  Baringo,  Bomet,  Elgeyo  Marakwet,  Kajiado, 
Laikipia,  Nandi,  Narok,  Samburu,  Trans  Nzoia, 
Turkana,  Uasin  Gishu,  West  Pokot,  Kakamega, 
Bungoma, Busia, Vihiga  
Nyanza, Homabay, Kakamega, Trans Nzoia, 
Bugoma, Kisii, Migori, Kericho, Eldoret, Kitale, 
Nyahururu, Nakuru, Nanyuki, Nyeri, Meru, Embu, 
Muranga, Wote, Kitui, Matuu, Machakos, Kitengela, 
Magadi, Rongai, Bisil, Naivasha 
5. 
Yehu 
Microfinance 
Trust  
232.0 
Kwale, Tiribe, Msambweni, Mwambalazi, Samburu,  
Kilifi, Mariakani, Kaloleni, Lamu, Makueni, Mikinduri, 
Meru, Taita Taveta, Voi  
6.  
Vision Fund 
Kenya Limited  
87.7 
Karbanet, West Pokot, Kapsabet, Kisumu(rural) 
Kitale, Mwala, Nyandarwa, Kilifi, Taveta, Migori, 
Meru, Njoro, Nyahururu, Molo, Kuresoi, Narok, 
Bomet, Nyeri and Tala  
7. 
Real People Ltd  
57.0 
Nairobi, Thika, Meru, Eldoret, Nakuru, Mombasa, 
Kisumu.  
73 
8. 
Ushindi Bora  
18.4 
Eldama Ravin, Laikipia, Kinamba, Eldoret  
9.  
BIMAS  
17.5 
10. 
Jiweze Ltd  
10.0 
Embu, Nakuru, Marimanti, Maua, Nanyuki, 
Machakos, Nyahururu, Kitengela,  
Makueni, Tala, Kitui,  
Kibwezi, Mwingi, Masii, Kerugoya, Kiritiri, Nyeri, 
Mwea, Thika, Miwangu, Matuu, Meru, Chuka, 
Mikinduri, Emali, Laare, Kasarani, Loitoktok, 
Limuru, Utawala,  
Karatina, Voi, Zombe, Kiambu, Siakago, Nkubu, 
Runyenjes, Rongai  
Baringo, Ravin, Kabarnet, Uasin Gishu, Kericho, 
Londiani, Homabay, Nyandarua, Kajiado, Kericho, 
Laikipia, Nanyuki  
11 
Longitude 
Finance 
5.3 
Muranga and Kajiado  
Source: Association of Microfinance Institutions, 2021 
MFIs potential participation in a wholesale finance mechanism 
222.  Access to financial services by the agricultural sector, while not a means to an 
end, is critical to provide funds for investments in productivity, improved post-harvest 
practices, smooth household cash flow, enable better access to markets and promote 
better management of risks. It can also play an important role in climate adaptation 
and increase the resilience of agriculture to climate change, thus contributing to long 
term  incomes  and  food  security.  Smallholder  farmers  are  quite  a  heterogeneous 
group,  differing  in  their  resource  base  and  choice  of  crops  and  livestock,  links  to 
markets,  the  relative  importance  of  agricultural  income,  choice  of  financial  service 
provides  (relatives,  informal  groups,  MFIs,  MFIs,  or  even  commercial  banks)  and 
other dimensions.  
223.  MFIs have good presence in rural areas, but do not have access to funds from 
the commercial banking sector or capital markets on a sustainable basis. In order for 
them to service farmers and agri-SMEs better they would need to forge linkages and 
partnerships  with  better  capitalised  financial  institutions  through  which  they  could 
get wholesale funds for retailing/onward lending to the agricultural sector and rural 
areas.  Some  of  the  large  microfinance  institutions,  such  as  the  Kenya  Women’s 
Finance  Trust  (KWFT),  Faulu,  and  SMEP,  participated  in  the  recently  closed  IFAD-
supported Programme for Rural Finance Innovations and Technologies (PROFIT) and 
received  funds  that  they  on-lent  to  the  farmers  and  other  rural  targets  groups.  In 
addition to receiving funds, they also benefited from capacity building from Technical 
Service  Providers  recruited  on  behalf  of  the  Programme  by  the  Alliance  for  Green 
Revolution  in  Africa  (AGRA)  who  were  collaborating  with  the  programme.  This 
capacity  building  assisted  the  participating  MFIs  to  transform  their  operations,  re-
74 
orient  their  staff  and  have  required  liquidity  in  the  short  and  medium-term  to 
effectively expand their outreach. 
224.  In order to provide finance-access solutions regarding it is necessary to better 
understand the various profiles of smallholder families and the conditions and market 
context where they operate. While the majority of efforts towards improving access 
to  finance  by  smallholder  farmers  has  focused  on  agricultural  value  chains  served 
primarily by banks or through value chain firms, this is a relatively narrow part of the 
market, representing only smallholder farmers in Kenya. There is a recognition of a 
missing middle in agri-finance in that there is limited understanding of what happens 
outside  the  commercial  farmer  and  tight  value  chain  segment  (tea,  coffee,  larger 
scale  ranching  and  dairying,  commercial  horticulture  in  Kenya)  when  it  comes  to 
financing  models  for  farmers.  MFIs  with  presence  in  rural  areas  could  be  part  of 
solving this puzzle. Most of the MFIs do not lend to the agricultural sector for various 
reasons. These include seasonality of production since most farmers all need money 
at nearly the same time for sowing the crop, it places peak demand on MFIs which 
they are not able to mobilise; lumpy repayments since MFIs are generally accustomed 
to making loans with weekly or monthly repayment schedules. In agricultural loans, 
repayment is not possible till the crop is harvested and sold, the common method of 
collecting weekly or monthly repayment used by MFIs does not work for the sector. 
Another  challenge  is  the  high  co-variant  risk  due  to  weather  and  pest  or  disease 
attacks occurring at the same time. A failure in rainfall (drought), unseasonal rains 
and flooding, hailstorms, high temperature spells, and likewise, pest attacks, affect 
crops and domestic animals adversely and affect all the farmers in a region. Since 
MFIs work in geographically compact areas, they can be severely affected by the high 
co-variant risk that crop loan borrowers face. Lastly, challenges of understanding the 
agricultural sector prevents MFIs getting onto agriculture lending. The country has 
therefore, witnessed a modest number of MFIs (both MFBs and credit-only) getting 
involved in making loans to a diverse group of agricultural stakeholders in many parts 
of the country.  
225.  However, even with this development there are MFIs, which have both staff 
and funds for the investment in this crucial sector. In addition, they are not unable 
to meet the demands for agricultural credit. Therefore, capital from other financial 
institutions can be of much help in improving their capital base so that they can on-
lend to the farmers. The PROFIT programme demonstrated that it is possible to reach 
the  small-scale  farmers,  agri-SMEs,  and  micro  and  medium  enterprises  (MSMEs) 
using  MFBs/MFIs  in  a  well-structured  model.  The  Agricultural  Finance  Corporation 
(AFC) made lines of credit available to a few MFBs for the purpose of on-lending to 
their members. In this innovative model AFC lent KES 200 million to selected MFBs s 
and expected to leverage more resources from the MFBs. This model worked well and 
it is the intension of the Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility (RK FINFA) to extend 
this model to more MFIs during its implementation.  
226.  There are, of course, many MFBs/MFIs that did not access the resources from 
AFC but continued lending their own funds to farmers. Even more important there 
75 
are many MFIs lending for climate-mitigating interventions such as green energy, soil 
conservation and water harvesting structures. There is therefore latent demand for 
this  kind  of  green  credit  line  and  MFIs  have  demonstrated  that  they  can  be  good 
channels  through  which  this  credit  can  be  supplied.  However,  it  is  important  to 
accompany  this  support  with  technical,  support  to  the  MFI  and  the  beneficiaries. 
Through the technical assistance it received, AFC made strides in several areas and 
results  included:  (i)  development  of  wholesale  financing  delivery  models  geared 
towards  MFIS  for  greater  outreach  to  smallholder  farmers.  AFC  previously 
experienced  challenges  in  lending  to  smallholder  farmers  due  to  their  small  land 
holding,  lack  of  tangible  collateral  and  poor  record  keeping;  (ii)  with  the  PROFIT 
capacity  interventions and loan from AFC, MFIs increased their lending portfolio to 
the  target  value  chains;  (iii)  MFIs  increased  their  risk  appetite  for  lending  to  the 
PROFIT  value  chains  by  using  unique  AVCF  products  and  Risk  Management 
Framework  and (iv) the loan from AFC has boosted the MFIs’ liquidity and enabled 
them  to  de-risk  lending  to  smallholder  farmers  by  using  innovative  products  an 
offering technical services to the borrowers. 
227.  This  model  should  be  accompanied  by  capacity  building  by  way  of  technical 
support  underscore areas of technical support services in aspects such as: (i)  design 
and implementation of demand for and supply agricultural finance to help the MFIs 
understand different smallholder segments and their needs; (ii) product design and 
piloting  to  reduce  the  costs  and  risks  of  new  market  entry  and  innovation;  (iii) 
systems  improvements  to  adapt  MIS/core  banking  systems  and  use  technology 
solutions, such as automation of data capture and analysis to accommodate tailored 
credit  assessment,  portfolio  monitoring  requirements,  and  loan  repayment 
schedules;  (iv)  design  of  staff  incentive  plans  to  promote  agricultural  lending;  (v) 
introduction of product-costing practices to inform product and program design and 
to  help  to  make  the  business  case  for  new  market  entrants;  and  (vi)  design  and 
piloting of new delivery channels to reduce the costs and risk of lending. 
Delivery Channels 
228.  MFBs/MFBs use a combination of delivery channels in delivering their products 
and services, from the traditional use of the banking halls, field visits by staff to their 
members,  use  self-help  groups  and  increasing  in  the  recent  past  they  are  using 
banking  agencies/agents  and  the  M-Pesa  platform  both  in  collecting  deposits  and 
delivery loans. The latter two have helped MFIs operate more efficiently and increase 
their customer outreach, if managed well. A recent publication from the International 
Finance  Corporation  based  on  its  work  with  nine  MFIs  in  Africa,  shows  the  cost  of 
handling transactions via agents is about 25 percent lower than through branches.  
229.  However, managing an agent network can still be costly, so it is important to 
do it carefully and build slowly. The focus is therefore a balance between the branches 
and the agency and use of M-Pesa outlets. However, as can be seen from paras 9 
most of the MFIs still operate hundreds of branches in the rural areas. For example 
76 
KEFT  operates  241  branches  in  operates  in  45  out  of  47  counties  and  80%  of  its 
operations are in the rural areas. 
 A  SWOT  (strengths,  weaknesses, and  threats)  analysis  of  MFBs/MFIs  in 
230. 
deepening in agricultural and rural sector is shown below. 
Table 2: SWOT Analysis for the MFIs in Agri-Finance in Kenya 
Strengths  
  Closer proximity to the clients   
  Enhancing rural economic 
productivity through easy 
finances  
  Bringing financial services to 
poor people and making it 
financial sustainable by the 
economies of scale-effect 
  Loan processing faster 
  Serves those who are 
marginalised (women, small 
traders, unemployed) 
Weakness 
  Duplication of products by many MFIs 
  Some MFIs not properly (credit-only) 
regulated 
  Poor recruitment and staff development 
  Poor research and development 
  Inadequate IT capacity 
  Low brand awareness, poor marketing, and 
adaptability 
  High administrative costs 
  High repayment structure/high rate of 
interest  
  Loans being provided for unproductive or 
  Encourages people to save 
unfeasible projects 
Opportunities   
Threats  
  Competition from MFIs and banks  
  Change of policies and legal framework 
  Cybersecurity issues and technological 
threats in the financial and business sector 
  Ageing membership 
  Lack of financial literacy 
  Huge/growing demand and 
supply gap 
  Huge untapped market demand 
from members  
  Market openness and 
innovative client approaches  
  Improved enabling environment 
(better policies, legal and 
regulatory framework) for MFBs 
  Digital advancement and 
growth in technology (such as 
M-Pesa platform) 
10.  PROFILES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS (MFIs) 
231.  The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  proposes  to  start  vetting  shareholders  in 
microfinance banks who own at least a 10% stake, if proposed regulations seeking 
to boost governance are adopted. The regulator says in the draft Microfinance Bill, 
2019  that  people  holding  at  least  a  10%  stake  will  be  regarded  as  significant 
shareholders. This is the first time the regulator has defined a significant owner of 
77 
microfinance  banks  and  upgraded  the  current  law  that  only  limits  individual 
ownership at 25%. 
vi)  Kenya Women Microfinance Bank    
Kenya Women Microfinance Bank (formerly known as Kenya Women Finance Trust 
or KWFT) is a tier 1  microfinance bank offering  banking services that  include both 
savings  and  credit  products  that  cater  for  the  needs  of  micro,  small  and  medium-
sized entrepreneurs. It has a branch network of 241 branches that operate in 45 of 
the 47 counties and 80% of its operations are in rural areas. The bank predominantly 
targets  women,  which  is  expected,  since  its  history  is  founded  primarily  on  the 
economic empowerment of women through access to finance. Although its main focus 
is not necessarily on agriculture, it has increased its interest in lending to agriculture 
and has a diversified menu of profits for the farming community. It is the leading and 
the largest MFI that has a great command in the market share, with over 800,000 
clients across the country. Currently its products and services are open to organised 
groups, organisations, and individuals.   
232.  The total income of the bank rose from KES 5.9858 billion in 2018 to KES 5,982 
billion  in  2019,  while  its  net  loss  dropped  from  KES  729.56  million  to  KES  401.59 
million (a decrease of about 45%). Its total assets increased from KES 29.76 billion 
to KES 30.61 billion, while its total liabilities increased from KES 25.51 billion to KES 
36.77 billion in the same period. Its liquidity ratio improved from 20.5% in 2018 to 
24% in 2019, while its non-performing portfolio improved from KES 52.18 million in 
2018 to KES 113.0 million in 2019. 
233.  The  bank  plays  a  key  role  in  supporting  the  smallholder  farmers  in  their 
agribusiness operations through offering credit  facilities and training to boost their 
economic value and to ensure food security both at the household and the society 
level.  The  bank  intends  to  deepen  its  agriculture  lending  and  has  a  strategy  to 
increase agricultural lending to 10% of its overall bank portfolio. In order to achieve 
this, the bank has developed an agribusiness strategy, and created an agribusiness 
department  with  a  detailed  programme  on  staff  capacity  building.  It  also  has  a 
management information system (MIS) in place to track deposits, credit facilities and 
liquidity; these reports can be customised as the need arises.   
234.  The  bank  would  be  willing  to  participate  in  any  initiative,  programme,  or 
project  aimed  at  increasing  agriculture  lending  and  to  finance  the  expansion  of  its 
agribusiness product offering. Some of the challenges the bank has faced in lending 
to farmers, agri-SMESs and MSMEs in the rural and agriculture sectors include high 
cost of funds and the cost of delivering financial services, lack of adequate market 
linkages and non-predictability of the agricultural markets, and limited technology. 
Therefore, the bank is required to invest in technology to deliver these services to 
rural  populations,  which  can  be  quite  expensive  and  a  high  credit  risk  due  to 
production  risk,  market  risk,  weather  risk  etc.  In  order  to  mitigate  some  of  these 
challenges,  the  bank  has  provided  micro  insurance  (agriculture  insurance),  has 
78 
continued to build the capacity of staff for agricultural lending, and has continued to 
mobilise funds for on-lending and entering into partnership and alliances with other 
institutions and organisations.  
235.  The bank provides a wide range of agribusiness products for both savings and 
credit facilities and has a unique business model for both groups, and individual and 
SME clients, and has the capacity to absorb additional funds that can be targeted at 
farmers, especially smallholder farmers. Some of the financial services and products 
offered by the bank include: 
  Dairy farming loans that enable dairy farmers to invest in high breed dairy cows. 
  Maziwa Plus Loans to facilitate dairy groups/ associations, societies, individuals, 
and  dairy  companies  to  access  loans  for  dairy  production  and  value  addition 
equipment, including buying additional cows and chilling equipment.  
  Green  House  Farmers  Kit  is  a  loan  facility  that  enables  farmers  to  acquire  a 
complete farmer’s kit that provides modern farming solutions. It includes quality 
seeds as well as advanced technology adjusted to customer needs and capacity. 
  Dairy  goat  farming  that  supports  dairy  goat  farming  by  enabling  farmers  to 
purchase quality dairy goats.  
  Aquaculture  (fish  farming)  loans  that  are  input  loans  offered  to  clients  for 
excavated ponds or liner ponds as well as affordable fingerlings.  
  Apiculture  (beekeeping)  loans  that  finances  modern  bee  keeping  through  the 
purchase of improved hives and other bee-keeping equipment.  
  Agricultural input loan is a product targeting farmers to help them acquire quality 
inputs for their farming activities affordably.  
  Agro-dealer  loans  targets  financing  of  agro-dealers  involved  in  agricultural 
value-chains, such as agro-vets, commodity traders‚ etc. 
236.  The bank participated in the PROFIT Programme implemented by the national 
Treasury, which injected KES 205 million in 2012 for on-lending to farmers and other 
players in the agricultural sector. Since agricultural lending was not one of the bank’s 
core  areas,  it  started  by  developing  agricultural  products.  Luckily,  the  programme 
had a technical assistance package which helped in building the capacity of the staff 
to develop an agricultural strategy, policy, and operational manual. Initially the bank 
started  by  lending  to  dairy  farmers  but  later  expanded  to  crop  farmers  and  other 
players, such as input suppliers. By 2019 the bank had lent  KES 1.9 billion, which 
decreased to KES 1.5 billion the following year due to the COVID-19 pandemic.  
237.  Of  importance  to  note  is  that  the  bank  seeks  to  improve  its  green  finance 
footprint  by  providing  loans  for  solar  lighting  solutions  and  biogas  to  farmers  to 
enable them to purchase bio-digesters, to use clean cooking and lighting in order to 
reduce costs and save time,,  to reduce indoor and environmental pollution, to use 
slurry as fertilizer and to improve the lifestyles of farmers.  
238.  In addition to the bank’s support to farmers, it has also partnered with other 
organisations. It has signed an agreement with the Feed the Future Kenya Crops & 
79 
Dairy  Market  Systems  Activity  (KCDMS),  a  United  States  Agency  for  International 
Development (USAID) - funded programme to extend tailored financial services to 
farmers in Busia and Homa Bay counties. The partnership is intended to benefit at 
least 10,000 farmers in both counties within three years. To achieve this target, Faulu 
Kenya  is  working  with  farmer  groups,  with  each  group  having  between  30  and  50 
farmers. The bank aims to recruit 100 groups annually over the three-year life cycle 
of the project. Under the partnership, farmers will also benefit from training, capacity 
building and market access.  
239.  The  outbreak  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  has  affected  MFIs  adversely.  The 
impact on the MFIs’ business was significant. The bank was on a recovery path when 
the pandemic struck. The measures taken by the government to mitigate the effects 
of  the  pandemic  included  movement  restriction,  restricting  of  gathering  of  people, 
imposition  of  curfews  and  closure  of  business  premises,  which  had  a  far-reaching 
impact  on  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  from  hotels,  transport,  construction,  and 
MSMES, which are the MFI’s main clientele. The effects of these measures were that 
the bank was unable to meet clients or disburse and collect loans for three months 
from April, May, and June 2020. The liquidity constraints hampered operations of the 
bank’s business. In the meantime the bank gave lenders moratoriums, which meant 
additional costs in terms of interest payments.  
240.  Some of the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the bank include 
reduced interest income, and reduced loan uptake, reduced cash flows.  The overall 
loan  book  reduced  significantly  from  2019  to  2020.  In  numerical  terms,  the  loss 
before tax increased by 73%, from KES 401 million in 2019 to KES 1.485 billion in 
2020. Net interest income reduced by 29%, t from KES 3.513 billion to KES 2.728 
billion, while impairment losses increased by 98%, from KES 11 million to KES 642 
million in the same period34.  
241.  However,  business  operations  started  to  recover  in  July  2020  and  the  MFI 
undertook strategic changes to ensure that it could endure the COVID-19 pandemic. 
These changes include a determined shift to use digital technology to deliver services, 
cost management, revamping of the products and services, mobilization of savings 
and building strategic partnerships.  
vii)  FAULU MFB   
242.  Faulu Microfinance Bank, a tier 1 microfinance bank, is part of the Old Mutual 
Group. It provides business training for its SME and individual customers to empower 
them with skills to grow their businesses.  It was the leading microfinance bank in 
profitability  and  deposits  in  2019.  Its  profit  before  tax  recorded  in  2019  was  KES. 
482 Million, which was up by 76% as compared to 2018 when the bank recorded a 
profitability of KES 287 million. The bank’s balance sheet closed at KES. 29.7 billion, 
up  by  9%  compared  to  KES.  27.2  billion  in  2018.  Gross  loans  and  advances  to 
34 KWFT Financial Statements, 2020 
80 
customers increased by 10% to KES 21 billion while customer deposits were up by 
8% to reach KES 20 billion. The liquidity ratio closed at 26% on account of increased 
customer deposits, while the bank’s capital position remains strong with all metrics 
above the regulatory thresholds. The core capital to risk weighted ratio of 15.5 % 
was lower than the prior year when it was 16.9%. This was driven by higher profits 
and high-risk weighted assets, which improved from 13.07%.  
243.  In  addition  to  lending  to  individuals,  the  MFB  also  offers  wholesale  lending 
services to MFIs and MFIs, with rural clients as the ultimate beneficiaries, based on 
portfolio  performance  review  of  the  existing  book,  full  security  for  the  loan  and 
pipeline of potential clients. The interest rate charged is dependent on the level of 
engagement,  ranging  (currently)  from  7%  to  11%,  with  the  level  of  risk  exposure 
being the biggest determinant. The MFIs and MFIs are free to set their own interest 
rates  when  they  issue  the  loans  from  these  funds  to  their  clients  (smallholders, 
SMEs.). However, the intermediary party is free to set the interest rate, with Faulu 
making recommendations for the same.  
244.  Faulu Bank participated in the PROFIT programme financed by IFAD and GoK. 
It  has  received  a  credit  facility  (CF)  of  KES  200  million  and  leveraged  it  to  KES  1 
billion.  It  loaned  the  money  to  about  13,764  beneficiaries.  The  loan  amount  also 
helped to stabilise its operations. The loan amounts given, and the number of loan 
beneficiaries  increased  significantly  after  the  bank  was  given  capacity  building 
training. During these trainings, the financial institutions were supported to develop 
specific products aligned to the agricultural value chain actors.  
245.  Faulu believes that the resources may have contributed to increased incomes 
and food security among the beneficiaries. Outcomes from the farmer group model 
showed that a significant number of beneficiaries not only gained valuable incomes 
but also showed tremendous resilience. This was evidenced by the fact that a majority 
of the beneficiaries were still able to  generate money from their business, provide 
adequate  food  for  their  families,  and  still  had  their  assets  acquired  before  project 
completion.  In  the  PROFIT  programme,  the  identified  four  value  chains,  namely, 
cereals, dairy, horticulture, and livestock, revamped the products on these lines. The 
use of aggregators gave the bank and farmers confidence on the marketing of the 
produce.  
246.  The  bank  has  an  array  of  products  directed  towards  wholesale  lending  and 
agribusiness value-chain clients in its SME and agribusiness products, which include: 
Kilimo bora loans that are targeted towards groups and individuals for all agribusiness 
activities;  Maziwa  bora  loans  that  address  the  financing  needs  of    dairy  farmers, 
cooperatives and MFIs; and Nafaka loans, a financial solution that meets the needs 
of cereal farmers, groups, farmer societies and MFIs and that are structured to meet 
seasonal and financial cycles. The bank is increasing its agricultural lending portfolio 
and towards this end it has a fully-fledged department for institutional banking and 
a  treasury  that  oversees  deposits  and  the  liquidity  aspect  of  the  bank.  Through 
training  of  the  bank’s  staff  internally  and  by  various  partners,  the  bank  has  now 
81 
revamped  agriculture  lending  around  four  value  chains,  which  include,  cereals, 
livestock, dairy, and horticulture. The proposition is centred on the aggregator model 
(cooperative, large buyer of the produce, SME, CBO, a factory etc.). The merits of 
the  aggregator  model  are  its  ability  to  reach  a  larger/bigger  clientele  base  and  to 
ensure  that  payments  are  processed  centrally,  thereby  reducing  transaction  costs. 
The  model  also  ensures  that  capacity  building  can  be  conducted  centrally.  Other 
benefits  include  offering  agriculture  insurance  through  its  linkages  with  UAP 
Insurance; payments are channelled through the borrower’s account in Faulu, further 
securing its interest and de-risking its portfolio. 
247.  Some of the challenges in lending to agri-SMEs, and agriculture sectors include 
information  asymmetry/gap  among  farmers,  financial  illiteracy/understanding  on 
finance needs and loan repayment structure among smallholder farmers, on boarding 
and remoteness of farmers, inadequate market linkages and locking of repayments 
between the farmer, off-taker, and the bank. The challenges faced are generic and 
cut across the industry in that farmers will opt for substandard farm inputs and thus 
poor  yield.  The  farmers  also  lack  information  about  crop  insurance,  which  would 
cushion them in case of weather perils. However, there are interventions that have 
been  put  in  place  by  the  bank.  These  include  partnerships  with  organisations  that 
provide  inputs  and  offtake  products,  aggressive  farmer  training  and  working  with 
agronomists in the field.  
viii)  ECLOF Kenya  
248.  ECLOF  Kenya  is  currently  a  credit-only  microfinance  institution  providing 
financial  and  related  non-financial  services  in  Kenya  and  to  all  sectors  of  the 
economy. ECLOF Kenya has a rural presence, with 42 branches in 33 countries and 
serving over 60,000 clients. The MFI has a portfolio in excess of KES 1 billion (~ USD 
10 million), of which KES 231 million (23%) is invested in agriculture. It is currently 
a Microfinance Company Limited by Guarantee but is in the process of becoming a 
shareholder-owned  institution,  with  the  objective  of  becoming  a  deposit-taking 
institution in the coming years35.  
ECLOF  is  deepening  its  presence  in  lending  to  agriculture  and  other  players  in  the 
rural sector and is scaling up dairy lending across all viable business clusters, with 
farmer groups and cooperatives being the product nerve centres. The MFI plans to 
roll  this  out  through  a  robust  capacity  development  programme  that  targets  staff, 
partner cooperative leaders and farmers across its network of branches. ECLOF Kenya 
has worked with numerous partners, in line with its mission to enable clients to realise 
their dreams and experience the abundance of life through the provision of financial 
and  related  non-financial  services.  These  partners  include  DFID,  the  USAID-
supported  Kenya  Crops  and  Dairy  Market  System  (KCDMS),  Kiva,  Unilever,  Water 
org, and ORB Energy, among others.  
35 Service Delivery Model Assessment -Public Report September 2018 
82 
249.  ECLOF’s main loan products include monthly climate smart agriculture (a dairy 
loan started in 2015 that had lent KES 29 million to over 200 farmers by May 2018. 
Its loan pricing and structure is a 3–9-month farmer input loan at below market rate, 
enabled by a repayable grant from DFID to eliminate the loan cost of the capital. No 
collateral  is  required,  only  six  weeks  of  savings  and  proof  of  six  months  of  milk 
deposits  to  an  aggregator.  The  loans  are  disbursed  either  directly  to  the  farmer 
through  their  loan  group  –  via  a  combination  of  various  delivery  channels,  for 
example the mobile money transfer platform M-Pesa, and subject to assessment of 
intended dairy farming expenditures – or through the partner aggregator for feed or 
purchase of a new cow. 
250.  The  loan  is  repaid  monthly  through  the  partner  aggregator  who  tracks  the 
deposited milk and pays the farmers after subtracting the loan repayment. There are 
additional  services  offered  by  the  MFI,  including  access  to  livestock  insurance, 
guaranteed off-take by the partner aggregator and access to climate smart and good 
agricultural  practices  training,  including  farm  diversification  training,  demo  farms, 
and financial literacy training access to veterinary services provided by the partner 
aggregator.  
251.  The  MFI  is  also  moving  into  green  financing  by  providing  loan  products  for 
improving  access  to  clean  water,  proper  sanitary  facilities,  such  as  construction  of 
environmental-friendly toilets, including ventilation improved pit (VIP) latrines, roof 
water catchment, water tanks, water purifiers, tanks and collectors, or shallow wells, 
in addition to financing energy-efficient cooking stoves (jikos) and  solar panels for 
charging  phones  and  operating  a  lamp,    a  small  radio  or    a    solar-powered  TV. 
Children now have light to do their homework, solar and heating. Towards this end, 
since  2011,  ECLOF  Kenya  has  disbursed  loans  worth  over  KES  260  million  to  over 
6,200 clients (the average loan size is around KES 40,000). As a result, some clients 
enjoy greater comfort and hygiene; others collect water for a farm or family, while 
yet others start a small business as water vendors. 
ix)  Juhudi Kilimo MFI  
252.  Juhudi Kilimo  is the second largest non-deposit-tracking (credit-only) MFI in 
the country in terms of branch and county coverage. The MFI has a variety of loan 
products that enable farmers to acquire a wide range of farm animals and invest in 
high breed dairy cows, poultry, goats, sheep, donkeys, rabbits, bee keeping, animal 
feeds and fish farming, among others. They include: 
  Animal  farming  loans  that  enable  farmers  to  acquire  a  wide  range  of  farm 
animals and invest in high breed dairy cows, poultry, dairy goat farming, sheep, 
rabbits, bee keeping and fish farming, among others. 
  Farm  equipment  loans  targeting  farmers  to  help  them  acquire  quality  farm 
equipment, such as generators, water tanks, water pumps, milking cans, biogas 
digesters,  motorcycles,  posho  mills,  chaff  cutters,  green  houses,  irrigation 
83 
equipment,  milk  freezers,  milking  machines,  ATM  milk  dispensers,  ploughing 
tools/equipment, and animal housing structures.  
  Working capital loans targeting farmers and micro entrepreneurs to enable them 
to expand their businesses and invest in agri-processors, agrovets, animal trade, 
cereals,  groceries,  milk  vending,  transport  services  and  veterinary  services, 
among others. 
253.  In addition to deepening financial literacy for the sound management of loans, 
Juhudi  provides  business  management,  technical  and  financial  literacy  training  to 
rural smallholder farmers and micro entrepreneurs. This loan product enables farmers 
to acquire a wide range of farm animals and invest in high breed dairy cows, poultry, 
goats, sheep, donkeys, rabbits, bee keeping, animal feeds and fish farming, among 
others. 
254.  Juhudi Kilimo’s main focus is predominantly smallholder farmers. It uses the 
group lending methodology and the results have been impressive.   Its loan book has 
grown  from  KES  497  million  in  2013  to  KES  1.77  billion  in  2020  (an  increase  of 
256%), while its customer base has increased from 12,375 to 45,672 (an increase of 
269%) in the same period. Its strategic thrust in the next few years is on growth, 
sustainability,  and  impact.  The  MFI  assesses  or  qualifies  clients  to  receive 
progressively higher loans as farmers repay their loans, reassessing a farmer’s debt 
capacity at each level. Starting with loans of, for example, KES 100,000, farmers can 
apply for up to double the earlier amount at each successful full repayment, with a 
cap at KES 100,000. Every loan goes through a new credit appraisal, and approval is 
not automatic. It also offers top-up loans for energy devices (such as solar lanterns 
and improved cooking stoves), education and emergencies to its most loyal clients.  
255.  Juhudi Kilimo is already working in the green finance space by providing loans 
for investment in green/clean energy investment and to customers seeking financing 
for eco-friendly products, such as solar water pumps, solar home systems, modern 
cooking  stoves,  solar  TVs,  and  biogas  systems  that  use  energy  generated  from 
natural  resources  that  are  renewable  (naturally  replenished).  The  areas  of  focus 
include solar panels, solar pumps, sola lanterns, solar installations, solar batteries, 
solar TVs, and improved cooking stoves.  
x)  SUMAC MFB  
256.  Sumac Microfinance Bank was established in 2002 by a group of 14 investors 
who  initially  formed  an  investment  group  to  help  chart  out  a  better  future  for 
themselves. In 2004, the institution opened its doors to the public as Sumac Credit 
Limited with a mission to empower businesspeople who could not match the stringent 
loan  requirements  by  commercial  banks.  In  2012,  we  were  duly  licensed  as  a 
Microfinance Bank by the Central Bank of Kenya to take deposits. We have since been 
referred  to  as  Sumac  Microfinance  Bank  Ltd.  The  P+MFB  has  continued  to  expand 
and  has  4  branches  (Ngara,  Nairobi,  Githunguri,  Nakuru  and  Thika)  and  plans  are 
underway for the opening of more branches across the country with targeted.  
84 
257.  Since  2012  the  MFB’s  customer  base  has  grown  and  the  bank  is  currently 
managing over KES 500 million worth of customer deposits, loan book standing at 
KES 900 million and operating a balance sheet of KES 1.3 billion. Sumac has been 
able to team up with local and international partners for funding and currently the 
bank has a customer base of 10,000. 
258.  These  include  Regmifa  Fund  Triple  Jump,  both  from  the  Netherlands.  For 
strategic reasons, the firm has just partnered with Badoer Investments Limited from 
Dubai, UAE which has taken over 15.6% shareholding. As part of its expansion the 
bank is also targeting diaspora banking and partnering with local commercial banks 
and  other  organisation,  which  include  Micro  Enterprises  Support  Programme  Trust 
(MESPT), Development Bank and Credit Bank. 
259.  The MFB’s expansion will continue in coming years in a strategic approach to 
seek to meet the needs of its clients countrywide. The bank has a strong presence in 
asset  financing  products,  especially  on  motor  vehicles  and  agricultural  equipment 
that as well as business loans with clients paying a 30 per cent deposit on all vehicle 
purchases  while  Sumac  Microfinance  Bank  finances  the  remainder  70  per  cent.  In 
addition,  the  MFB  has  ventured  in  agricultural  financing  with  a  facility  for  dairy 
farmers, that include financing farmers to acquire dairy cattle in a facility that is also 
insured, to cushion them against any animal losses and which has also opened credit 
lines to women and the youth in the rural areas where they own no other form of 
security except livestock, allowing them once they have cleared paying for a facility 
to take up new ones. 
260.  It is worth noting that Sumac has been able to team up with other local and 
international partners for funding as well. These include Regional MSME Investment 
Fund for Sub-Saharan Africa (Regmifa) and Triple Jump, both from the Netherlands. 
Local Sumac partners include Micro Enterprises Support Programme Trust (MESPT), 
Development Bank and Credit Bank. The MFI has already received KES 150 million 
from  the  Regmifa,  KES  45  million  from  the  Development  Bank  of  Kenya,  KES  30 
million from the Micro Enterprises Support Programme Trust (MESPT) USD2 million 
(KES  200  million)  from  US-based  Social  Investment  Managers  &  Advisors 
(SIMA) LLC. 
261.  The  MFB  is  also  moving  into  green  finance  and  is  providing  finance  for 
acquisition of green energy assets. The bank is providing Kawi loan (a clean energy 
product) which is meant to help individuals access clean (solar) energy equipment 
and  installation,  including  cooking  stove,  biogas,  solar  panel,  and  installation  of 
generators for the same. The loan product targets dairy farmers for biogas and light 
industries and micro client for cooking stoves.  
85 
262.  To  further  deepen  the  green  finance  business  the  MFB  entered  a  long-term 
agreement with the Kenya Biogas Programme (KBP)36 to sell biogas to both existing 
and potential clients throughout the country. Plans are at an advanced stage to roll-
out the project, in which farmers will access funding from Sumac MFB to acquire the 
biogas facilities, and then pay the loan monthly over a convenient period of time.  
263.  Digitization  provides  an  opportunity  for  microfinance  providers  to  leverage 
their license, customer base and outreach to rural areas and low-income clients and 
digital solutions help financial institutions deepen customer engagement and product 
usage,  and  in  turn  promote  and  increase  financial  inclusion.  Sumac  MFB  has 
leveraged on innovation through its M-banking platform, which is integrated into a 
vibrant  core  banking  system  in  order  to  provide  financial  services  more  efficiently 
and effectively.  
264.  Businesses across the world and country in almost all sector s of the economy 
have  gone  through  particularly  rough  stretch  in  the  last  fifteen  months  since 
March 2020. The diminished earning capacity of their clients threatens to undermine 
the strong repayment culture on which microfinance depends. Sumac has not been 
an exception, but the management and board of the bank is still hopeful of a bright 
future.  The  bank  responded  to  the  pandemic  in  two  ways,  that  is,  by  providing 
repayment deferrals and restructuring loans, which is being review on a need-basis 
and case-by case basis.   
11.  SUMMARY OF MFIs’ POTENTIAL TO PARTICIPATE IN RK FINFA 
Strategies, challenges, and opportunities 
265.  The  MFIs  that  have  been  profiled  play  a  key  role  in  supporting  smallholder 
farmers in their agribusiness operations through offering credit facilities and training 
to boost their economic value and ensure food security both at the community and 
household levels. The MFIs provide a wide range of agribusiness products for both 
savings and credit facilities and have unique business models for groups, individual 
and SME clients and have the capacity to absorb additional funds that can be pushed 
towards farmers, especially smallholder farmers.  
266.  Although  for  most  of  MFIs  farmers  are  not  their  main  clientele,  they  are 
increasingly becoming keen to lend to the stakeholders operating in the sector. They 
have subsequently diversified their lending to agriculture and have a broader menu 
of products for the farming community.  They provide a variety of delivery channels 
36 The Kenya Biogas Program (KBP), a constituent of the Africa Biogas Partnership Program 
(ABPP) aims to achieve the development of a commercially viable domestic biodigester 
sector in Kenya by 2019. 
86 
and  operations  and  their  products  and  services  are  open  to  organised  groups, 
organisations, and individuals.   
267.  Some of the MFIs, such as Kenya Women Microfinance Bank, Faulu and SMEP 
participated  in  the  PROFIT  Programme  implemented  by  the  National  Treasury  and 
IFAD. They received funds in 2012 for on-lending to farmers and other players in the 
agricultural sector, which luckily was accompanied by a technical assistance package 
that helped in building the capacity of the staff to develop an agricultural strategy, 
policy, and operational manual.  
268.  Some of the MFIs are moving into green financing by providing loan products 
for improving access to clean water, proper sanitary facilities, such as construction 
of environmental-friendly toilets, ventilation improved pit (VIP) latrines, roof water 
catchment,  water  tanks,  water  purifiers,  tanks  and  collectors,  or  shallow  wells,  in 
addition  to  financing  energy  cooking  stoves  (jikos),  and  solar  panels  for  charging 
phones and operating lamps, radios or solar-powered TVs. 
Assessment of the technological/operational capacity of the MFIs and quality of 
the MIS system  
269.  The  MFIs  would  be  willing  to  participate  in  RK  FINFA  in  order  to  increase 
agriculture lending and to finance the expansion of its agribusiness product offering. 
Some of the challenges they have faced in lending to farmers, agri-SMEs and MSMEs 
in the rural and agriculture sectors include high cost of funds and delivering financial 
services, lack of adequate market linkages and non-predictability of the agricultural 
markets,  and  limited  technology.  They  therefore  they  are  required  to  invest  in 
technology  to  deliver  these  services  to  rural  populations,  which  can  be  quite 
expensive and a high credit risk due to production risk, market risk, weather risk etc.  
270.  In  the  age  of  data-driven  services,  some  MFIs,  such  as  Musoni  have 
demonstrated  that  providers  of  digital  inclusive  financial  services  can  embrace 
technology  and  reach  out  to  ever-greater  numbers  of  low-income  people,  while 
mitigating  risks  and  implementing  client  protection  principles.  Client  protection 
policies are a useful tool in the efforts to improve the lives of low-income people and 
their communities, enabling microfinance institutions to maximise their social impact. 
271.  A summary of the profiles of 5 MFIs active in agricultural finance is shown in 
the table below. 
Table 3: Summary of the profiles of 5 MFIs active in agricultural finance 
MFIs 
KWFT 
FAULU 
SUMAC 
ECLOF 
Juhudi 
Kilimo 
Financial soundness1 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
Have an agriculture strategy? 2 
Staff has agri-capacity2 
Rural outreach (branches)  
Already offering agricultural loans  
Targeted 
product development 
agricultural 
finance 
technical 
Need 
services 
/opportunities to participate in the 
RK FINFA programme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quality of MIS3  
 
 
X 
X 
X 
10  Although the financial statements are fine, it is important to point that it is not feasible to deeply 
interrogate financial statement in this kind of exercise. They are taken as-is. The RK FINFA would 
need to undertake due diligence of financial institutions to participate in the RK FINFA programme 
during implementation  
11  KWFT and Faulu participated in the PROFIT programme 
12  The quality of the MIS will have to be vouched for after due diligence if the MFIs were to participate 
in the RK FINFA programme 
272.  MFIs  have  proved  to  be  resilient  institutions  in the  agricultural  and  rural  sector.  This  is 
especially true of farmer-based MFIs whose main clients are small-scale farmers spread across 
the country. However, these MFIs have inadequate finances to enable them serve farmers and 
other  AVC  players  adequately.  If  they  could  partner  with  more  and  better  capitalised  financial 
institution through participating in a project such as RK FINFA they can reach deepen financial 
inclusion in the rural areas, where penetration is still low. To ensure that the injection of finance 
meets its objectives it should be accompanied by capacity building by way of technical support  
services in aspects such as (i)  design and implementation of demand for and supply agricultural 
finance to help the MFIs understand different smallholder segments and their needs; (ii) product 
design and piloting to reduce the costs and risks of new market entry and innovation; (iii) systems 
improvements  to  adapt  MIS/core  banking  systems  and  use  technology  solutions,  such  as 
automation  of  data capture  and analysis  to accommodate tailored credit  assessment,  portfolio 
monitoring requirements,  and  loan repayment  schedules; (iv)  design  of  staff  incentive plans to 
promote agricultural lending; (v) introduction of product-costing practices to inform product and 
program design and to help to make the business case for new market entrants; and (vi) design 
and piloting of new delivery channels to reduce the costs and risk of lending. 
88 
ANNEX 1:  Central Bank of Kenya Directory of licenced Microfinance Banks 
NO.  
1.  
MICROFINANCE BANK 
Caritas Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 15352 - 00100, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 - 5151500  
Email: info@caritas-mfb.co.ke  
Website: www.caritas-mfb.co.ke  
Physical Address: Cardinal Maurice Otunga Plaza, Ground floor, Kaunda Street, 
Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 02.06.2015  
Branches: 2  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
Century Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 38319 - 00623, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 - 2664282, 0722 - 168721, 0756 - 305132  
Email: info@century.co.ke  
Website: www.century.co.ke  
Physical Address: Bihi Towers, 8th Floor, Moi Avenue  
Date Licenced: 17.09.2012  
Branches: 2  
Choice Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 18263 - 00100, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 3882206 / 207, 0736 - 662218, 0724 - 308000  
Email: info@choicemfb.com  
Website: www.choicemfb.com  
Physical Address: Siron Place, Ongata Rongai, Magadi Road, Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 13.05.2015  
Branches: 1  
Daraja Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: P.O. Box 100854 - 00101, Nairobi Telephone: +254 - 020 - 
3879995 / 0733 - 988888, 0707 – 444888, 0718 - 444888 Email: 
daraja@darajabank.co.ke Website: www.darajabank.co.ke Physical Address: 
Karandini Road, off Naivasha Road, Nairobi Date Licenced: 12.01.2015 
Branches: 1  
Faulu Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 60240 - 00200, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 - 3877290/3/7; 3872183/4; 3867503, 0711 - 074074, 
0708 - 111000  
Fax: +254-20-3867504, 3874875  
Email: info@faulukenya.com, customercare@faulukenya.com, 
contact@faulukenya.com  
Website: www.faulukenya.com  
Physical Address: Faulu Kenya House, Ngong Lane - Off Ngong Road, Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 21.05.2009  
Branches: 39  
89 
NO.  
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
MICROFINANCE BANK 
Kenya Women Microfinance Bank PLC  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 4179-00506, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 - 3067000, 2470272-5/2715334-5, 0729920920, 
0732633332, 0703 - 067000  
Email: info@kwftbank.com.  
Website: www.kwftbank.com.  
Physical Address: Akira House, Kiambere Road, Upper Hill, Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 31.03.2010  
Branches: 31  
Rafiki Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 12755 - 00400, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254-020-2166401/0730 170 000/500  
Email: info@rafiki.co.ke  
Website: www.rafiki.co.ke  
Physical Address: Rafiki House, Biashara Street, Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 14.06.2011  
Branches: 17  
Key Microfinance Bank PLC  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 20833 - 00100, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 - 2214483/2215384/ 2215387/8/9, 2631070, 
2215380, 2215384/5/7/8/9, 0733-554555  
Email: info@keymicrofinancebank.com  
Website: www.keymicrofinancebnk.com  
Physical Address: Finance House, 14th Floor, Loita Street, Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 31.12.2010  
Branches: 2  
SMEP Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 64063 - 00620, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 - 3572799/2055761, 2673327/8, 0711606900  
Email: info@smep.co.ke  
Website: www.smep.co.ke  
Physical Address: SMEP Building - Kirichwa Road, Off Argwings Kodhek Road, 
Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 14.12.2010  
Branches: 7  
Sumac Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: P. O. Box 11687 - 00100, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 - 2212587, 2210440, 2249047, 0738637245, 
0725223499  
Fax: 20 2210430  
Email: info@sumacmicrofinancebank.co.ke  
Website: www.sumacmicrofinancebank.co.ke  
Physical Address: Consolidated Bank House, 2nd Floor, Koinange Street, 
Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 29.10.2012  
Branches: 3  
90 
NO.  
11. 
12. 
MICROFINANCE BANK 
U & I Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: 15825 - 00100, Nairobi  
Telephone: +254 - 020 - 2367288, 0713 - 112791  
Email: info@uni-microfinance.co.ke  
Website: www.uni-microfinance.co.ke  
Physical Address: Asili Complex, 1st Floor, River Road, Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 08.04.2013  
Branches: 1  
Uwezo Microfinance Bank Limited  
Postal Address: 1654 - 00100, Nairobi  
Telephone: 2212919, 0703591302  
Email: info@uwezomfbank.com  
Website: www.uwezomfbank.com  
Physical Address: Rehani House, 11th Floor, Koinange Street, Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 08.11.2010  
Branches: 1  
13.  Maisha Microfinance Bank Ltd  
Postal Address: 49316 - 00100, Nairobi  
Telephone: 020 222 0648 | 0736-028-982 | 0792-002-300  
Email: info@maishabank.com  
Website: www.maishabank.com  
Physical Address: Chester House, 2nd Floor, Koinange Street, Nairobi  
Date Licenced: 21.05.2016  
Branches: 1  
14.  Muungano Microfinance Bank PLC  
Postal Address: 355-10218, Kangari, Murang’a  
Telephone: 020-4404173 | 0706-974-747 | 0706-975-522  
Email: info@muunganomfbank.co.ke  
Physical Address: Eastend Mall Kangari Township, Kangari-Githumu Road  
Date Licenced: 30.10.2019  
Branches: 1  
91 
RK-FINFA PIM APPENDIX 3:  
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND CLIMATE CHANGE MANAGEMENT 
Contents 
1 
Introduction .................................................................................................................. 1 
2  Potential Environmental, Social and Climate-Related Impacts of RK-FINFA Interventions and 
their Mitigation & Management ........................................................................................ 1 
Benefits of RK-FINFA ........................................................................................ 1 
Potential Environmental, Social and Climate Change Risks and Impacts ................. 2 
2.1 
2.2 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3  Climate Risk Assessment ................................................................................................ 1 
Background .................................................................................................... 1 
Risk Classification ............................................................................................ 1 
Climate Risk Analysis ....................................................................................... 3 
Overview ....................................................................................................... 3 
Value Chain related Vulnerabilities and Risks ...................................................... 4 
3.3.1 
3.3.2 
4.4 
4.6 
4.5 
4.5.1 
4.5.2 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.3.1 
4.3.2 
4.3.3 
4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.3 
4.6.1 
4.6.2 
4.6.3 
4.6.4 
4.6.5 
4.6.6 
4  Environmental, Social and Climate Change Management .................................................... 1 
RK-FINFA Implementation and Coordination for ESC Management ......................... 1 
Institutional, Policy, Legal and Framework For Environmental Management ............. 1 
National Environmental Guidelines ..................................................................... 3 
The EIA Process ............................................................................................. 3 
Permitting and Licencing Requirements ............................................................. 5 
Contractor’s Contractual Obligations ................................................................. 6 
Screening for RK-FINFA-supported Projects ........................................................ 6 
SECAP Screening Categorisation ....................................................................... 6 
Activities not supported by IFAD ....................................................................... 7 
Activities Encouraged for Support through GFF ................................................... 9 
Environmental and Social Management System ................................................... 9 
Introduction ................................................................................................... 9 
Elements of an ESMS .................................................................................... 11 
Safeguard Documents .................................................................................... 17 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Studies ....................................... 17 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)....................................... 19 
Climate Risk Analysis .................................................................................... 19 
Carbon Footprint .......................................................................................... 19 
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) ........................................................ 19 
Standard Operating Procedures ...................................................................... 20 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan ......................................................................... 21 
Purpose and objectives of engagement ............................................................ 21 
Legal and regulatory framework ..................................................................... 21 
Description of PFI-financed Activities ............................................................... 22 
Stakeholder Identification and Mapping ........................................................... 22 
Implementation of the SEP ............................................................................ 22 
Roles and Responsibilities .............................................................................. 23 
Grievance Management ................................................................................. 23 
Monitoring and Reporting ............................................................................... 23 
Grievance Redress Mechanisms ....................................................................... 23 
Purpose of the GRM ...................................................................................... 23 
Guiding Principles for RK-FINFA Grievance Mechanism ....................................... 24 
Grievance Monitoring and Reporting ................................................................ 24 
IFAD Complaints Procedure ............................................................................ 24 
Gender Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse ................................. 25 
GBV/SEA Risk Factors ................................................................................... 25 
GBV/SEA Risk Mitigation Measures .................................................................. 25 
Disclosure of Safeguard Documents ................................................................. 26 
Review and Approval of ESIAs, Project Reports and IPMP ................................... 26 
Monitoring .................................................................................................... 26 
4.7.1 
4.7.2 
4.7.3 
4.7.4 
4.7.5 
4.7.6 
4.7.7 
4.7.8 
4.8.1 
4.8.2 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 
4.10 
4.11 
4.12 
4.9.1 
4.9.2 
4.7 
4.8 
4.9 
4.13 
4.14 
4.15 
Quarterly and Annual Reviews ........................................................................ 27 
Reporting ..................................................................................................... 27 
Environmental and Social Auditing ................................................................... 28 
5.1 
5.2 
5  Capacity Building ......................................................................................................... 29 
Existing Capacity ........................................................................................... 29 
Training Needs .............................................................................................. 29 
Project Implementation ................................................................................. 29 
Specific Capacity Building for Vulnerable Groups ............................................... 30 
Preliminary Proposals for Training .................................................................... 30 
5.2.1 
5.2.2 
5.3 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
6  Guidelines for the Preparation of an Integrated Pest Management Plan ............................... 31 
Introduction ................................................................................................. 31 
Policy and Regulatory Frameworks in Kenya Related to Pest Management ............. 31 
Impacts of Agrochemicals ............................................................................... 33 
Potential Mitigation Measures .......................................................................... 34 
Integrated Pest Management Approach ............................................................ 35 
Pesticide Management ................................................................................... 36 
Screening Pesticides ..................................................................................... 36 
Reduce exposure time or the degree of exposure .............................................. 37 
Disposal of unused and obsolete pesticide, and empty pesticide containers .......... 39 
IPMP Summary............................................................................................. 39 
6.6.1 
6.6.2 
6.6.3 
6.6.4 
7.5.1 
7.5.2 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
7.7 
7.8 
7.9 
7.10 
7.11 
7.12 
7.13 
7.14 
7  Guidelines for the Preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework ...................... 41 
Overview ...................................................................................................... 41 
Objective of the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework ................................... 42 
Free Prior and Informed Consent ..................................................................... 42 
Policy And Legislative Framework on Indigenous Peoples .................................... 43 
Project Component Screening ......................................................................... 46 
Screening Methodology ................................................................................. 47 
Screening Criteria ......................................................................................... 47 
Social Assessment ......................................................................................... 48 
Stakeholder Engagement ............................................................................... 48 
Impact Identification ..................................................................................... 49 
Determination of Mitigation Measures .............................................................. 50 
Development of strategies for participation of Indigenous Peoples ....................... 50 
Combined qualitative and quantitative analysis methods .................................... 51 
Conduct of the SA ......................................................................................... 51 
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) ......................................................................... 52 
Grievance Redress Mechanism for IP ................................................................ 53 
7.14.1  Overview ..................................................................................................... 53 
7.14.2  Grievance Redress Process for the IPP ............................................................. 55 
7.14.3  Use of Alternative Dispute Resettlement Mechanisms ........................................ 56 
IFAD Complaints Procedure ............................................................................ 57 
7.14.4 
Implementation of the IPPF ............................................................................ 57 
Disclosure Arrangements ................................................................................ 57 
Specific Capacity-Building for IP ...................................................................... 57 
Roles and Responsibilities ............................................................................... 58 
Budget ......................................................................................................... 58 
Monitoring and Evaluation .............................................................................. 59 
7.20.1  Mechanisms for monitoring, evaluation and reporting ........................................ 59 
7.20.2  Monitoring and Evaluation Benchmarks ........................................................... 60 
Reporting ..................................................................................................... 60 
7.15 
7.16 
7.17 
7.18 
7.19 
7.20 
7.21 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
ASALs 
CA 
CC 
CEnvO 
CNRMO 
COK 
COVID-19 
CPFT 
CPR 
CSA 
CSSO 
E&S 
ECCO 
ERO 
ESC 
ESG 
ESIA 
ESMS 
GALS 
GFF 
GCF 
GoK 
GRM 
IFAD 
ILO 
IP 
IPP 
IPPF 
MALF 
MFB 
MFI 
MITC 
MITED 
MOEF 
MPSYG 
MSME 
NDC 
NEMA 
NT&P 
PCR 
PDR 
PFI 
PIM  
PMU 
PSC 
PWD 
RF 
R-CGS 
RK-FINFA 
SACCO 
SASRA 
SDG 
SECAP 
SIO 
SME 
SPR 
TA 
Arid And Semi-Arid Lands 
Conservation Agriculture 
Climate Change 
County Environment Officer 
County Natural Resource Management Officer 
Constitution of Kenya 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
County Project Facilitation Team 
Comprehensive Project Report 
Climate Smart Agriculture 
County Social Services Officer 
Environmental and Social 
Environment and Climate Change Officer 
ESMS Responsible Officer (for PFIs) 
Environmental, Social and Climate Change  
Environmental, Social and Governance 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Management System 
Gender Action Learning System 
Green Financing Facility 
Green Climate Fund 
Government of Kenya 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
International Labour Organisation 
Indigenous Peoples 
Indigenous Peoples Plan 
Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries 
Microfinance Bank 
Microfinance Institution 
Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology 
Ministry of Industry, Trade and Enterprise Development 
Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
Ministry of Public Services, Youth and Gender 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
National Environment Management Authority 
National Treasury & Planning 
Project Completion Report 
Project Design Report 
Participating Financial Institution 
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Management Unit 
Project Steering Committee 
Persons Living with Disabilities 
Rural Finance 
Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme 
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility 
Savings and Credit Cooperative Society 
Sacco Societies Regulatory Authority 
Sustainable Development Goal 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment 
Social Inclusion Officer 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
Summary Project Report 
Technical Assistance 
1 
Introduction 
RK-FINFA may have environmental and social risks resulting from its activities, particularly 
the end line investments by the smallholders and MSMEs.  In order to ensure that potential 
adverse impacts are minimised, environmental, social and governance standards will be a 
criterion  for  participation  in  the  project  by  the  partner  financial  institutions  (PFIs)  and 
technical  assistance  will  be  provided  to  strengthen  or  establish  their  Environment  and 
Social  Management  Systems  (ESMS).  Some  commercial  banks  and  microfinance  banks 
(MFBs) may already provide services and products for sustainable production, biodiversity 
and  environmental  protection,  energy  efficiency  and  renewable  energy  and  may  have 
established ESMSs that enable reporting on these portfolios. While it is unlikely that rural 
SACCOs have the capacity and resources to develop and implement ESMSs, guidance and 
capacity building would have to be provided to them to ensure environmental and social 
risks emanating from their activities will be avoided or minimised, and to set up monitoring 
and reporting systems.  
Specifics of the nature of activities and interventions to be supported through RK-FINFA 
will  be  determined  when  PFIs  review  loan  applications.  This  document  is  intended  to 
provide guidance to the management of environmental, social and climate change (ESC) 
related risks and impacts of potential project activities that will be financed by RK-FINFA 
supported PFIs, SACCOs and MSMEs.  It sets out the framework for these institutions to 
develop environmental and social management systems.  It identifies specific criteria for 
screening of investments and steps for establishing or strengthening of the various PFI’s 
ESMS.  
1 
2 
Potential Environmental, Social and Climate-Related Impacts 
of RK-FINFA Interventions and their Mitigation & Management 
2.1  Benefits of RK-FINFA 
The Project has been designed to provide numerous socio-economic benefits for different 
stakeholders and target groups.  These are summarised in Table  2-1 below. The project 
will  benefit  190,000  rural  Kenyan  households,  including  both  direct  and  indirect  clients. 
The targeting focus is on low-income, economically active rural households, with specific 
targets on 50 per cent of women and 30 per cent of youth participation in both capacity 
building and financing activities.  
Table 2-1  RK-FINFA Benefits  
Target Group 
Expected Benefits  
Environmental and Natural Resources 
Smallholder producers 
 
 
Increased productivity in agriculture value chains  
Technical  support  to  climate  smart  agriculture  resulting  in 
improved soil and water conservation and improved handling, 
storage and application of fertilizers;   
Socio-Economic  
Smallholder households and 
producers 
Women 
  Reduction  in  mortality  and  morbidity  risks  in  livestock 
ruminant  numbers  thereby  reducing  the  pressure  on 
rangelands. 
Improved  knowledge  and  skills 
management as a result of the advisory services (GFF) 
for  natural  resources 
 
  Direct and indirect financial services provided to an estimated 
66,000 economically active smallholder households. 
  90,000  smallholder  households  through  participation  in  the 
 
VCs strengthened by the supported agribusinesses. 
Estimated  32,000  persons  will  gain  employment  in  the  RK-
FINFA supported farm and off-farm employment activities. 
 
(marginalized  groups 
  50% of beneficiaries will be women, youth comprise 30% and 
a  minimum  of  5%  of  beneficiaries  will  be  from  vulnerable 
groups 
including  persons  with 
disabilities and persons with HIV). 
Financial support provided to women-owned micro and small 
and medium  enterprises  (SMEs) that  have growth  potential, 
including 
financial 
through 
MFBs/MFIs and SACCOs. 
Technical  support  services  provided  to  women  to  build  their 
capacity in agribusiness, their groups and associations and to 
build  capacity  of  MFBs/MFIs,  SACCOs  to  support  the 
development  of  women  owned  agribusiness  and  financial 
products. 
participating 
institutions 
 
  Access  to  information,  knowledge  and  financial  services  for 
women  will  be 
literacy,  business 
development  services,  follow-up  and  training,  and  access  to 
digital platforms such as through mobile phones.  
financial 
through 
  Women  will  receive  50  percent  of  the  training  in  business 
 
skills. 
Leadership trainings and mentorship of women in farmer and 
agribusiness  groups,  village  savings  and  loan  groups, 
associations and co-operatives. 
1 
Target Group 
Expected Benefits  
Youth  
Vulnerable groups 
  30% beneficiaries will be youth. 
 
Youth-sensitive  financing  modalities  will  facilitate  access  to 
affordable finance and productive assets. 
  RK-FINFA will leverage on the private sector to pilot and scale-
up  digital  solutions  that  will  positively  impact  rural  young 
women and men. 
  Capacity  building  on 
literacy  and  business 
financial 
development training, business skills provided to equip youth 
with tools for mindset change and confidence to make sound 
financial decisions, in turn enabling them to manage financial 
services. 
  RK-FINFA will encourage the use of youth as financial agents 
and educators in project activities to empower their leadership 
skills. 
  5%  of  beneficiaries  will  be 
from  vulnerable  groups 
(marginalized  groups  including  persons  with  disabilities  and 
persons with HIV). 
Rural MSMEs 
  2,000  rural  MSMEs  engaged  in  smallholder-inclusive  value 
Financial institutions 
Climate Change 
Smallholder households and 
producers 
 
 
chains. 
PFIs can expand their targeted area of investments with RK-
FINFA resources to any rural county in Kenya. 
Technical  assistance  provided  to  target  beneficiaries  to 
support  increased  resilience  and  ability  to  cope  with  climate 
risks. 
  Renewable energy use and improved resource use efficiency 
for climate change mitigation 
It  is  expected  that  rangeland  interventions  will  contribute  to  the  protection  and 
conservation  of  key  grazing  areas  and  regulate  seasonal  access.    This  will  then  have  a 
positive effect on livestock production as it will ensure availability of pasture, even during 
times of climatic stress.  Moreover, the climate resilient water infrastructure is meant to 
ensure that water is available for both human and livestock use throughout the year.  
2.2 
Potential Environmental, Social and Climate Change Risks and Impacts  
Table 2-2 below summarises some generic risks and adverse impacts that may result from 
RK-FINFA supported activities.  Please note that risks, impacts and mitigation measures in 
the table are not exhaustive since the exact types of interventions to be supported by the 
Project are not yet known.  
Table 2-2  Examples of Environmental, Social and Climate-Related Risks and Impacts 
Environmental, Social and Climate Aspects, 
Risks and Impacts  
Recommended Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Environmental Risks and Impacts 
Abstraction of water for irrigation and 
aquaculture resulting in depletion of aquifers, 
particularly in the dry season leading to threats 
to aquatic ecosystems. 
  Adhere to permitted abstraction volume as stipulated in water 
user/abstraction permits. 
Excavation activities and/or clearing of 
vegetation during construction of irrigation 
  Minimise/prevent  soil  erosion  by  controlling  earthworks,  installing 
and maintaining drainage structures and erosion control measure; 
use zero-till/reduce till methods of land preparation 
2 
Environmental, Social and Climate Aspects, 
Risks and Impacts  
schemes, buildings/workshops, storage and 
processing facilities, leading to: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Soil erosion, 
Dust emissions, 
Loss in biodiversity;  
Resulting  increase  in  runoff  also  may 
lead  to  deterioration  of  water  quality 
(sediment load) in water sources and/or 
sea 
Use of agrochemicals, leading to pollution due 
to leaching, seepage or transmission of 
agrochemicals through the soil into water 
sources; threats to aquatic ecology, including 
bio-magnification of toxins in tissues of aquatic 
fauna, and/or species die off; loss of 
biodiversity, ecological imbalances, caused by 
poisoning of non-target species, particularly 
bees and other beneficial insects; resistance to 
pesticides and pest resurgence. 
Over-watering of fields leading to water logging 
and salinization  
Discharge of contaminated water from 
aquaculture ponds entering surface water 
bodies or contaminating soil. 
Oil pollution from spills or leaks fuel, oils and 
lubricants from farm machinery, 
Excessive noise from working machinery, 
drilling boreholes, etc. 
Generation of waste such as food waste, 
packaging, scrap metal leading to health risks 
from proliferation of vermin, obstruction of 
access  
Recommended Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
  Mitigation through restoration of the sites after works in accordance 
with  contractors  environmental  and  social  management  plans 
(CEMPS) 
  Any existing riparian vegetation should be maintained (not cleared) 
  Use zero-till/reduced till methods for land preparation 
  If  mechanized  clearing  and  where  water  is  available,  keep  dust 
down by watering exposed/ worked surfaces 
  If  possible,  schedule  clearing  activities  such  that  they  avoid  the 
height of the dry seasons. 
  Careful and continuous supervision of clearing activities so that only 
areas required for plot/fields are cleared. 
  Monitor water quality 
  Prepare and implement an Agrochemical Management System, 
and an Integrated Pest Management Plan 
  Minimise use of agrochemicals through adopting conservation 
agriculture techniques, explore organic/natural fertilizers, 
agrochemicals 
  Manual removal of weeds 
  Careful supervision of application of agrochemicals 
  Use agrochemicals registered and approved by MALF, WHO and 
FAO 
  Train farmers/aquafarmers in proper use, handling, storage, and 
disposal of agrochemicals. 
  Ensure agrochemical containers are disposed of as hazardous 
waste according to NEMA’s waste management regulations 
  Keep records of agrochemicals used, application amounts. 
  Monitor water quality in soils and water sources 
  Control water supplied to fields 
  Fields should have slight gradients so as to allow drainage of 
excess water 
  Maintain drainage canals and other drainage structures 
  Monitor water quality discharged from fish ponds and irrigation 
canals 
   Treat effluent to conform with NEMA’s Water Quality Regulations  
  Where fuel is stored in bulk, the fuel tank should be contained in a 
bund of 110% tank capacity 
  Where fuel drums are used these should be stored on sump 
pallets. 
  Establish procedures for fuel delivery; decanting/draining; use, 
storage; spill response; disposal of waste oil; handling of oil 
products  
  Adhere to standards as prescribed in NEMA’s Noise and Excessive 
Vibration Pollution (Control)Regulations 
  Install noise reduction technologies in machinery, generators, etc. 
  Dispose of solid waste as per best practice guidelines: recycle, 
reuse, recover and reduce waste, and in line with NEMA’s Waste 
Management Regulations 
  Sensitise construction workers, farmers, fishers, processors, on 
waste management practices 
Risk of fire destroying structures and 
surrounding vegetation, and causing air 
pollution, and solid waste pollution from fire 
debris 
  Prepare emergency preparedness and response plan 
  Training in emergency response as per plan 
3 
Environmental, Social and Climate Aspects, 
Risks and Impacts  
Recommended Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Social/Socio-Economic Risks and Impacts 
Irrigation, aquaculture resulting in reduced 
availability of water for other ongoing and 
planned developments, causing conflict 
between communities and project-supported 
interventions 
Competition for water sources with community 
sources  
Poor application and handling of agrochemicals: 
touching, inhaling or ingesting toxic chemicals 
leading to dermatological or gastric ailments, or 
poisoning. 
Poor treatment application methods and 
improper storage leading to proliferation of 
aflatoxins and resulting health effects on 
community 
Accidents and injuries to workers due to 
movement of materials into construction sites, 
as well as construction activities, for processing 
plants, treatment and storage facilities, 
workshops, laboratories, etc. 
Accidents and incidents, electrocution, from 
handling machinery and working with electrical 
systems, during operation/implementation in 
buildings/warehouses  
Women may be marginalised from participating 
in cultivation if access to training is limited and 
if technologies make it difficult for women  
Gender based violence (GBV) i.e. transactional 
sex (food crops/fish for sex) and Intimate 
Partner Violence, child labour 
Retrogressive social norms prevent women and 
youth from participating and benefitting from 
project-supported  activities 
Inequitable labour and working conditions. 
Inadequate consultation of various 
stakeholders, particularly with vulnerable and 
disadvantaged members of the communities 
may result in reduced uptake of linkages, 
promoted varieties, attendance at field schools, 
enhanced marketing, value chain interventions 
  Ensure community water sources are not compromised 
  Establish grievance redress mechanism to deal with conflicts 
  Develop agrochemical management system and IPMP describing 
handling, storage, use and disposal of all agrochemicals used on 
the schemes.  
  Train farmers in the handling, safe storage, application and 
disposal of all agrochemicals. 
  Remove sources of contamination, promoting better agricultural 
and storage techniques (control moisture, temperature, and 
aeration) 
  Ensure adequate resources are available for testing and early 
diagnosis, and enforcing strict food safety standards,  
  Sensitisation of farmers and consumers about risks of aflatoxins 
  Create general awareness about personal protection 
  Chemical decontamination or use of enterosorbents for 
contaminated grains 
  Provide adequate and appropriate PPE such as safety boots, 
helmets, gloves, overalls and this should be in keeping with the 
task and exposure a worker is subjected to 
  Comply with OSHA requirements and best practice 
  Provide training to all relevant personnel in necessary OHS 
requirements to ensure their safety 
  First Aid Kit must be kept on the site and modestly stocked with 
necessities for any emergencies. 
  Prepare an Emergency Preparedness and Response and 
Evacuation Plan  
  Train all personnel in emergency response 
  Continuous 
consultations  and  dialogue  between  project 
implementors  and  potential  women  participants/  beneficiaries  to 
establish how to overcome some of these difficulties. 
  Create awareness on prevention, handling and referral for all forms 
of GBV and child labour – integrated in the project activities  
  Use  of  GALS  methodology  and/or  other  gender  participatory 
methodologies to empower women and make women’s roles, needs 
and aspirations visible; and sensitizing smallholder farmers, women, 
men and youth to increase their participation 
  Increasing women’s access to knowledge, skills, inputs and  finance 
through training, matching grants, exposure visits and GALS fairs 
  Increasing women and youth’s visibility as actors in the value chains 
through representation quotas 
  Ensure labour and working conditions are in line with national labour 
laws and ILO core conventions: equal pay, non-discrimination  
  Carry  out  continuous,  extensive  and  inclusive  consultations  with 
stakeholders,  particularly  vulnerable  and  disadvantaged  groups, 
during entire project period 
  Set up and disseminate Grievance Redress Mechanism which should 
be accessible to all stakeholders 
4 
Environmental, Social and Climate Aspects, 
Risks and Impacts  
Recommended Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Risk of fire on spreading to neighbouring 
premises, and causing injury/fatalities to 
workforce and neighbours. 
Impacts of COVID-19 may affect output, or 
cause lockdowns which disrupt transportation 
modes resulting in spoilt goods.    
Climate Risks and Impacts 
Pests and disease outbreaks, including locusts, 
fall army worm, fish diseases 
  Prepare and train in emergency preparedness and response plan  
  Ensure guaranteed markets  
  Encourage smallholder farmers to develop alternative livelihood 
means through safety nets 
  Establish early warning systems 
  Farmers to be trained in accessing climate early warning systems 
  Encourage farmers to develop alternative livelihood means 
through safety nets 
  Develop and implement IPMP 
Excessive rain, wind or floods may damage 
buildings (warehouses, milling posts), roads 
(disrupting transport of produce)  and water 
infrastructure. 
  Install and maintain drainage structures to regulate stormwater 
and runoff/run on 
  Provide guidance on siting, design and construction of robust 
infrastructure 
Excessive rain, wind or floods may cause severe 
soil erosion 
Droughts / prolonged dry periods leading to 
water unavailability /scarcity 
Disillusion/distrust as a result of delayed 
implementation 
  Install and maintain drainage structures to regulate stormwater 
and runoff/run on 
  Use zero-till/reduced till methods for land preparation 
  Provide guidance on siting, design and construction of robust 
infrastructure 
  Establish early warning systems 
  smallholder farmers to be trained in accessing climate early 
warning systems 
  Encourage smallholder farmers to develop alternative livelihood 
means through safety nets 
  Establish alternative water supplies, eg. rainwater harvesting, storage 
facilities for times of spate 
  Continuous communication with stakeholders at all levels. 
Poor safeguards measures in procurement  
  Ensure procurement of safeguards related studies is done in 
accordance with IFAD's procurement guidelines 
5 
3 
Climate Risk Assessment 
3.1  Background 
Kenya  has  been  negatively  affected  by  climate  change  in  most  sectors  of  its  economy 
including  crop  and  livestock  production,  tourism,  transport  among  others.  Climate 
variability  and  climate  change  is  increasingly  felt  across  the  country  and  the  duration 
between  climate  hazards  such  as  droughts  and  floods  has  become  shorter,  with  wide 
reaching impacts and losses. Kenya's mean annual temperature is expected to increase by 
1.00C to 2.80C by 2060, while rainfall is expected to increase by up to 49mm per month. 
More  hotter  days  are  being  experienced  in  Kenya,  particularly  during  the  long  rainy 
seasons, when most farmers are planting.  
Partly due to El Niño and La Niña episodes, Kenya is prone to cyclical prolonged droughts 
and serious  floods, with climate change increasing the intensity and frequency  of these 
events. Northern Kenya’s arid and semiarid lands (ASALs) are food- and water-insecure 
regions dependent on limited and highly variable rainfall. Rising temperatures, heat waves, 
changes  in  seasonal  rainfall  and  extreme  rainfall  events  intensify  risks  to  livestock  and 
crop production, and to human health through heat and water stress, disease, damage to 
crop and grazing lands and diminished water quality. Drought frequencies have increased 
to every 1-3 years which has in some instances resulted in losses of up to 60% of livestock 
in recent years in Marsabit County.  During drought, livestock become emaciated and their 
value drops drastically. Prolonged drought has  also resulted in long-term environmental 
changes such as deforestation, drying up of rivers and shallow wells, increased incidences 
of new pests, weeds and diseases, land degradation and amplified wildlife-human conflicts. 
Such climate related events could lead to emergence or re-emergence of climate related 
diseases, such as the Rift Valley Fever or anthrax, which re-emerges, periodically in ASAL 
areas after occasional heavy rains and flooding.  
The western counties (Trans Nzoia, Kakamega, Bungoma, Siaya and Busia) are relatively 
cooler, wetter and the mean annual temperatures are lower. In various climate projection 
scenarios,  western  regions  will  more  likely  experience  extreme  events  related  to  floods 
and landslides (caused  by a combination of deforestation, intensive rainfall, soil erosion 
and  agricultural  activities  on  hilltops).  Farmers  in  this  region  have  also  noted  changing 
seasonality,  i.e.,  delayed  onset  of  rains,  unreliability  and  variability  of  rains,  reduced  or 
increased amounts of rainfall, and higher temperatures during the dry season. All these 
present major risks to crop production and livelihoods.  
3.2  Risk Classification 
The  purpose  of  climate  risk  screening  is  to  determine  the  exposure  of  the  Project  to 
climate-related risks (High, Moderate or Low) based on available information about historic 
climate hazard occurrences, current climate trends and future climate change scenarios, 
as well as to assess the likelihood of the Project increasing the vulnerability of the expected 
target  populations  to  climate  hazards.  It  provides  an  opportunity  to  integrate  climate 
issues  into  Project  design  and  therefore  increase  Project  resilience  and  hence 
sustainability.   
IFAD’s climate risk screening criteria are presented in Table 3-1 below. 
1 
Table 3-1  Climate Risk Screening 
Climate Categorisation 
Types of Projects 
High Risk  
Projects that promote agricultural activity on areas subject to extreme climatic events, 
such as flooding, drought, tropical storms or heat waves 
Projects where climate scenarios for the area foresee changes in temperature, rainfall or 
extreme weather that will adversely affect project impact, sustainability or cost over its 
lifetime; 
Projects  that  promote  agricultural  activity  on  marginal  and/or  highly  degraded  areas 
(such as on hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains). 
Projects in areas in which rural development projects have experienced weather-related 
losses and damages in the past. 
Projects  that  establish  infrastructure  in  areas  with  a  track  record  of  extreme  weather 
events (e.g. water points in drought-prone areas) 
Projects  that  target  groups  entirely  dependent  on  natural  resources  (such  as  seasonal 
crops, rainfed agricultural plots, that have been affected by in the last decade by climate 
trends or specific climatic events; 
Projects  where  climate  variability  is  likely  to  affect  agricultural  productivity  (crops, 
livestock and fisheries) access to markets and/or the associated incidence of pests and 
diseases for the project target groups; 
Projects investing in climate-sensitive livelihoods that are diversified; 
Projects investing in infrastructure that is exposed to infrequent extreme weather events;  
Projects investing in institutional development and capacity-building for rural institutions 
(such as farmer groups, cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous areas;  
Projects that have the potential to become more resilient through the adoption of green 
technologies at a reasonable cost;  
Projects  with  opportunities  to  strengthen 
capabilities;  
indigenous  climate  risk  management 
Projects with opportunities to integrate climate resilience aspects through policy dialogue 
to improve agricultural sector strategies and policies;  
Projects  with  potential  to  integrate  climate  resilience  measures  without  extensive 
additional costs (e.g. Improved building codes, capacity-building, or including climate risk 
issues in policy processes); 
Projects that would benefit from a more thorough climate risk and vulnerability analysis 
to  identify  the  most  vulnerable  rural  populations,  improve  targeting,  and  identify 
additional complementary investment actions to manage climate risks. 
Projects that are not likely to be vulnerable to climate risks and thus voluntary measures 
could be incorporated into the detailed design and implementation phases based on the 
SECAP  project  assessment  recommendations.  These  projects  generally  focus  on 
investments which do not have a direct physical or geographical interface with climate 
hazards (such as the development of a micro-finance institution).  
Medium Risk 
Low Risk 
Source: IFAD (2017), SECAP 
According to SECAP’s climate risk classification guidelines as described in the table above, 
RK-FINFA is classified “moderate” given that the target end beneficiaries, their livelihoods 
and the economic activities are exposed to climate-related risks such as floods, droughts 
and  incidence  of  pests  and  diseases.  These  climatic  events  have  already  adversely 
impacted agricultural productivity for smallholders and profitability of agribusinesses, and 
thus  climate  change  projections  should  be  taken  into  account  in  the  due  diligence  for 
medium  and  long-term  investments.      Some  Project  counties  are  exposed  to  extreme 
2 
weather events, mainly frequent and prolonged dry spells as well as drought. Droughts in 
Project  counties  that  are  ASAL  counties,  namely:  Nakuru,  Tharaka  Nithi,  Meru,  Embu, 
Machakos  and  Nyeri  have  continued  to  affect  agriculture  and  livestock  productivity.  
Therefore,  as  per  SECAP  requirements,  a  basic  Climate  Risk  Analysis  (CRA)  will  be 
required. 
3.3 
Climate Risk Analysis 
3.3.1  Overview 
Kenya’s geography is dominated by arid and semi-arid plains, with a temperate highland 
plateau  (reaching  over  5,000  m)  in  the  center,  and  a  hotter,  wetter  climate  along  the 
coast and the shores of Lake Victoria. Two-thirds of the country receive less than 500 mm 
of rainfall per year; coastal and highland areas receive annual averages upwards of 1,100 
mm and 2,000 mm, respectively. Kenya has two rainy seasons: “long rains” from March 
to  June  (about  70  percent  of  total  annual  rainfall);  and  “short  rains”  from  October  to 
December. In the west and along the coast, additional significant rainfall occurs outside 
of these two rainy seasons. Temperatures range from an average of 18°C in high elevation 
areas  like  Nairobi  to  26°C  in  coastal  areas  such  as  Mombasa.  Located  on  the  equator, 
Kenya experiences little seasonal temperature variation. 
Kenya  is  highly  exposed  to  many  natural  hazards,  the  most  common  being  floods  and 
droughts. It is estimated that over 70% of natural disasters in Kenya are attributable to 
extreme climatic events. Typically, major droughts occur approximately every ten years, 
and moderate droughts or floods every three to four years. Repeating patterns of floods 
and droughts in the country have had large socio-economic impacts and high economic 
costs. For example, the 1998 to 2000 drought cost an estimated $2.8 billion, principally 
due  to  crops  and  livestock  loss,  as  well  as  forest  fires,  damage  to  fisheries,  reduced 
hydropower  generation,  reduced  industrial  production  and  reduced  water  supplies. 
Droughts have affected more people and had the greatest economic impact (8% of GDP 
every five years). As many as 28 droughts have been recorded in the past 100 years, and 
these appear to be increasing in frequency. Droughts are often nation-wide, but normally 
have the most severe impacts in the country’s highly arid zones. Drought also remains a 
significant concern to Kenya’s agricultural sector. Arid and semi-arid areas comprise 18 or 
the 20 poorest counties and are particularly at risk from increased aridity and periods of 
drought. While drought affect the most people, floods have caused the greatest losses in 
terms of human lives. Baringo, West Pokot, Kisumu and Laikipia are some of the country’s 
most  disaster-prone  areas  and  have  required  significant  disaster  risk  investment.  
Vulnerability from these hazards poses major challenges for economic stability and fiscal 
sustainability and have had adverse social and fiscal consequences. Indeed, lower-income 
populations  reside  in  more  hazard  prone  locations,  with  high  potential  for  significantly 
increased exposure of already vulnerable populations. 
livestock  productivity  and  pastoralists 
The  Climate  Risk  and  Vulnerability  Analysis  undertaken  for  IFAD’s  Kenya  Livestock 
Commercialisation  Project  (KeLCoP)  provides  projections  for  some  of  the  RK-FINFA 
counties1.  The  ASAL  counties  (parts  of  Tharaka  Nithi,  Embu,  Meru  and  Machakos)  are 
highly  vulnerable  to  extreme  weather  events,  particularly  drought,  which  continue  to 
affect 
indicate  that 
temperatures have since 1981 increased moderately (0.25-0.5°C), whereas rainfall has 
decreased over the same period (CCAFS 2015). The combination of the moderate increase 
in temperature and rainfall decrease has resulted into reduced length of the rainy seasons 
and  increase  in  heat  stress  days  and  drought  occurrence.  Drought  frequencies  have 
increased from every 10 years to every 1-3 years. Prolonged droughts are understood to 
have contributed to the long-term environmental changes such as deforestation, drying 
livelihoods.  Records 
1 Kachulu, Mutisungilire and Florent Baarsch (May 2020); Climate Risk and Vulnerability Analysis Report:  
Study undertaken in support of the Kenya Livestock Commercialisation Project (KeLCoP). 
3 
up of rivers and shallow wells, land degradation and amplified wildlife-human conflicts. 
The climatic changes have also lead to emergence or re-emergence of pestilence (locust 
swarms and fall army worm) as well as climate-related diseases, in particular, the vector 
borne diseases such as the Rift Valley Fever or anthrax, which re-emerges, periodically in 
ASAL  areas  after  occasional  heavy  rains  and  flooding.    The  western  counties  of  Trans 
Nzoia, Kakamega, Bungoma, Siaya and Busia are relatively cooler, wetter and the mean 
annual temperatures are lower compared to the ASALs. In these counties, over the years, 
farmers have also noted changing seasonality, i.e. delayed onset of rains, unreliability and 
variability  of  rains,  reduced  or  increased  amounts  of  rainfall  and  higher  temperatures 
during  the  dry  season.  For  instance,  in  Siaya,  the  temperature  has  increased  by  0.5oC 
since 1981 while precipitation has increased by 15-25% during the same period2 (CCAFS 
2015). In Busia, historical data shows that drought frequency has increased from every 
10  years  to  every  2-5  years  and  the  flood  prone  areas  of  Budalangi have  increased  in 
floods and moist stress (CCAFS 2015). In Kakamega, temperature increase has resulted 
into heat stress and droughts. In Nakuru high moisture stress averaging 50 days per year 
of intense rains resulting into floods and livelihood losses have been recorded over the 
last  decade.  For  instance,  in  2013,  floods  in  Nakuru  destroyed  over  200  homes  and 
hundreds of crop hectarage. 
3.3.2  Value Chain related Vulnerabilities and Risks 
The table below summarises the trends and likely changes that would occur up to mid-
century in some of the RK-FINFA counties. 
Table 3-2  Likely Changes in Temperature and Precipitation in Selected RK-FINFA 
Counties 
RK-FINFA County 
Likely Changes 
Meru 
Nakuru 
Nandi 
Nyeri 
Siaya 
Tharaka Nithi 
Trans Nzoia 
Increase in temperature and rainfall variability altering the slope and bedrock stability 
in some areas 
Mean temperatures are projected to increase by 0.3ºc, with the first agricultural 
season projected to experience even greater changes. Precipitation is projected to 
increase by 0.3% and 6% in the first and second wet season respectively 
Dry spells and mean temperatures have been increasing gradually. These trends will 
continue in the future and therefore affect agricultural productivity 
Increase in temperature and rainfall variability. The wildfires are expected to increase 
and be more severe 
Increase in intense precipitation with flooding more likely to occur. Wildfires are also 
expected to increase both in frequency and intensity due to increase in temperature 
and rainfall variability 
Mean temperatures have increased by approximately 0.6°C and resulted in a 
moderate increase in heat stress days in the first and second agricultural seasons. 
Severe and mild droughts have been experienced leading to poor crop yields and low 
livestock production 
The county has experienced changes in rainfall patterns, which are expected to be 
more intense in the future. These changes result in reduced soil fertility and poor soil 
structure while higher temperatures and atmospheric humidity favours development 
of crop pests and diseases 
Source:  IFAD RK-FINFA SECAP Review Note (May 2021) 
2 CCAFS (2015). Kenya county climate risk profiles. Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security. URL: 
https://ccafs.cgiar.org/publications/kenya-county-climate-risk-profiles 
4 
4 
Environmental, Social and Climate Change Management  
The Environmental, Social and Climate Change (ESC) management for RK-FINFA will follow 
the  national  guidelines  and  processes,  as  well  as  IFAD’s  safeguard  requirements  as 
elaborated  in  IFAD’s  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Change  Procedures  (SECAP, 
2017)3.  This document provides guidance for the development of environmental and social 
management systems for RK-FINFA PFIs.  
4.1  RK-FINFA Implementation and Coordination for ESC Management 
The  institutional  arrangements  for  RK-FINFA  implementation  as  presented  in  the  PDR, 
which  give  an  overview  of  the  roles  of  the  PSC,  PMU.    The  PMU  be  staffed  with  an 
Environmental and Climate Change  Officer (ECCO) and a Social Inclusion Officer (SIO), 
both of who will be directly responsible for overseeing both the environmental, social and 
climate related aspects,  and for supporting the development and implementation of the 
PFI ESMSs. (Terms of Reference for the ECCO and SIO are provided in the PIM).  
At  the  county  level,  PMUs  of  ongoing  IFAD  value  chain  projects  and  County  Project 
Facilitation Teams (CPFTs) will be composed of subject matter specialists which will include 
County  Environment  Officers  (CEnvOs),  County  Natural  Resource  Management  Officers 
(CNRMOs) and County Social Services Officers (CSSOs) to support ESC management. 
In addition, each PFI will appoint a dedicated person (or team) to address environmental, 
social  and  climate-related  issues.    For  the  purposes  of  this  document,  this  person  is 
referred to as the ESMS Responsible Officer (ERO). 
4.2 
Institutional,  Policy,  Legal  and  Framework  For  Environmental 
Management 
The  Government  of  Kenya  (GoK)  has  put  in  place  several  policies,  legislations  and 
institutional frameworks to regulate and address environmental, climate change and social 
inclusion  thematic  areas.    These  are  listed  in  the  table  below  together  with  the  key 
institutions tasked with the implementation of the legislative frameworks. 
Table 4-1 Policy, Legislative and Institutional Framework 
Thematic 
Area 
Policies/Legislations/Guidelines/Strategies/ 
Action Plans 
Key Institutions 
Agriculture 
Livestock 
Agriculture  Sector  Transformation  and  Growth 
Strategy  (ASTGS  2019-2029);  Agriculture  Act  (rev 
2012); Crops Act (2013); Irrigation Act (2019); Crops 
(Nuts and Oil Crops) Regulations (2020); Crops (Food 
Crops) Regulations (2019); Pest Control Products Act 
Cap  346;  Plant  Protection  Act  Cap  324;  Agriculture 
Produce Marketing Act (2017) 
Draft  (reviewed)  National  Livestock  Policy  (2019); 
Kenya  Veterinary  policy  (2015);  Draft  Livestock 
Breeding  Bill  (2015);  Livestock  identification  and 
traceability  system  regulations  (2019);  Pest  Control 
Products  Act  Cap 346; Kenya  Meat  Commission  Act; 
Fertilizers and Animal Foodstuffs Act, Cap 345 (2012); 
Animal Health Bill (2019) 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and 
Fisheries, Pest Control Product Board 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and 
Fisheries, Pest Control Product Board 
3 IFAD (2017). Social, Environmental and Climate Change Procedures.  
1 
Thematic 
Area 
Policies/Legislations/Guidelines/Strategies/ 
Action Plans 
Key Institutions 
Fisheries 
Gender 
National Oceans and Fisheries Policy (2008); Fisheries 
Act  2016;  Fisheries  Management  and  Development 
Bill (2019); 
National  Aquaculture  Policy 
Aquaculture Development Plan  (2010-2015)  
(2011);  National 
Sessional  Paper  No.  2  of  2019  on  National  Policy  on 
Gender  and  Development;  Gender  Strategic  Plan 
(2018-2022);  National  Policy  for  the  Eradication  of 
Female  Genital  Mutilation  in  Kenya  (2019);  National 
Policy for  Prevention  and  Response  to  Gender Based 
Violence (2014); Prohibition of FGM Act (2011) 
Youth 
Kenya Youth Policy (2006); Kenya Youth Agribusiness 
Strategy  (2017-2021);  Kenya  Youth  Development 
Policy (2018) 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and 
Fisheries  
National Gender and Equality Commission 
(NGEC), Women Enterprise Fund, Ministry 
of  Labour,  Social  Security  and  Services, 
Ministry  of  Public  Service,  Gender  and 
Youth  Affairs,  National  Council  for  People 
with  Disabilities,  National  Council  for 
Children Services 
Youth  Enterprise  Development  Fund in 
Kenya, Ministry of Labour, Social Security 
and  Services,  Ministry  of  Public  Service, 
Gender and Youth Affairs 
Nutrition 
Climate 
Change 
National Comprehensive School Health policy (2007); 
National  Food  and  Nutrition  Security  Policy  (2011); 
National School Health Strategy Implementation Plan 
(2011),  National  Nutrition  Action  Plan  (2012);  The 
Breast  Milk  Substitutes  (Regulation  and  Control)  Act 
Number  34  (2012);  Kenya  National  Strategy  for  the 
Prevention  and  Control  of  Non-Communicable 
Diseases (2015-2020) 
Ministry  of  Health,  Ministry  of  Education, 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and  
Fisheries  
Green 
Strategy 
Economy 
National 
and 
Implementation  Plan  (2016-2030);  National  Climate 
Finance  Policy  (2016);  Climate  Change  Act  (2016); 
The  National  Climate  Change  Response  Strategy 
(2010);  Kenya  Nationally  Determined  Contributions 
(2015); Meteorology Policy (2019);  Climate Finance 
Bill,  2018;  Green  bonds  Guidelines,  2019;  National 
Climate  Change  Action  Plan  (NCCAP)  2018-2022; 
National  Adaptation  Plan  (NAP  2015-  2030);  Kenya 
Climate  Smart  Agriculture  Strategy  (2017-2026); 
Climate  Risk  Management  Framework 
(2017); 
National Climate Change Policy (2018); Kenya Climate 
Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework (2018-
2027) 
National  Treasury  &  Planning  (Green 
Climate  Fund),  Ministry  of  Environment 
and  Forestry,  Ministry  of  Water  & 
Sanitation  and    Irrigation,    Ministry  of 
Agriculture,  Livestock  and  Fisheries;  
Kenya  Meteorological  Department,  Water 
Resources 
Authority, 
Management 
National Disaster Management Authority 
2015; 
The Environmental Management and Coordination Act 
1999  and  the  amendment  Act  2015;  Wildlife 
Conservation  and  Management  Act  2013;  Forest 
Conservation  and  Management  Act,  2016,  Natural 
Resources Act, 2016; Water Act 2016; National Solid 
Waste  Management  Strategy, 
Forest 
Conservation  and  Management  Act,  2016;  Natural 
Resources (Benefit Sharing) Bill, 2018; Environmental 
Management  and  Coordination  (Water  Quality) 
Regulations (2006); Environmental Management and 
Coordination (Wetlands, River Banks, Lake Shores and 
Sea  Shore  Management)  Regulations 
(2009); 
Irrigation  Policy  (2011);  Water  Act  (CAP  372)  No.  8 
(2002)  (Revised  2012,  2016);  Land  Act  (2012); 
National  Environment  Policy,  2013,  Constitution  of 
Kenya, 2010, Lands Act, 2012; Kenya Grass Fires Act 
Cap 327 
Kenya  Constitution,  2010,  Bill  of  Rights;  Kenya 
Community Land Act (2016); Kenya Agricultural and 
Livestock Research Act (2013); National Cohesion and 
Integration Act (2008) 
Environment 
and  Natural 
Resources 
Management 
Indigenous 
Peoples 
Environment 
Ministry  of  Environment  and  Forestry, 
National 
Management 
Authority,  Kenya  Forest  Service,  Ministry 
of  Water  &  Sanitation  and  Irrigation, 
Water  Resources  Management  Authority, 
National  Environment  Trust  Fund,  Kenya 
Water  Towers  Agency,  Kenya  Wildlife 
Services 
Ministry of Sports, Culture and Arts 
2 
IFAD’s Safeguard Policies 
IFAD  has  developed  safeguard  policies  to  support  the  sustainable  implementation  of  its 
activities and interventions in achieving its mandate to eradicate rural poverty and food 
insecurity.  These include policies and strategies on: Improving Access to Land and Tenure 
Security; Disclosure of Documents; Environment and Natural Resources; Gender Equality 
and Women’s Empowerment; Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual 
Exploitation  and  Abuse;  Targeting;  Climate  Change  Strategy;  Social,  Environment  and 
Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP)  and  Strategy  and  Action  Plan  on  Environment 
and  Climate  Change.    SECAP  provides  14  Guidance  Statements,  namely:    Biodiversity; 
Agrochemicals;  Energy;  Fisheries  and  Aquaculture;  Forest  Resources;  Rangeland-based 
Livestock Production; Water; Dams, their Safety and SECAP; Physical Cultural Resources; 
Rural Roads; Development of Value Chains, Microenterprises and Small Enterprises; Rural 
Finance;  Physical  and  Economic  Resettlement;  and  Community  Health.    The  key 
differences between Kenyan and IFAD policies and requirements are that the GoK policies 
do not specifically provide for climate risk categorisation, FPIC and livelihood restoration 
where physical and economic displacement may occur. 
4.3  National Environmental Guidelines  
4.3.1 
The EIA Process 
The  National  Environment  Management  Authority  prepared  the  Environment  Impact 
Assessment Guidelines and Administrative Procedures in November 2002 (referred to as 
the  EIA  Guidelines).  The  Guidelines  describe  procedural  steps  in  EIA  studies  and 
Environmental  Audits  as  well  as  the  contents  and  format  of  the  study  reports  to  be 
submitted to NEMA, the EIA study review and decision-making process. 
In 2019, the EIA process was revised.  The Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) 
(Amendment)  Regulations,  2019  (Legal  Notice  32  dated  30th  April  2019),  now  requires 
that every proponent undertaking a project specified in the Second Schedule of the Act as 
being a low risk project or a medium risk project, shall submit to the Authority a Summary 
Project  Report  (SPR)  of  the  likely  environmental  and  social  effects  of  the  project.  After 
review, where the Authority considers that the proposed project may  have a significant 
adverse environmental impact, it shall recommend that the proponent should prepare and 
submit a Comprehensive Project Report (CPR); or where the Authority considers that the 
proposed project is not likely to have any significant adverse environmental impact, it shall 
exempt  the  proponent  from  submitting  a  Comprehensive  Project  Report  and  issue  the 
proponent with an approval to proceed with the project. 
The Second Schedule of the Environmental Management and Coordination Act 1999 has 
also  been  amended  by  Legal  Notice  31  dated  30th  April  2019.    This  Schedule  lists  the 
following activities which may be relevant to RK-FINFA as low risk projects: 
  Community water projects including boreholes, water pans, sand dams and sub-
surface dams; 
  Livestock holding grounds and cattle dips; 
  Expansion or rehabilitation of markets; 
  Local roads and facility access roads; 
  Business premises including shops, stores, urban market sheds; 
  Cottage industry, jua kali sector and garages; 
  Small scale rehabilitation, maintenance and modernization of projects; and 
  Standard warehouses not exceeding one thousand four hundred square meters. 
Medium risk projects listed under the amended Second Schedule which could be relevant 
to RK-FINFA interventions are: 
3 
  Water  resources  and  infrastructure,  including  drilling  for  purposes  of  utilizing 
ground water resources and related infrastructure; 
  Medium-scale agriculture not exceeding one hundred hectares; 
  Medium size grain storage; 
  Medium size agricultural and livestock produce storage facilities; 
  Medium scale irrigation projects. 
  Medium scale abattoirs and meat-processing plants; 
  Any other medium-scale food-processing plants or agro-based processing plants; 
and 
  Go-downs for storage and warehouses. 
The definition of “medium” is not provided. 
High  risk  projects  are  required  to  undertake  full  environmental  and  social  impact 
assessments.  RK-FINFA interventions will not include high risk projects as described in 
Second Schedule, since these would capitulate the Project into IFAD’s SECAP Category A. 
The EIA Process is depicted in the figure below.  
4 
Table 4-2  The EIA Process in Kenya 
Source: Adapted from NEMA, EIA Guidelines and Administrative Procedures (November 
2002) an EMCA 2019 (LN31) and EIA EA Regulations 2019 (LN32) 
4.3.2  Permitting and Licencing Requirements 
There are a number of permits and licences that will be required for the implementation 
of RK-FINFA supported activities, depending on the type of activity.  These may include, 
for example:   
  Environmental Impact Assessment Licence;  
  Water Abstraction Permit; 
  Discharge Licence for Effluents, Emissions and Wastewater; 
  Construction Permit; 
  Certification of Registration of Work Place;  
  Licence for Storage and Sale of Pest Control Products; 
  Permit for Excavation of Borrow Pits.   
5 
4.3.3  Contractor’s Contractual Obligations 
Some  of  the  activities  supported  through  RK-FINFA  may  involve  the  construction  of 
infrastructure  (for  example,  markets,  earth  dams  or  water  infrastructure).  Contractors 
hired for these works will be required to familiarize themselves with national environmental 
and social policies, as well as IFAD’s policies and safeguards.  They will also be required 
to obtain all necessary national and local governmental permits and approvals as will be 
detailed  in  ESMPs  which  will  form  part  of  the  Summary  Project  Reports  (SPRs)  and 
Comprehensive Project Reports (CPRs), for those activities where these are required. All 
works  will  be  performed  in  accordance  with  current  environmental  practices,  guidelines 
and  standards  in  accordance  with  the  documents  cited  above.  In  addition,  they  are 
required  to  abide  by  environmental  and  occupational  health  and  safety  provisions  the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act (2007) and applicable Factories Act Rules which cover 
medical examinations noise prevention and control, fire risk reduction, among others. 
The  Contract  Documents  typically  include  aspects  such  as:  worker  health  and  safety 
(including the need for a Health & Safety Officer), visual intrusion, child labour, emergency 
response  plans,  environmental  protection  plan  (covering  solid  waste,  water  pollution, 
dust/air  pollution,  workplace  hygiene  and  sanitation,  HIV/AIDS,  gender,  and  traffic 
management.  However,  in  order  to  ensure  that  environmental  and  social  mitigation 
measures are actually implemented, all recommendations made in the ESMPs should be 
included as items in the Bills of Quantities.   
Prior to mobilisation, the Contractor’s  Environment and Social Management Plan (CESMP) 
must  be  prepared    presenting    the  environmental  and  social  management  measures 
identified as part of the SPRs and CPRs in order to provide practical guidance on meeting 
the  additional  contractual  requirements  for  a  specific  subproject.    The  CESMP  should 
integrate  the  environment  and  social  management  measures  identified  for  offsetting, 
eliminating  or  reducing  environment  and  social  impacts  into  the  implementation  and 
operational stages of the subproject. It will demonstrate how the contractor will monitor 
and then manage those impacts including measures to be undertaken to offset / mitigate 
the impacts at specific locations and the time at which the measures will be implemented.   
4.4 
Screening for RK-FINFA-supported Projects 
The purpose of screening is to provide an initial indication of the nature and complexities 
of  a  potential  investment,  after  which  it  can  be  categorised  to  determine  the  level  of 
investigation necessary to ensure that the project causes no harm to the environment or 
the project communities, and to ensure that the project is acceptable and sustainable in 
terms of environmental, social and climate change risks and impacts.  
4.4.1  SECAP Screening Categorisation 
According to SECAP Review Note, RK-FINFA has been categorised as Category B (medium 
risk).    In  other  words,  activities  supported  through  RK-FINFA  may  have  some  adverse 
environmental and/or social impacts on human populations or environmentally significant 
areas, but the impacts are site-specific and few are irreversible in nature, and/or can be 
readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. High risk 
interventions will not be supported through RK-FINFA support. 
The Second Schedule of the Environmental Management and Coordination Act 1999 has 
also been amended by Legal Notice 31 dated 30th April 2019.  According to this, RK-FINFA 
interventions will fall into the low risk  or medium risk categories as  shown in Table  4-3 
below. 
6 
Table 4-3  Risk Categorisation of RK-FINFA Projects 
Low Risk Projects 
Medium Risk Projects 
Community water projects including 
boreholes, water pans, sand dams and sub-
surface dams 
Water resources and infrastructure, including 
drilling for purposes of utilizing ground water 
resources and related infrastructure 
Livestock holding grounds and cattle dips 
Medium-scale agriculture not exceeding one 
hundred hectares 
Expansion or rehabilitation of markets 
Medium size grain storage 
Local roads and facility access roads 
Business premises including shops, stores, 
urban market sheds 
Cottage industry, jua kali sector and garages 
Medium size agricultural and livestock produce 
storage facilities 
Medium scale irrigation projects 
Medium scale abattoirs and meat-processing 
plants 
Small scale rehabilitation, maintenance and 
modernization of projects 
Any other medium-scale food-processing 
plants or agro-based processing plants 
Standard warehouses not exceeding one 
thousand four hundred square meters 
Go-downs for storage and warehouses 
Source: EMCA Amendment to the Second Schedule 2019 (LN 31) 
4.4.2  Activities not supported by IFAD 
There are a number of activities that IFAD will not support or implement, for which SECAP 
(2017) refers to the IFC exclusion list4.  In the context of RK-FINFA, these are: 
  Production  or  trade  in  any  product  or  activity  deemed  illegal  under  host  country 
laws  or  regulations  or  international  conventions  and  agreements,  or  subject  to 
international bans, such as pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting 
substances, PCB's, wildlife or products regulated under CITES. RK-FINFA will have 
to ensure beneficiary farmers use approved pesticides and herbicides. An indirect 
impact of RK-FINFA may result in an increase in poaching or killing of threatened 
or endangered species when wild animals disperse into improved rangelands, since 
some  of  the  project  activities  may  be  proximate  to  national  parks,  wildlife 
conservancies and forests. RK-FINFA must therefore ensure that sufficient provision 
is made for the protection and conservation of wildlife, flora and their habitats; 
  Production  or  activities  involving  harmful  or  exploitative  forms  of  forced  labour5 
and/or harmful child labour6.  As such forced labour may not be an issue for RK-
FINFA subprojects, but it should be noted that IFAD requires that farm hands/casual 
workers are paid decent living wages, and that labour and working conditions and 
well-being of workers and local communities are fully considered and in line with 
ILO  conventions.    In  rural  societies,  children  often  skip  school  in  order  to  assist 
their families on the farms.  Children working on agricultural projects are especially 
susceptible to harm from poor use and management of agrochemicals.  RK-FINFA 
supported  subprojects  will  therefore  have  to  ensure  that  animal  husbandry 
activities do not interfere with children’s education, and that children do not handle 
agrochemicals and are not otherwise exposed to these substances. 
4 International Finance Corporation Exclusion List: www.ifc.org/exclusionlist  
5 Forced labour means all work or service, not voluntarily performed, that is extracted from an individual under 
threat of force or penalty. 
6  Harmful  child  labour  means  the  employment  of  children  that  is  economically  exploitive,  or  is  likely  to  be 
hazardous to, or to interfere with, the child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health, or physical, mental, 
spiritual, moral, or social development. 
7 
SECAP (2017) also states that IFAD will not support “projects in areas of critical habitats 
or which result in conversion or degradation of such habitats”. Emphasis will be to identify 
alternatives and ensure that any potential degradation or conversion is firstly avoided, and 
if not avoided, appropriately mitigated.   
In  addition,  in  order  to  retain  Category  B  status,  RK-FINFA  will  NOT  support 
subprojects or interventions that have the following implications: 
Activities/interventions having locational implications which:  
  Would develop wetlands; 
  Cause significant adverse impacts to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services, 
such as conversion of natural forest or wildlands, loss of habitat, erosion or other 
form of land degradation, or fragmentation of habitats; 
  Result in major hydrological changes; 
  Are located in or within 5km of ecologically sensitive areas, areas of global/national 
significance  for  biodiversity  conservation),  and/or  biodiversity-rich  areas  and 
habitats depended on by endangered species.  These include protected areas such 
as  national  parks,  wildlife  conservancies  and  forests,  world  heritage  sites  (WHS) 
and water towers7.   
  Are  located  in  areas  subjected  to  major  destruction  as  a  result  of  geophysical 
hazards eg. landslides, earthquakes or volcanic eruptions. 
Activities/interventions having natural resource implications that would: 
  Lead to unsustainable natural resource management practices (fisheries, forestry, 
livestock) and/or result in exceeding carrying capacity; 
  Would result in significant increase in the use of agrochemicals which may lead to 
life-threatening illness and long-term public health and safety concerns; 
  Rely on water-based (groundwater and/or surface water) development where there 
is  reason  to  believe  that  significant  depletion  and/or  reduced  flow  has  occurred 
from the effects of climate change or from overutilization; 
  Pose  a  risk  of  introducing  potentially  invasive  species  or  genetically  modified 
organisms which might alter genetic traits of indigenous species or have an adverse 
effect on local biodiversity 
Is located in an area of socio-environmental conflict about water resources. 
Is located or has an impact on ecological sensitive areas. 
 
 
  Project's location is significantly struck by the effects of climate change or natural 
hazards. 
Activities/interventions involving infrastructure development that would: 
  Require the need to rehabilitate or develop large scale irrigation schemes of more 
 
 
than 100 hectares per scheme;  
Involve significant extraction/diversion/containment of  surface water,  leaving the 
river  flow  below  20  per  cent  environmental  flow  plus  downstream  user 
requirement; 
Include drainage or permanent correction of natural waterbodies (eg. river training, 
wetland reclamation). 
Activities/interventions having social implications that would result in: 
  Any economic displacement or physical resettlement; 
7 Kenya has five major water towers, namely Mt Kenya, the Aberdare Mountain Range, the Mau Forest 
Complex, the Cherangani Hills and Mt Elgon – all of which are located within RK-FINFA’s Project counties. In 
2018, additional water towers were gazetted, namely: Mt Kulal, Hurii Hills and Mt Marsabit in Marsabit County; 
Karisia Hills and Mt Nyiro in Samburu County; Tugen Hills in Baringo County; and Subukia Escarpment in 
Nakuru County (a RK-FINFA project county); Kaptagat Hills in Elgeyo Marakwet County.  Ref. 
https://watertowers.go.ke/wtowers/ 
8 
  Significant  social  adverse  impacts  on  disadvantaged,  vulnerable,  indigenous  and 
underserved groups; 
  Conversion  and/or  loss  of  physical  cultural  and  traditional  resources,  including 
graves, indigenous tree/plant species that have traditional value. 
All applications for loans made to RCGS PFIs and the GFF host institutions will undergo 
screening to ensure that they are not high risk projects and that they not are listed in the 
Exclusion List.  
4.4.3  Activities Encouraged for Support through GFF 
RK-FINFA  through  the  GFF  will  intentionally  encourage  activities/interventions  with  a 
climate-smart slant.  These could include, for example: 
  Water  efficient  technologies  eg.  through  drip  irrigation/sprinkler  or  micro-jet 
systems);  
  Flood protection measures (physical and biophysical);  
  Climate resilient infrastructure;  
  Climate  smart  agriculture,  eg.  employing  no-tilling,  terracing,  drought  or  flood 
tolerant inputs, etc);  
  Soil and water conservation measures;  
  Renewable energy, eg solar pumps for farms, solar lighting for warehouses;  
  Water harvesting/water storage systems eg. road, roof and rock runoff harvesting, 
spate harvesting;  
  Agro-forestry and afforestation/reforestation;  
  Post harvest handling technologies to reduce post-harvest food losses (eg. cooling 
facilities, warehouses) 
  Cleaner transport solutions eg pooled transport modes for transporting agricultural 
produce, increased use of bicycles)  
  Production of energy-saving stoves and biogas technologies to reduce firewood and  
fuel consumption. 
Further additions for the taxonomy will be developed during the initial phases of project 
implementation. 
4.5 
Environmental and Social Management System  
4.5.1 
Introduction 
Effective  management  of  environmental  risks,  impacts  and  opportunities  contributes  to 
financial  institutions  creating  long-term  value  for  their  businesses.  In  order  to  manage 
both risks, impacts and opportunities strategically and comprehensively, it is necessary to 
establish an environmental and social management system (ESMS) which is a systematic 
approach to applying processes and procedures.   The key to implementing an ESMS is 
continual improvement.  
Typical risks experienced in the financial sector, and their consequences are illustrated in 
the figure below.  
9 
Table 4-4  Typical Risks experienced by Banks and Clients 
Source: IFC (2007); Banking on Sustainability – Financing Environmental and Social 
Opportunities in Emerging Markets 
Key environmental and social risk for financial institutions (commercial banks, MFBs and 
MSMEs) are reported as being8:   
  Reputational risk/negative publicity with customers, shareholders and the general 
public; 
  Credit risk (defaults, payments, rescheduling); 
  Security (devalued collateral); 
  Nonperforming loans, investments or leases; 
  Loss of financing from international financial institutions; 
  Liability for clean up of contaminated property or collateral; 
  Reduced  access  to  capital  from  private  financial  institutions/international  bond 
markets; 
  Potential civil or criminal liability for negligence; 
  Loss of depositors or retail clients. 
On the other hand, financial institutions’ clients report that the main E&S issues they face 
are9: 
  Disruption  of  operations,  such  loss  in  productivity  due  to  climatic  events  (water 
stress, drought, floods, landslides), higher labour costs or high labour turnover; 
  Environmental  legal  issues  –  noncompliance  with  environmental  regulations  and 
buyer requirements (for example for export-oriented crops); 
  Health and safety of workers (eg. accidents on farms); 
  Loss  of  market  share  because  of  environmental  regulations  (due  to  for  example 
licencing and permitting requirements and associated costs); 
  Market devaluation because of environmental or social liability; 
  Loss of liability insurance coverage. 
Environmental and social risk management improves the quality of a bank’s portfolio and 
lowers insurance liabilities and compensation claims.  Significant benefits from establishing 
and implementing an ESMS include:   
  Systematic and consistent approach to environmental and social issues; 
8 IFC (2007); Banking on Sustainability – Financing Environmental and Social Opportunities in Emerging 
Markets 
9 IFC (2007) 
10 
  Easy  integration into  existing  organization  and  management  systems,  leading  to 
improved risk control; 
  Better communications, resulting in improved public relations, greater stakeholder 
dialogue, and credible commitment toward staff and external stakeholders; 
  Increased value to shareholders; 
  Improved  access  to  international  capital  markets  and  funding  from  multilateral 
institutions and development banks; 
  Enhanced reputation and better brand value; 
  Greater and higher long-term returns by financing more sustainable projects and 
businesses. 
4.5.2 
Elements of an ESMS 
Various PFIs that were consulted during the preparation of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) for RK-FINFA had different levels of ESG requirements in 
place and had some elements of an ESMS.  But none had a fully fledged ESMS.  Table 4-5 
below  provides  guidance  in  regard  to  the  key  elements  necessary  to  develop  and 
implement an ESMS.  However, it must be noted that while the banks and guarantor PFIs 
would  be  able  to  develop  all  these  elements  to  produce  a  comprehensive  ESMS,  it  is 
unlikely  that  smaller  MFBs,  rural  Agri  MSMEs  and  SACCOs  would  have  the  human  and 
financial resources to do so, nor would it necessarily be appropriate for them to have such 
a detailed ESMS. The table therefore attempts to indicate the level of detail that would be 
appropriate for the various categories of PFIs. 
For  ease  of  reference  to  environmental,  social  and  climate-related  management,  the 
various RK-FINFA PFIs have been assigned the following categories: 
Tier 1 PFIs: Commercial banks, larger MFBs/guarantors (eg. AFC, KWFT) 
Tier 2 PFIs: Mid-sized MFBs (eg. FAULU, SMEP, Rafiki) and larger SACCOs 
Tier 3 PFIs: Agri MSMEs, small rural agriculture-based SACCOs 
Smallholder individuals are not expected to develop any elements of an ESMS, but will be 
required  to  adhere  by  the  national  laws  of  the  country  in  terms  of  environmental 
protection, labour, GBV/SEA, non-discrimination, etc.   
In the table below, requirements are indicated as follows: 
 
 
 
Required as described 
Required to extent possible 
Not required 
Table 4-5  Key Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System 
Elements of an ESMS 
Guideline for Requirements 
Tier 1 PFIs 
Tier 2 PFIs 
Tier 3 PFIs 
E&S Policy 
Indicate types of activities financed by PFI 
(incl those financed through RK-FINFA) 
1.  POLICIES 
Identify officer who has the specific 
responsibility to manage E&S and climate-
related risks and to who s/he will report 
Indicate compliance with national laws and 
international best practice.  
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elements of an ESMS 
Guideline for Requirements 
Tier 1 PFIs 
Tier 2 PFIs 
Tier 3 PFIs 
Key items for E&S policy should be reflected 
in policy:  
 
 
 
  Management of E&S and climate-
related risks 
Resource efficiency and pollution 
prevention 
Community health safety and security 
Gender based violence and sexual 
exploitation and abuse 
Land acquisition 
Biodiversity 
Indigenous and vulnerable people 
Cultural heritage 
Climate change 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stipulate commitment to continual 
improvement (endorsed by top 
management) 
Policy should be a public document and 
easily available upon request 
One page policy, signed by CEO, to be 
prepared and displayed in all branches 
OHS Policy 
Indicate types of activities financed by PFI 
(incl those financed through RK-FINFA)  
Indicate who has the specific responsibility 
to manage OHS risk and to who s/he will 
report 
Indicate compliance with national laws and 
international best practice 
Key items for OHS policy should be reflected 
in policy:  
  Management of OHS risks 
 
 
Labour and Working Conditions 
Community Health and Safety  
Stipulate commitment to continual 
improvement (endorsed by top 
management) 
Policy should be a public document and 
easily available upon request 
One page policy, signed by CEO, to be 
prepared and displayed in all branches 
Governance Policy 
Indicate types of activities financed by PFI’s 
(incl those financed through RK-FINFA) 
Indicate who has the specific responsibility 
to manage governance risk and to who s/he 
will report 
Indicate compliance with national laws and 
international best practice  
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elements of an ESMS 
Guideline for Requirements 
Tier 1 PFIs 
Tier 2 PFIs 
Tier 3 PFIs 
Key items for Governance policy should be 
reflected in policy:  
 
 
 
Business Integrity  
Know Your Customer 
Anti-bribery & corruption 
 
 
 
  Whistle blowing 
 
 
Zero tolerance for GBV/SEA 
Code of Conduct 
Stipulate commitment to continual 
improvement (endorsed by top 
management) 
Policy should be a public document and 
easily available upon request 
One page policy, signed by CEO, to be 
prepared and displayed in all branches 
 
 
 
2.  ORGANISATIONAL CAPACITY AND COMPETENCY 
ESMS Focal Point 
Assign one person to oversee ESMS 
development and implementation,and E&S 
and climate related performance 
Organisation Chart 
Develop an organization chart indicating 
linkages and reporting lines between 
different departments within the PFI, eg. 
Board, Management, E&S Unit, Social 
performance unit, agricultural unit, 
Procurement Officer 
Include linkages with MFBs, SACCOs and 
MSMEs to be supported through RK-FINFA 
Capacity to implement 
ESMS 
Carry out needs assessment to identify type 
of training and capacity building needed for 
each department in order to effectively 
implement the ESMS. 
Carry out training as identified 
3.  LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
Compliance with the 
Kenyan ESHS laws and 
regulations, IFAD’s 
SECAP, other 
development partner 
standards (eg IFC) as 
well as with 
international 
conventions and 
treaties. 
Prepare legal register indicating relevant 
national laws and regulations, international 
conventions / treaties, ESG requirements 
(incl. IFAD, development partner, 
international conventions such as ILO), as 
relevant to RK-FINCA supported operations 
Include licensing and permitting 
requirements 
Compliance with the 
Exceptions list 
Prepare Exclusion List listing types of 
interventions that will not be funded by the 
PFI 
Exclusion List to be aligned with IFAD’s 
Exclusion List 
13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elements of an ESMS 
Guideline for Requirements 
Tier 1 PFIs 
Tier 2 PFIs 
Tier 3 PFIs 
Exclusion list to include high and substantial 
risk activities/projects as these cannot be 
considered by RK-FINFA to maintain IFAD 
category B, or that would necessitate 
expensive additional studies and mitigation 
actions such as RAPs, biodiversity 
assessments 
 
 
 
4.  IDENTIFICATION OF RISKS AND IMPACTS 
ESC Screening  
Categorisation of risk  
ESMS to identify generic risks and impacts 
associated with all types of potential 
interventions that may be financed by the 
PFI  
Based on generic list of risks and impacts, 
develop screening checklist to identify E&S 
and climate-related risks and impacts of 
specific investments at PFI, SACCO and 
MSME levels 
Screening checklist to align with EP, IFC PS 
and IFAD SECAP standards. Risks to be 
assessed against key E&S criteria, namely: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labour and working conditions 
Resource efficiency and pollution 
prevention 
Community health safety and security 
Land acquisition 
Biodiversity 
Indigenous peoples 
Cultural heritage 
Climate change 
Legal compliance 
PFIs to develop checklists to assess capacity 
of on lendee MFBs, MSMEs and SACCOs to 
implement activities/investments and 
manage risks and impacts 
ESMS to include guidance on categorization 
of activities/interventions to be financed 
(high, medium, low risk categories)  
(NB: Interventions that have high E&S and 
climate-related risks will not be supported 
under RK-FINFA) 
E&S and climate-
related risks and 
impact assessment 
ESIAs to be conducted/prepared by clients 
prior to lending, depending on nature and 
scale of activity/project to be funded, and in 
line with NEMA and IFAD guidelines 
E&S and climate-
related risk and impact 
management plans 
Prepare generic risk and impact 
management plans to provide guidance on 
types of impacts and potential mitigation 
measures 
ESMPs to be prepared as part of ESIAs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  SPECIFIC MANAGEMENT PLANS OR PROCEDURES 
14 
Elements of an ESMS 
Guideline for Requirements 
Tier 1 PFIs 
Tier 2 PFIs 
Tier 3 PFIs 
Integrated Pest 
Management Plan 
Prepare procedures for transport, storage, 
handling and application of agrochemicals 
Emergency 
Preparedness and 
Response 
Procedures for responding to accidents and 
emergencies, including accident/incident 
reporting 
Labour Management 
Requirements for on-lendee PFIs and 
SACCOs to have EPR plans in place 
Develop Labour Management Procedure 
(LMP) specifying adherence to core ILO 
conventions (mainly to prohibit forced 
labour and child labour, freedom of 
association and fair wages) 
PFIs to ensure labour management 
procedures are implemented at on-lendee 
MFB, SACCOs and MSME level 
Gender Based Violence 
and Sexual Exploitation 
and Abuse  
Develop GBV/SEA prevention and mitigation 
procedures emphasising zero tolerance on 
all forms of GBV/SEA in line with national 
laws and IFAD GBV/SEA policy. 
PFIs to ensure GBV/SEA prevention and 
mitigation procedures are applied at on-
lendee MFB, SACCOs and MSME level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan 
(SEP) 
Prepare SEP which will identify key 
stakeholders, relevance to the PFI, 
prioritisation for engagement, establish 
frequency and channels of engagement and 
feedback 
Communication 
Strategy 
Elaborate on SEP to develop means of 
communication with and between PFIs, 
MFBs, SACCOs and MSMEs as relevant 
 
 
FPIC  
7.  FREE PRIOR AND INFORMED CONSENT 
Prepare specific procedures describing 
approach to include vulnerable people (eg 
minority groups, indigenous groups, persons 
with disabilities) to benefit from RK-FINFA 
support to ensure equitable access by all to 
PFI’s products 
Stipulate percentage of target beneficiaries 
falling within this category 
Monitor inclusion of vulnerable groups in on-
lending activities 
 
 
 
8.  GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS 
Grievance Redress 
Mechanisms 
Grievance redress mechanisms to be set up 
at all levels: PFIs, MFBs SACCOs 
PFIs to ensure that SACCOs/MFBs that they 
on lend to also have a GRM in place  
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elements of an ESMS 
Guideline for Requirements 
Tier 1 PFIs 
Tier 2 PFIs 
Tier 3 PFIs 
GRM to indicate grievance registration 
procedures (incl. where and how to register 
grievance), responsibilities for action, 
timelines for communication and resolution, 
and avenues for escalation to higher levels if 
necessary 
 
 
 
Registration of 
Complaints/Grievances 
PFIs to establish platform on their websites 
to enable lodging of complaints. 
9.  SECURITY 
Security Procedures 
Procedures for security, including cyber 
security, personnel security 
COVID-19 Response  
Develop procedures to prevent the spread of 
COVID and response to any positive cases 
10.  COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
PFIs to ensure on-lendee MFBs, SACCOs and 
MSMEs follow COVID-19 protocols 
11.  RECORD KEEPING 
Maintenance of 
Documentation 
Ensure all records are maintained for the 
development of the ESMS, procedures and 
plans, consultations/ engagement, 
complaints/ grievances, etc 
12.  REPORTING 
Internal Reporting  
Establish internal reporting system  
Submit quarterly reports on ESMS progress 
and E&S and climate-related performance to 
top management 
Inform all organisation’s staff of ESMS 
requirements and E&S and climate-related 
performance (incl. actions required by staff 
where necessary)  
External Reporting 
Reporting on E&S and climate-related 
performance to shareholders and clients 
13.  DISCLOSURE 
Disclosure of Policies, 
Sustainability or E&S 
Reports, ESIA reports 
Policies to be displayed at all offices and 
made available to public upon request 
Determine which other E&S and climate-
related documentation can be made public, 
and whether at all times or only upon 
request 
Where ESIAs are required, SPR and CPR 
reports (as applicable) to be disclosed in 
accordance with NEMA EIA Regulations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.  MONITORING AND REVIEW 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elements of an ESMS 
Guideline for Requirements 
Tier 1 PFIs 
Tier 2 PFIs 
Tier 3 PFIs 
Monitoring 
E&S and climate-related performance to be 
monitored based on indicators developed for 
specific types of activities, their nature and 
size. 
Establish procedures for monitoring on 
lending performance to assess in regard to 
E&S and climate-related performance 
Where ESMPs have been prepared, also use 
these as a basis monitoring 
For on-lendees, specify who will monitor 
E&S and climate related performance (eg a 
consultant or by branch personnel) and how 
monitoring will be done (visits to clients, 
feedback online, etc) 
Set up feedback mechanism geared to 
improve processes/procedures (continual 
improvement) 
Monitoring reports to be provided to top 
management quarterly 
Review 
Review of ESMS, procedures, etc, to include 
improvements from feedback, lessons 
learned 
ESMS document to be updated every 2 
years at least.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.6 
Safeguard Documents 
During the course of the implementation of the ESMS, it may be necessary for clients to 
develop certain safeguard documents depending on the nature and scale of the activity for 
which the loan is intended.   These are described hereunder. 
4.6.1 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Studies 
The  National  Environment  Management  Authority  prepared  the  Environment  Impact 
Assessment Guidelines and Administrative Procedures in November 2002 (referred to as 
the  EIA  Guidelines).  The  Guidelines  describe  procedural  steps  in  EIA  studies  and 
Environmental  Audits  as  well  as  the  contents  and  format  of  the  study  reports  to  be 
submitted to NEMA, the EIA study review and decision-making process. 
The  revised  Environmental  (Impact  Assessment  and  Audit)  (Amendment)  Regulations, 
2019  (Legal  Notice  32  dated  30th  April  2019),  now  require  that  every  proponent 
undertaking  a  project  specified  in  the  Second  Schedule  of  the  Act  as  being  a  low  risk 
project or a medium risk project, shall submit to the Authority a Summary Project Report 
(SPR) of the likely environmental and social effects of the project. After review, where the 
Authority  considers  that  the  proposed  project  may  have  a  significant  adverse 
environmental impact, it shall recommend that the proponent should prepare and submit 
a Comprehensive Project Report (CPR); or where the Authority considers that the proposed 
project is not likely to have any significant adverse environmental impact, it shall exempt 
the proponent from submitting a Comprehensive Project Report and issue the proponent 
with an approval to proceed with the project. 
17 
Based  on  the  screening  process  described  above,  all  activities/interventions  funded 
through  RK-FINFA  will  fall  under  SECAP  Category  B,  which,  according  to  SECAP,  would 
require ESMPs to be prepared.  In terms of NEMA categorisation, the possible interventions 
will  require  either  Summary  Project  Reports  (SPRs)  or  Comprehensive  Project  Reports 
(CPRs).   Where proposed activities or interventions may have some environmental and/or 
social  impacts  of  concern  which  would  require  full  ESIAs,  these  would  be  screened  out 
during the screening process.  In addition, if they involve activities listed in the exclusion 
list, then those interventions will also not be supported through RK-FINFA. 
A Summary Project Report must specify: 
(a)  The nature of the project; 
(b)  The location of the project including:  
  Proof of land ownership, where applicable; 
  Any environmentally sensitive area to be affected; 
  Availability of supportive environmental management infrastructure; and 
  Conformity to land use plan or zonation plan;  
(c)  Potential environmental impacts of the project and the mitigation measures to be 
taken  during  and  after  implementation  of  the  project,  in  the  form  of  an 
environmental and social management plan. 
A Comprehensive Project Report must specify: 
(a)  The nature of the project; 
(b)  The location of the project including: 
  Proof of land ownership; 
  The global positioning system coordinates; and 
  The physical area that may be affected by the project's activities; 
(c)  The activities that shall be undertaken during the project construction, operation 
and decommissioning phases; 
(d)  Description of the international, national and county environmental legislative and 
regulatory frameworks on the environment and socio-economic matters; 
(e)  The preliminary design of the project;  
(f)  The  materials  to  be  used,  products  and  byproducts,  including  waste  to  be 
generated by the project and the methods of their disposal; 
(g)  The potential environmental impacts of the project and the mitigation measures 
to be taken during and after implementation of the project; 
(h)  An  analysis  of  available  alternatives  including  alternatives  for  the  project  site, 
design, technologies, and processes, and the reasons for preferring the proposed 
site, design, technologies and processes; 
(i)  An action plan for the prevention and management of possible accidents during 
the project cycle; 
(j)  A  plan  to  ensure  the  health  and  safety  of  the  workers  and  neighbouring 
communities; 
(k)  The economic and socio-cultural impacts to the local community and the nation in 
general; a plan to  ensure the  relocation or resettlement of persons affected by 
the project; 
(l)  A strategic communication plan to ensure inclusive participation during the study 
and provide a summary of issues discussed at the public participation forum; 
(m)  An environmental and social management plan; 
(n)  Integration of climate change vulnerability assessment,  relevant adaptation and 
mitigation actions; 
(o)  The project cost; and 
(p)  Any other information the authority may require. 
These reports will be prepared by a NEMA-registered practitioner. 
18 
4.6.2 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) 
ESMPs  are  to  be  prepared  as  part  of  the  SPRs  and  CPRs  (see  above).      Stakeholder 
concerns must be addressed in the ESMPs, and the project design should be presented to 
the communities. 
While the actual implementation of ESMPs will be done by contractors, the communities 
or individual beneficiaries (depending on the type of project and the mitigation measures 
to be implemented), the PFIs in conjunction with CEnVOs or CNMROs will be responsible 
for ensuring that these are implemented and will carry out regular monitoring. However, 
supervision  and  monitoring  of  ESMP  implementation  will  be  done  by  the  Environmental 
Representative at the PFIs, who will report performance to the ECCO at the PMU.  
4.6.3  Climate Risk Analysis 
The purpose of climate risk screening is to determine the exposure of a project intervention 
to  climate-related  risks  (High,  Moderate  or  Low)  based  on  available  information  about 
historic  climate  hazard  occurrences,  current  climate  trends  and  future  climate  change 
scenarios, as well as to assess the likelihood of the Project increasing the vulnerability of 
the expected target populations to climate hazards. It provides an opportunity to integrate 
climate  issues  into  project  design  and  therefore  increase  project  resilience  and  hence 
sustainability.   The risk classification indicates that the Project has climate medium risk, 
and therefore a basic Climate Risk Analysis (CRA) for RK-FINFA is required, as presented 
in Chapter 8 of the ESMF.  
Climate adaptation interventions will be promoted through the GFF, and will be supervised  
and monitored by the ECCO, with support from the NEMA Regional Officers.   
4.6.4  Carbon Footprint 
The  total  amount  of  greenhouse  gases  (GHGs)  in  terms  of  carbon  equivalent  (C-eq) 
emitted by the processes in the agricultural sector is regarded as the carbon footprint of 
agriculture.  Various  activities  related  to  agriculture  such  as  plowing,  tilling,  manuring, 
irrigation, cultivation of a variety of crops, rearing livestock emit a significant amount of 
GHGs that are categorized in three tiers of carbon footprinting. The energy input through 
machinery,  electricity,  livestock  management,  and  fossil  fuel  constitutes  a  major 
proportion  of  carbon  emissions  through  agriculture.  Crop  cultivation  systems  (mainly 
cereals) produces higher GHGs than other farming systems like vegetables and fruits. In 
addition,  land  use  changes  including  conversion  of  natural  ecosystems  to  agricultural 
fields,  deforestation  and  crop  residue  burning  after  harvest  contribute  significantly  to 
higher carbon emissions10. 
There are a number of tools that can be used to measure GHG emissions of agricultural 
practices.    FAO  has  developed  a  manual  that  provides  guidance  for  estimating  carbon 
footprints from agricultural activites.11  
4.6.5 
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
RK-FINFA will stimulate increased livestock productivity, and  could therefore necessitate 
the increased use of agrochemicals.  Agrochemicals (mainly pesticides) may be necessary 
to  achieve  higher  production,  but  they  must  be  carefully  applied  as  they  have  various 
adverse environmental and social impacts related to contamination of water bodies and 
soil  and  thereby  threatening  biodiversity,  risks  to  farmers  and  community  health  from 
exposure to agrochemicals, and releases of GHGs.   In order to properly manage the use 
10 Jaiswal, B and M Agrawal (2020); Carbon Footprints of Agriculture Sector. In Carbon Footprints: Case 
Studies from Building, Households and Agricultural Sectors  pp81-99 ed. Subramanian Senthilkannan Muthu 
11 FAO (2015); Estimating Greenhouse Gas Emissions in Agriculture: A Manual to Address Data 
Requirements for Developing Countries 
19 
of pesticides, Integrated Pest Management Plans (IPMPs) must be prepared by the Project 
PMU for application by the PFIs.  Guidelines for the preparation of an IPMP are presented 
in Chapter 6.  
The following main steps can be considered as typical for an IPM approach12: 
  Prevention and/or suppression of harmful organisms.  This is often best achieved 
by a combination of the following options: 
o  where  appropriate,  use  of  pest 
resistant/tolerant  cultivars  and 
standard/certified seed and planting material; 
o  balanced  soil  fertility  and  water  management,  making  optimum  use  of 
organic matter; 
o  prevent  spreading  of  harmful  organisms  by  field  sanitation  and  hygiene 
measures  (e.g.,  by  removal  of  affected  plants  or  plant  parts,  regular 
cleansing of machinery and equipment); 
o  protection and enhancement of important beneficial organisms, e.g. by the 
utilisation of ecological infrastructures inside and outside production sites. 
  Harmful  organisms  must  be  monitored  with  adequate  methods  and  tools,  where 
available. Such adequate tools should include observations in the field and where 
feasible warning, forecasting and early diagnosis systems (eg. traps). 
  Based on the results of the monitoring it is decided whether and when to use what 
pest management inputs. Sustainable biological, physical and other non-chemical 
methods must be given priority over chemical methods if they provide satisfactory 
pest control. 
  Pesticides should only be applied as a last resort when there are no adequate non-
chemical alternatives and use of pesticides is economically justified. 
  The pesticides applied shall be as specific as possible for the target and shall have 
the least side effects on human health, non-target organisms and the environment, 
while their use should be kept at minimum levels, e.g. by partial applications. 
  Monitor the success of the applied pest management measures. 
The IPMP should evaluate the impact of potential pests prior to  Project implementation, 
identify the type of pests and assess the magnitude of impacts likely to be caused by those 
pests.  In assessing the hazards of pesticide use, the toxicity of the pesticide and exposure 
to it are key elements. Therefore, as a minimum, the IPMP should: 
  Screen the types of pesticides for toxicity by ensuring: they are effective against 
the  target  species,  have  negligible  adverse  impacts  on  human  health  and  non-
target  species,  will  not  precipitate  resistance  in  pests,  and  do  not  fall  into  WHO 
class 1A or 1B; 
  Aim to reduce exposure time or degree of exposure. 
  Propose alternative non-pesticide management options (physical, mechanical and 
biochemical), as well as any available less toxic varieties of the pesticides. 
The ECCO will prepare the IPMP as appropriate for RK-FINFA which will then be distributed 
to all the PFIs, who in turn will ensure that all activities involving the use of agrochemicals 
receive,  understand  and  implement  the  IPMP.    The  IPMP  must  also  stipulate  national 
requirements, as well as approved and appropriate agrochemicals to be used in specific 
agricultural  activities.    In  developing  the  IPMP,  reference  should  be  made  to  SECAP’s 
Guidance Statement #2 on Agrochemicals, and relevant IFC’s EHS Guidelines on crop and 
livestock production and agro-processing. 
4.6.6  Standard Operating Procedures 
Depending on the scale and complexity of the some of the interventions and subprojects 
supported  through  RK-FINFA,  other  operating  procedures  or  plans  may  need  to  be 
developed, particularly if contractors are hired for specific construction works, to ensure 
12 http://www.fao.org/agriculture/crops/thematic-sitemap/theme/pests/ipm/more-ipm/en/ 
20 
environmental protection, community and occupational health and safety and other risks 
and hazards.  If necessary, these may include: 
  Traffic Management Plan; 
  Waste Management Plan; 
  Health and Safety Management Plan; 
  Pollution Contingency Plan; 
  Erosion Management Plan;   
  Cultural Heritage Management Plan. 
These plans would be developed by the PFIs financing those interventions, consultants or 
contractors undertaking the works.  
4.7 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
The following steps to develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) have been adapted 
from CDC’s ESG Toolkit13, and IFC’s Stakeholder Engagement Handbook14. 
Development of SEPs will be the responsibility of the PFI EROs.   
Key components of a SEP are described below: 
4.7.1  Purpose and objectives of engagement  
Stakeholder consultation is seen as a proactive approach to identify development pathways 
with  local  communities  and  build  ownership  on  project  initiatives.    The  overall  purpose 
may  include  achieving and  maintaining  the  social  licence  to  operate  and  facilitating  the 
successful setting and establishment of the activity/intervention. Specific objectives of an 
SEP  may  include  ensuring  inclusivity,  prior  and  informed  consultation  with  interested 
parties, timely disclosure of relevant information, and proactive engagement to anticipate 
and manage stakeholders’ concerns and expectations.  
4.7.2 
Legal and regulatory framework  
The  regulatory  framework  should  include  national  legal  requirements  as  well  as  good 
international  industry  practice  and  guidance  such  IFAD’s  requirements  for  engagement 
and IFC Performance Standards.  
IFAD-funded projects are people-centred and therefore the organisation stresses the need 
for stakeholder engagement, as is reflected in its various policy documents, including those 
on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security (2008); Engagement with Indigenous 
Peoples  (2009),  Environment  and  Natural  Resource  Management  (2011),  and  SECAP 
(2017).   
In  Kenya,  citizens’  right  to  full  consultation,  participation  and  expression  of  views  with 
respect  to  policies  and  projects  affecting  their  community  are  clearly  stipulated  in  the 
Constitution of Kenya (2010).  These are further amplified by the County Governments Act 
(2012)  and  the  EIA  Guidelines  and  Regulations  which  require  consultations  with  key 
stakeholders at National, county and local level, as well as with the affected communities, 
and their participation, during the entire EIA process.  The interested and affected groups 
should  participate  through  consultations,  and  also  provide  inputs  and  comments 
throughout the ESIA process. 
13 https://toolkit.cdcgroup.com/esg-topics/external-stakeholder-engagement/ 
14 IFC (2007); Stakeholder Engagement: A Good Practice Handbook for Companies Doing Business in 
Emerging Markets 
21 
4.7.3  Description of PFI-financed Activities 
Understanding the potential E&S and climate-related impacts that may be triggered by the 
activities/interventions  to  be  financed  is  the  first  step  towards  identifying  relevant 
stakeholders.  Often  this  process  can  be  originated  by  an  ESIA,  or  may  be  determined 
through a less formal analysis early in the investment decision. The sooner impacts and 
influential stakeholders are identified and start to be engaged, the better placed the PFI is 
to manage stakeholder expectations. 
4.7.4  Stakeholder Identification and Mapping  
Priorities  for  engagement  can  be  determined  by  understanding  each  stakeholder’s 
influence and the impact of the PFI’s operations on that individual/group. This is termed 
as  ‘stakeholder  mapping’.  Stakeholder  impact  is  defined  as  the  extent  to  which  the 
interests of a stakeholder are affected by the company or project. Influence refers to the 
power  that  a  stakeholder  has  over  the  PFI’s  operations  (including  its  social  licence  to 
operate).  Analysing  stakeholders’  influence  and  impact  will  allow  prioritisation  and 
strategic decisions about the engagement approach.  
Steps for stakeholder identification and analysis are: 
 
Identify those stakeholders directly and indirectly affected by the project: how they 
will be affected and to what degree, and what influence they could have on the PFI 
or activities/interventions it will fund; 
Identify those whose “interests” determine them as stakeholders; 
 
  Prioritize identified stakeholders. These are usually individuals and groups in the 
who are directly and adversely affected. Also consider  engagement mandated by 
law or PFI’s governing principles. Prioritize vulnerable groups and persons. 
  Refer  to  past  stakeholder  information  and  consultation.  Referring  to  historical 
stakeholder information related to an intervention or locality can save time and flag 
up risks, liabilities, or unresolved issues that can then be prioritized and managed); 
  Verify stakeholder representatives (eg. elders, local leaders, women leaders, youth 
leaders, etc); 
  Engage with stakeholders in their own communities to promote transparency and 
accountability; 
Include relevant government agencies as key stakeholders; 
 
  Where necessary, work with representative and accountable NGOs and community-
based  organizations,  particularly  those  who  represent  communities  directly 
affected by PFI financed activities/interventions; 
  Recognize employees as a good channel of communication. 
4.7.5 
Implementation of the SEP 
The SEP should establish the objectives of engagement with different stakeholder groups 
(depending  on  the  priority  assigned)  and  which  forms  of  engagement  are  most 
appropriate, and should define the tools, resources, effort and materials to be used. The 
approach to engagement will vary from information disclosure (what information will be 
disclosed, in what formats, and the types of methods that will be used to communicate 
this information to each of the  stakeholder groups identified15) to in-depth engagement 
(one-to-one meetings, letters or calls which are two-way, relatively frequent and may seek 
approvals, deal with specific issues or concerns, or seek collaboration opportunities).  The 
views  of  women,  elderly,  youth,  PWDs  and  other  vulnerable  groups  will  be  taken  into 
account during this process. 
A  schedule  should  be  prepared  outlining  dates  and  locations  when  various  stakeholder 
engagement activities, including consultation, disclosure, and partnerships will take place 
and the date by which such activities will take place.  
15 Communication methods typically include mass media, national and local press or radio communications 
that are unidirectional and capable of reaching wider audiences 
22 
It should be noted that all other activities, from consultation and informed participation to 
negotiation  and  resolution  of  grievances,  will  be  more  constructive  if  stakeholders, 
including affected communities, have accurate and timely information about the project, 
its impacts, and any other aspects that may have an effect on them. 
4.7.6  Roles and Responsibilities  
An SEP should clearly define who in the institution will lead the engagement activities, who 
will record and keep track of activities, as well as grievances, and how feedback, concerns 
or issues raised will be dealt with or escalated. It also needs to describe governance and 
oversight  mechanisms  and  indicate  who  from  senior  management/board  has  ultimate 
responsibility for delivering effective stakeholder engagement. 
4.7.7  Grievance Management 
Having a good overall stakeholder engagement process in place and providing access to 
information on a regular basis can help to prevent grievances from arising in the first place, 
or  from  escalating  to  a  level  that  can  potentially  undermine  the  PFI’s  reputation  and 
performance. From a risk-management perspective, PFIs can benefit from understanding 
stakeholder  grievances  and  addressing  them  in  a  timely  manner.    During  stakeholder 
consultations, stakeholders should be informed of process available to them for grievance 
reporting, consideration and redress. 
4.7.8  Monitoring and Reporting  
Engagement  activities,  concerns  and  stakeholder  perceptions  should  be  monitored  and 
acted on. Outcomes of engagement activities and grievance management should be part 
of  annual  monitoring  reports  prepared  by  the  PFI.    PFIs  should  seek  continuous 
improvement in stakeholder perceptions of the PFI and on how grievances are managed, 
for example, by aiming at reducing the time taken to address grievances. Information and 
feedback  received from engagement activities can be a useful source  of information for 
identifying community investment opportunities or opportunities for shared value.  
4.8  Grievance Redress Mechanisms 
4.8.1  Purpose of the GRM 
In order to receive and facilitate the resolution of affected peoples’ concerns, complaints, 
and  grievances  about  the  project’s  social  and  environmental  performance  a  Grievance 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be developed for RK-FINFA as well as at the PFI level.  
The GRM will record and address any complaints that may arise during the implementation 
phase  of  the  project  and/or  any  future  operational  issues  that  have  the  potential  to  be 
designed  out  during  the  implementation  phase.  The  GRM  will  be  designed  to  address 
concerns and complaints promptly and transparently with no impacts (cost, discrimination) 
for any reports made by project affected people. The GRM works within existing legal and 
cultural frameworks, providing an additional opportunity to resolve grievances at the local 
and  project  level.  In  the  interest  of  all  parties  concerned,  the  grievance  redress 
mechanisms will be designed with the objective of solving disputes at the earliest possible 
time.  The mechanism should implicitly discourage referring matters to the court system 
for resolution. 
Complaints  will  be  recorded  on  the  Grievances  Register  that  will  be  maintained  by  the 
relevant PFI, while the PMU will maintain a register of project-wide complaints. Ensuring 
the  implementation  of  grievance  mechanisms  at  PMU  and  PFI  levels  and  recording  all 
grievances  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  SIO  in  the  PMU.  A  Grievance  Redress 
Committee, comprising the SIO and ECCO in the PMU, a County level representative and 
23 
a  representative  from  the  PFIs  will  investigate  to  check  the  validity  and  severity  of  the 
grievance and resolve it.   
Complaints  can  also  be  submitted  through  IFAD’s  Complaints  Procedure  that  allows 
individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly and file a complaint if they believe 
they  are  or  might  be  adversely  affected  by  an  IFAD-funded  project/programme  not 
complying with IFAD's Social and Environmental Policies and mandatory aspects of SECAP.  
4.8.2  Guiding Principles for RK-FINFA Grievance Mechanism 
The GRM process is guided by the following principles:  
  Fairness and equity – all the grievances shall be received, recorded and investigated 
equally  and  with  fairness.  There  will  be  no  bias,  favours  or  special  treatment 
accorded to anyone during the process; 
  Functionality,  Promptness  and  Speed  –  the  process  will  be  functional  to  address 
any issues raised, prompt and speedy to ensure that issues are resolved within the 
specified timelines; 
  Definite and clear – the process will be clear and easily understood by all involved.  
The communities and project beneficiaries should be well informed and sensitized 
in the process so that they are at ease with it; 
  Simplicity – the process will be simple and well understood by everyone, at each 
stage of grievance handling; 
  Confidence  in  the  process  –  the  communities  and  project  beneficiaries  will  be 
encouraged to develop confidence in the process, and to trust that their issues will 
be listened to and acted upon accordingly;  
  Considerations on the effects of the decisions – those handling the grievances will 
give due considerations on the effects (either short or long term) of their decisions 
on the lives of the complainants and their families. 
The Project GRM process will involve four main stages:  
Receiving and recording the grievance; 
Investigation and site inspection;  
Response; and 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv.  Monitoring and evaluation. 
Each bank, MFB, SACCO and Agri MSME will be expected to develop, publicise and 
implement its GRM.   
4.8.3  Grievance Monitoring and Reporting 
The PMU Social Inclusion Officer will ensure that grievances are logged and reviewed on a 
regular basis (at least quarterly) to determine if the same or similar grievances are being 
recorded for one or more PFIs.  Multiple grievances related to the same or similar issues 
is an indicator of a more systemic problem within the Project which needs to be mitigated 
through the development of Project controls or measures. 
At the PFI level, the PFI EROs will be responsible for monitoring grievances and reporting 
status to their CEOs and to the PMU.  
4.8.4 
IFAD Complaints Procedure 
A complaint relating to non-compliance with IFAD’s Social and Environmental Policies and 
mandatory aspects of its SECAP can be submitted in any of the following ways: 
  Download the complaints form (Word) 
  Send an email to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org 
However, this is only encouraged if the complainant has already brought the matter to the 
attention  of  the  PMU  or  the  NT&P,  or  if  the  complainants  feel  they  might  be  subject  to 
retaliation if they went to NT&P directly. 
24 
4.9  Gender Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
4.9.1  GBV/SEA Risk Factors 
Gender-based violence (GBV) and sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) cuts across multiple 
spheres including individual, relationship, community, institutional and policy levels.  While 
sexual violence can impact anyone, sexual violence is largely considered a gender-based 
violence, with women and girls made as primary targets. IFAD has no tolerance towards 
acts of sexual harassment or SEA and takes action to prevent sexual harassment and SEA 
from  occurring  in  the  first  place  and  ensures  a  prompt  and  effective  response  to 
allegations16. 
RK-FINFA  component  interventions,  depending  on  their  scope,  can  exacerbate  existing 
risks or can create new ones. Risk factors may include:  
  Unequitable sharing of income between men and women after sale of agricultural 
produce, livestock, poultry or bees related products; 
  Low employment rates of women; 
  Limited land for agriculture and livestock rearing which may require hiring of land 
especially by the youth and women, often based on informal agreements.  
All these can exacerbate already existing inequities between women, men, and youth.  
4.9.2  GBV/SEA Risk Mitigation Measures 
The prevention and mitigation of GBV/SEA requires interaction and collaboration between 
major actors within RK-FINFA. These may include: 
i.  Women and their children, as well as other vulnerable populations, in communities 
ii. 
iii. 
where RK-FINFA will be implemented; 
The communities including cultural, religious and informal structures who may play 
a protection role;  
PMU and PFIs who are responsible for following contractually mandated social and 
labour practices that prevent abuse and violence; 
iv.  Workers including extension officers who will need to abide by codes of work ethics 
or codes of conduct.   
In the RK-FINFA context, SEA/GBV assumes a medium risk level, and therefore the project 
will deploy the following strategies: 
  Social  and  economic  inclusion  of  women  and  young  women  in  the  project  to 
improve their livelihoods and reduce poverty which is a risk factor for GBV; 
  Use  of  the  GALS  methodology  to  handle  GBV/SEA  and  other  gender  and  youth 
related inequalities at the household, livestock farmer group and community level; 
  Sensitize  communities  especially  the  vulnerable  populations  on  the  laws  and 
services that can protect them and provide redress in case of an incident;  
  Require  every  RK-FINFA  PFI  to  sensitise  their  workforce  on  GBV/SEA  and  sign  a 
code of conduct;   
  Awareness creation among PMU and implementing partners; 
  Training  the  PMU  team  and  PFIs  on  conflict  sensitivity  and  the  ‘Do  No  Harm’ 
Principle. 
The PMU’s Social Inclusion Officer will be responsible for ensuring that all RK-FINFA PMU 
personnel as well as those in PFIs abide by  IFAD’s  requirements  on  GBV/SEA.  SIO will 
work with CSSOs and/or County Gender Officers as well as service providers for survivors 
of  SEA/GBV  to  offer  a  minimum  basic  package  of  services,  ideally  including  case 
16 IFAD (2018); IFAD Policy to Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and 
Abuse. 
25 
management support, health services, psychosocial support, shelter—if needed— security 
and access to legal services. 
4.10  Disclosure of Safeguard Documents 
Where  CPRs  and  PRs  are  to  be  prepared,  consultations  must  be  held  with  all levels:  at 
community, village, county and national levels.  During these consultations, the processes 
for disclosure of the documents should be communicated. IFAD’s SECAP procedures also 
require that sufficient consultations have been carried out with key stakeholders in order 
to satisfy its requirements for Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC).    
Prior  to  approval  of  the  activities/interventions  to  be  funded,  the  CPRs  /PRs  will  be 
disclosed nationally in line with NEMA’s EIA Regulations, and in the Project counties at a 
location accessible to the general public, and in a form and language that the communities 
are able to understand, so that they may comment on any aspects/issues contained in the 
reports prior to their approval.  PFIs financing the interventions and their clients will be 
responsible for disclosure.   
4.11  Review and Approval of ESIAs, Project Reports and IPMP 
CPRs  and  PRs  will  be  reviewed  by  the  PFI’s  officer  responsible  for  the  ESMS.    The  PMU 
ECCO  and  SIO  may  also  be  required  to  review  these  documents  prior  to  submission  to 
NEMA, depending on the nature and scale of the intervention.  
The RK-FINFA IPMP will be reviewed by IFAD and approved by MALF.   
4.12  Monitoring 
Monitoring requires that: 
  ESMSs have been developed as stipulated; 
  The various safeguards instruments (CPRs and PRs which will include ESMPs) have 
been prepared to the required standard, within the required timelines; 
  The safeguards instruments have been reviewed and approved by the responsible 
entities; 
  Environmental,  social  and  climate  mitigation  measures,  have  been/are  being 
implemented and that mitigation measures are effective. This includes monitoring 
the  implementation  of  the  ESMPs  and  IPMP,  and  also  the  grievance  redress 
mechanism(s); 
  The  community  is  participating  in  all  stages  of  the  environmental  and  social 
management and monitoring processes; 
  PMU  and  PFI  staff  have  been  trained  in  accordance  with  the  capacity  building 
proposals; 
  Reports are prepared and delivered as required. 
Monitoring at RK-FINFA level will be done primarily by the ECCO, supported by the SIO, 
CEnvOs, CNRMOs, CSSOs and where necessary other technical officers.  At the PFI level, 
monitoring will be done by the PFI EROs. 
Examples of typical monitoring parameters and indicators are shown in Table 4-6 below: 
26 
Table 4-6  Examples of Monitoring Indicators 
Monitoring Parameter  Monitoring 
Target 
ESMS  
Screening 
Activity/Indicators 
# of PFIs that have 
developed and are 
implementing ESMS  
Responsibility for 
Monitoring 
100% Tier 1 PFIs are 
implementing ESMSs 
ECCO, supported 
by SIO 
% of proposed 
interventions screened 
100% proposed 
interventions screened 
ECCO, PFI ERO 
Licences and permits 
% of required permits 
obtained 
100% of required 
permits obtained 
ECCO, PFI ERO 
NEMA Approvals received 
for ESIAs 
Stakeholder engagement 
plan 
Grievance Redress 
Reporting 
% of CPRs, PRs approved  100% ESIAs, Project 
ECCO, PFI ERO 
No. of SEPs prepared 
Reports approved 
100% Tier 1 and 2 PFIs 
have developed and are 
implementing SEPs 
SIO, PFI ERO 
No. of PFIs having 
functioning grievance 
redress committees 
All PFIs have functioning 
grievance redress 
committees  
No. of grievances 
received 
No. of quarterly reports 
submitted to PMU per 
year by each PFI 
100% of grievances 
resolved 
4 reports received 
SIO, ECCO, PFI 
ERO 
ECCO 
4.13  Quarterly and Annual Reviews 
Quarterly and annual reviews will be undertaken by the PMU ECCO and SIO.  These reviews 
are necessary to: 
  Ensure that PFIs are complying with the processes established in the ESMF; 
 
Identify challenges and opportunities in order to learn lessons and thereby improve 
Project performance; and  
  Be able to determine the cumulative impacts of the Project to establish attainment 
of the Project Development Objectives.  
The reviews will produce Quarterly and Annual Review Reports.   
Each  year,  workshops  will  be  held  where  environmental,  climate  change  and  social 
performance of the Project will be reviewed and discussed, and recommendations made 
for improved Project performance.  These workshops will be attended by the ECCO, SIO, 
County  officers,  NEMA  Regional  Officers  and  PFI  officers  responsible 
for  the 
implementation of the ESMSs. 
The Quarterly and Annual Review reports will be presented to the PSC in order to ensure 
that the Project is achieving its overall development objectives.  IFAD will participate in 
these presentations.   
4.14  Reporting 
The PFIs will submit quarterly reports on environmental, social and climate-related issues 
to the PMU (ECCO). 
27 
The  ECCO  will  produce  quarterly  and  annual  environmental,  social  and  climate 
performance reports, which the PMU Project Coordinator will review and then submit to 
the PSC and IFAD.  
4.15  Environmental and Social Auditing 
Where  ESIAs  have  been  prepared  for  given  activities/interventions  financed  by  PFIs, 
annual  environmental  and  social  auditing  will  be  carried  out  to  establish  the  level  of 
compliance  with  national  policy  objectives  and  regulatory  requirements  and  whether 
NEMA’s  conditions  of  approval  attached  to  the  CPRs  and  PRs  are  being  implemented 
satisfactorily.  The PFIs will be responsible for ensuring that these audits are carried out.    
The audits will be carried out by independent NEMA-registered practitioners.  ECCOs will 
also ensure that PFIs carry out audits for specified projects. 
Auditing  of  the  ESMS  is  to  be  done  internally  every  year  as  part  of  the  ESMS  review 
process, and may involve the PFI internal auditors where present.  This will be done by 
the PFI EROs, with support from the ECCO. Audit reports will be sent to the PSC and IFAD.   
28 
5 
Capacity Building 
5.1 
Existing Capacity 
Based on discussions held during the consultations with selected PFIs, it was established 
that  for  the  most  part  these  PFIs  (Tier  1  and  some  Tier  2)  have  in  place  several  ESG 
requirements that could feed into specific elements of an ESMS.  Understandably, different 
aspects of ESG requirements are handled by different departments within the institutions, 
but none of the institutions had a dedicated person or team to deal with ESG requirements 
and  ESC  issues  in  a  consolidated  manner.    However,  not  all  PFIs  will  have  formal  (or 
informal) policies, procedures and processes or institutional set-ups that could support the 
development of an ESMS.  Certainly, at the rural level, agri-MSMEs and SACCOs will have 
only a few, if any, of the prescribed policies and procedures.   
During this preliminary ESMF, it was not possible to assess the capacity of county officers, 
particularly  the  CEnvOs,  CNRMOs  and  CSSOs,  to  monitor  ESC  issues  or  support  the 
development  of  ESMSs  for  rural  MFIs.    While  knowledge  on  ESC  issues  no  doubt  exists 
within the project county offices, the county officers are unlikely to be familiar with ESG 
requirements for implementing and monitoring ESMSs.  It is also possible that they would 
not have the (financial and logistical) resources to carry out  regular monitoring. During 
the initial stages of Project implementation, consultations will be held at the counties to 
ascertain their capacities. 
Clearly, therefore there is need to build capacity in ESG as well as to deal with ESC issues 
and challenges that the agricultural sector experiences.   
5.2 
Training Needs 
5.2.1  Project Implementation 
RK-FINFA Subcomponent 1.1 of the Technical Support and Innovation Services Component 
is  focused  on  strengthening  capacity  of  PFIs,  MFBs,  MSMEs  and  SACCOS,  including 
implementing  and  monitoring  of  green  investment  portfolios  and  developing  and 
implementing ESMSs for the 41 PFIs.  
At the start of the Project, a capacity needs assessment will be carried out in order to: 
 
Identify  the  existing  knowledge,  skills  and  gaps  in  the  area  related  to 
environmental and social compliance among the PSC, PMU staff, key PFI staff 
and other key Project implementation actors; 
  Make recommendations for detailed capacity development required in order 
to ensure environmental and social compliance of RK-FINFA at all stages of 
its development and implementation; 
  Make recommendations for detailed capacity building required by specific 
PFIs in order to ensure climate risk mitigation and emission reductions at 
all stages of the Project development and implementation; 
  Prepare a detailed capacity building plan, training manuals (modules, visual 
aids, leaflets), training schedule and provide costs for these activities based 
on the identified capacity needs. 
  Carry out the training programme by using the manuals developed. 
In  addition,  Technical  Assistance  (in  the  form  of  a  consultancy)  will  be  hired  to 
carry out training (particularly for the ECCO, SIO and CPFTs) and to support the PMU 
and PFIs to mainstream environmental, social and climate issues.  The ECCO and 
29 
SIO will then roll out training to the Tier 3 MFIs, SACCOs and project beneficiaries.  
5.2.2  Specific Capacity Building for Vulnerable Groups 
Vulnerable groups, including marginalized groups and persons with disabilities, will 
be invited to participate in training and capacity building sessions, cognizant that 
these groups may have specific capacity building needs.  
5.3 
Preliminary Proposals for Training 
Table  5-1  below  summarises  the  types  of  training  that  could  be  included  for  capacity 
building  covering  topics  and  issues  relevant  to  the  ESMF,  the  development  and 
implementation of the ESMF and SECAP requirements. 
Table 5-1  Anticipated Training Topics  
Capacity Building Topics 
Target Audience 
Training Methods 
National environmental, social and 
climate policies, legislation and 
administrative frameworks, and 
requirements (including permitting and 
licencing) 
IFAD’s SECAP, Gender, Indigenous 
Peoples, FPIC, Climate, Land and 
Disclosure Policies 
RK-FINFA environmental and social 
management system, incl. ESG policies, 
ESC management procedures and plans; 
institutional and organizational 
arrangements to implement the ESMS; 
legal compliance;  safeguards 
requirements; ERP; reporting and 
monitoring and ESMS review.  
RK-FINFA SEP, Grievance Redress 
Mechanism, GBV/SEA 
GALs Training 
RK-FINFA PMU, PFIs, CPFTs 
Training workshops 
RK-FINFA PMU, PFIs, CPFTs 
Training workshops  
RK-FINFA PMU, PFIs, CPFTs 
Training workshops 
RK-FINFA PMU, PFIs, CPFTs 
Project beneficiaries 
RK-FINFA PMU, PFIs, CPFTs 
Project beneficiaries 
Training workshops for PMU, Tier 
1 & 2 PFIs 
Roll out training to Tier 3 PFIs and 
project beneficiaries 
Training workshops for PMU, Tier 
1 & 2 PFIs 
Roll out training to Tier 3 PFIs and 
project beneficiaries  
30 
6 
Guidelines for the Preparation of an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan 
These  guidelines  have  been  adapted  from  IFAD’s  Social  Environmental  and  Climate 
Assessment Procedures (SECAP 2017) Guidance Statement #2 on Agrochemicals. 
6.1 
Introduction 
The use of agrochemicals has been critical to agriculture. Agrochemicals include pesticides 
and chemicals used in animal husbandry such as antibiotics and hormones. “Pesticides” 
are  chemicals  that  are  used  to  kill  or  control  pests.  By  their  nature,  pesticides  are 
potentially toxic to other organisms, including humans, and need to be used  safely and 
disposed  of  properly.  Absence  of  safety  precautions  can  result  in  accidents,  sometimes 
with serious consequences. Those at greatest risk are those who experience the greatest 
exposure — these typically being smallholder farmers and livestock keepers, farm workers 
and their families. These groups are also often poor since bigger farms are more likely to 
provide  training  on  pesticide  risk  avoidance  to  their  workers.    The  unsafe  use  of 
agrochemicals  also  poses  serious  negative  risk  on  the  environment  (soil,  water,  plant, 
wildlife,  microorganisms,  etc).    In  the  Kenyan  context,  the  proximity  of  agricultural 
activities using agrochemicals to  sensitive  ecological receptors such  as protected areas, 
conservancies  and  other  wildlife  habitats  raises  concern  in  regard  to  the  impacts  these 
chemicals may have on those receptors.   
Where  there  is  a  significant  increase  in  the  use  of  agrochemicals,  IFAD  requires  a  pest 
management  or  mitigation  plan  to  be  prepared.    RK-FINFA  will  promote  the  use  of 
agrochemicals as the Project will increase the availability of short-term credit for purchase 
of agrochemicals, which result increased use of agrochemicals.  IFAD emphasises the need 
for  careful  selection  of  the  type  of  agrochemicals  and  management  and  use  (timing, 
dosage, mode of application, etc.) to reduce to acceptable levels the environmental risks 
they pose while providing the needed benefits for increased production with lower financial 
and health risk costs.   
6.2 
Policy and Regulatory Frameworks in Kenya Related to Pest Management 
Institutional Framework 
The main government organ responsible agriculture is the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock, Fisheries and Irrigation.   Other institutions and stakeholders involved in pest 
management and influence adoption of IPM programs include:   
  Kenya Agriculture and Livestock Research Organisation (KALRO) 
  Kenya Seed Company (KSC) Agricultural Development Corporation (ADC)  
  Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC) 
  National Cereals and Produce Board (NCPB)  
  New Kenya Cooperative Creameries (NKCC) 
  Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service (KEPHIS) 
  Pest Control Products Board (PCPB)  
  National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 
  Agro Chemical Association of Kenya (AAK). 
31 
National Policies and Legislation 
Policies and legislation related to the agriculture sector and implementation of the IPMP 
are presented below.  
Table 6-1 Policies and Legislation related to IPM in the Agriculture Sector 
Thematic Area 
Policies/Legislations/Guidelines/Strategies/ 
Action Plans 
Agriculture 
Livestock 
Fisheries 
Environment and 
Natural Resources 
Management 
Agriculture Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy (ASTGS 
2019-2029); Agriculture Act (rev 2012); Crops Act (2013); Irrigation 
Act (2019); Crops (Nuts and Oil Crops) Regulations (2020); Crops 
(Food Crops) Regulations (2019); Pest Control Products Act Cap 346; 
Plant Protection Act Cap 324; Fertilizers and Animal Foodstuffs Act, 
Cap 345 (2012) 
Draft (reviewed) National Livestock Policy (2019); Kenya Veterinary 
policy (2015); Draft Livestock Breeding Bill (2015); Livestock 
identification and traceability system regulations (2019); Pest Control 
Products Act Cap 346; Kenya Meat Commission Act; Fertilizers and 
Animal Foodstuffs Act, Cap 345 (2012); Animal Health Bill (2019) 
Fisheries Act 2016; Fisheries Management and Development Bill 
(2019); 
National Aquaculture Policy (2011); National Aquaculture 
Development Plan  (2010-2015)  
The Environmental Management and Coordination Act 1999; 
Environmental Management and Coordination (Water Quality) 
Regulations (2006); Environmental Management and Coordination 
(Wetlands, River Banks, Lake Shores and Sea Shore Management) 
Regulations (2009); Irrigation Policy (2011); Water Act (CAP 372) 
No. 8 (2002) (Revised 2012, 2016) 
International Conventions and Regional Agreements with implications on the 
Use of Agrochemicals 
  Basel Convention,2006. 
The  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Trans-
Boundary  Movements  of  Hazardous  Wastes  and  Their  Disposal  was  concluded  in 
Basel, Switzerland, on March 22, 1989, and entered into force in May 1992. Now 
ratified by 149 countries including 32 of the 53 African countries, the focus of this 
convention  is  to  control  the  movement  of  hazardous  wastes,  ensure  their 
environmentally  sound  management  and  disposal,  and  prevent  illegal  waste 
trafficking (UNEP, 2006). 
  Rotterdam  Convention,  1999,aims  to  promote  shared  responsibility  and 
cooperative  efforts  among  Parties  in  the  international  trade  of  certain hazardous 
chemicals  in  order  to  protect  human  health  and  the  environment  from  potential 
harm and to contribute to their environmentally sound use. Governments began to 
address the problem of toxic pesticides and other hazardous chemicals in the 1980s 
by establishing a voluntary Prior Informed Consent procedure (PIC). PIC required 
exporters  trading  in  a  list  of  hazardous  substances  to  obtain  the  prior  informed 
consent of importers before proceeding with the trade. 
  The FAO  International Code of Conduct  on the Distribution and  Use of Pesticides 
(2002).    It  establishes  voluntary  standards  for  public  and  private  institutions 
involved  in  the  distribution  and  use  of  pesticides.  The  Code  sets  out  a  vision  of 
shared  responsibility  between  the  public  and  private  sectors,  especially  the 
pesticide industry and government, to ensure that pesticides are used responsibly, 
32 
delivering benefits through adequate pest management without significant adverse 
effects on human health or the environment. 
  FAO Guidelines on Good Practice for Ground Application of Pesticides, 2001. FAO 
produced a new,  revised and expanded series  of pesticide application equipment 
related guidelines to cover the application of pesticides. 
  The Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention (ILO 184). This was adopted by 
the  conference  of  the  International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  addresses  the 
protection  of  workers  in  the  agricultural  sector.  More  people  work  in  agriculture 
than in any other sector, more workers are injured in agriculture than in any other 
sector,  and  pesticides  are  a  major  cause  of  injury  and  death.  In  addition,  more 
children work in agriculture than in any other sector and they are differently and 
particularly vulnerable to the toxic effects of chemicals such as pesticides. A specific 
section  of  the  convention  deals  with  the  sound  management  of  chemicals  and 
advises governments to adopt good management practices for chemicals, to inform 
users  adequately  about  the  chemicals  they  use  and  to  ensure  that  adequate 
mechanisms  are  in  place  to  safely  dispose  of  empty  containers  and  waste 
chemicals. 
  Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM).  The Kenya-
UNEP partnership for SAICM aims to serve as a catalyst for the implementation of 
activities that will facilitate the meeting of Kenya's Vision 2030 goals on chemicals 
and  waste  management.  These  activities  will  promote  the  meeting  of  Kenya's 
obligations as they relate to the Basel, Stockholm and Rotterdam Conventions, to 
which  Kenya  is  Party.  Special  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  engaging  with industry 
and the private sector in manufacturing, use and disposal of chemicals. 
6.3 
Impacts of Agrochemicals 
Several potential environmental and social consequences are associated with the use of 
agrochemicals: 
  Air pollution: Pesticides can contribute to air pollution as pesticide drift occurs when 
pesticides  suspended  in  the  air  as  particles  are  carried  by  wind  to  other  areas, 
potentially contaminating them. Ground spraying produces less pesticide drift. 
  Water pollution from the use of agrochemicals may affect both groundwater and 
surface  water  through  leaching  and  run-off.  High  concentrations  of  nitrates  and 
phosphates  can  lead  to  eutrophication  in  rivers,  lakes  and  coastal  waters.  High 
levels  of  nitrogen  and  phosphorus  cause  the  depletion  of  oxygen  in  lakes  and 
reservoirs  by  excessive  algal  and  bacterial  growth  (eutrophication),  eventually 
reducing  aquatic  life.  The  problem  is  aggravated  by  organic  effluents,  especially 
human sewage, and eutrophication in drinking water reservoirs is a public health 
concern. In addition, the toxic compounds contained in some pesticides may pollute 
groundwater and surface water, posing threats to both human and animal health, 
including marine and freshwater fish. 
  Hazards to humans and animals: Improper application of pesticides, overuse and 
neglect  of  safety  periods  during  and  after  application  may  result  in  unnecessary 
exposure of farmers and their families to toxic material. Contact can be direct (skin 
or eye) or through inhalation or ingestion. Agrochemical residues are also known 
to persist in contaminated clothing. Pesticides may move off target and poison fish, 
cattle,  beneficial  insects,  pollinators,  soil  organisms  and  nearby  communities. 
Pesticides may have acute or chronic toxic effects. While people are aware of their 
acute effects, which vary from mild irritation to death, their chronic toxicity results 
from  the  accumulation  of  small  amounts  of  residue  in  consumed  food  –  of  both 
plant and animal origin – in the human body over a long period, leading to various 
toxicity symptoms and diseases. 
  Bioaccumulation  implies  that  toxic  levels  increase  over  time  and  along  the  food 
chain  (e.g.  in  carnivorous  mammals  or  predatory  fish).  The  bioaccumulation  of 
toxins resulting from agrochemical use is a very serious issue, causing biodiversity 
33 
loss and disease in both animals and humans, especially in poor rural communities 
that  rely  on  wild  food.  Bioaccumulation  is  also  very  serious  for  the  marine  and 
freshwater life that is critical to a large proportion of the poor. 
  Pest resurgence: Misuse of pesticides can cause elimination or suppression of the 
natural  enemies  that  keep  insect  pest  populations  under  control  and  at 
economically acceptable levels. This suppression leads to outbreaks of secondary 
pests previously not considered important. This can affect livestock and community 
health. 
  Pest resistance: The misuse of pesticides can lead to the build-up of resistance in 
insect  pests,  pathogens  and  weeds.  This  resistance  has  great  economic  and 
ecological consequences because increasing amounts of more expensive and toxic 
pesticide formulations are required to achieve pest control. In some areas of the 
world, pesticide overuse has created a population of resistant pests, which threaten 
subsistence, livestock and human health. 
  Loss  of  bees  and  other  beneficial  insects:  Pesticides  can  kill  bees  and  other 
beneficial insects that are essential for the pollination of indigenous plants, honey 
production, etc., thus causing negative impacts on the food production, livelihoods 
and incomes of poor rural communities. 
  Greenhouse  Gases:  Agrochemicals  are  among  the  most  important  secondary 
sources of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the agriculture sector. 
  Climate change is expected to affect the population and life cycles of several pests 
and  diseases,  mainly  through  the  influence  on  their  distribution  and  expansion 
ranges.  More  invasions  by  introduced  or  migrated  alien  species  of  pests  and 
diseases are expected, with higher intensities of infection. However, the impact of 
climate  change  will  be  most  clear  through  its  effect  on  crops,  as  crops  growing 
under  various  types  of  climate  stress  will  be  more  susceptible  and  vulnerable  to 
pests  and  diseases.  Anticipated  effects  include  reduced  tolerance  and  resistance 
levels in livestock, and losses in biodiversity. Because of higher pest and disease 
pressure,  more  pesticides  will  be  applied,  which  might  lead  to  increased  misuse 
and overuse if not well managed. Environmental instability and increased incidence 
of extreme weather may also reduce the effectiveness of pesticides on target pests, 
or  result  in  more  injury  to  non-target  organisms.  However,  climate  change  may 
affect biological control negatively or positively. 
6.4 
Potential Mitigation Measures 
The use of agrochemicals can also be reduced or eliminated by promoting the use of locally 
available natural biopesticides; the use of natural on-farm animal and green manure; and 
organic farming techniques.  
Some measures for management of pesticides are described here: 
Pesticide management: 
  The project should be explicit about the pesticides it proposes, including those that 
farmers are expected to use when credit for input purchases is made available. For 
projects  that  entail  significant  pesticide  use  or  have  the  potential  to  result  in 
increased  pesticide  use,  a  pesticide  management  plan  is  prepared,  either  as  a 
stand-alone  document  or  as  part  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Impact 
Assessment  (ESIA)  or  ESMP.  The  most  important  criteria  for  assessing  the 
environmental  impact  of  a  pesticide  are  its  toxicity  level  and  the  degree  of 
biodegradability. Consideration should also be given to residue-level guidance for 
countries that intend to export crops. Unregistered, restricted-use or experimental-
use pesticides should be avoided, unless their use in the project has been reviewed 
and  approved  by  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations 
(FAO)/World Health Organization (WHO) Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residues. 
34 
  Pesticides in WHO Class la and Class lb5 should generally be avoided. 
  For general use, the formulated product should be at a low enough concentration 
to  be  in  at  most  a  WHO  Class  II.  Low-toxicity  formulations  should  be  favoured: 
from  least  toxic  to  most  toxic,  the  options  are  granule,  dust,  wettable  powder, 
flowable, emulsifiable concentrate, ultra-low volume and fumigant.  
  Low-concentration  granulars,  seed  dressings,  bait  formulations  and  pheromone 
traps  generally  present  the  least  hazard  to  users  and  are  especially  suitable  for 
small-scale 
they  cause  minimal 
environmental  contamination  and  minimal  adverse  effects  on  non-target 
organisms. 
farmers  unfamiliar  with  pesticide  use; 
  Safe application equipment and servicing facilities should be promoted, along with 
correct  calibration  of  equipment.  Training  should  be  provided  for  personnel  and 
farmers applying the pesticides. 
  Protective  clothing,  including  masks,  gloves  and  boots,  should  be  provided  or 
promoted, especially for pesticides that are absorbed through the skin. However, 
improper  use  of  protective  clothing  may  be  even  more  hazardous  than  doing 
without protection: unless it is washed, protective clothing can become saturated 
with pesticides – such as in the lining of boots and gloves – and can greatly increase 
pesticide absorption. Training should be provided. 
  Training  is  crucial  to  the  safety,  use  and  cost-effectiveness  of  pesticides,  and  is 
recommended  for  inclusion  in  any  project  that  increases  the  availability  or 
accessibility of pesticides. A range of actors will require education: users, operators, 
extension  officers,  retailers,  health  workers  treating  cases  of  poisoning,  and 
legislators in pesticides law. 
  Application guidelines for pesticide use should be made clear, and a legal document 
should be drawn up providing assurance that the guidelines will be followed. 
  All the pesticides used in the project should be properly labelled, and all labels and 
application guidelines should be provided in the local language. 
  Monitor water courses, soil and community health on a regular basis to ensure that 
pesticide concentrations are within legal environmental and health limits. 
6.5 
Integrated Pest Management Approach 
An Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) is a tool to prevent, evaluate and mitigate 
the  occurrences  of  pesticides  or  pesticide  breakdown  products.  The  IPMP  includes 
components promoting prevention and developing appropriate responses to the detection 
of  pesticides  or  pesticide  breakdown  products,  and  provides  responses  to  reduce  or 
eliminate continued pesticide movement to groundwater and surface water. It encourages 
the  use  of  a  combination  of  pest  management  techniques,  such  as  integrated  pest 
management to suppress pest populations in an effective, economical and environmentally 
sound  way,  and  minimize  adverse  effects  on  beneficial  organisms,  humans  and  the 
environment. 
Whenever an IFAD project includes the purchase, promotion or use of agrochemicals, the 
following should be addressed:  
 
 
 
Identification of specific crops and livestock breeds and their existing or potential 
pests requiring pest management: 
Investigate  the  options  for  using  available  safe  pesticides  and  non-pesticide 
alternatives such as natural deterrents. 
Identification of nationally approved and available pesticides, and management and 
application  techniques  for  their  judicial  and  effective  use  to  protect  human  and 
environment health. 
  Assessment  of  local  and  national  capacity  for  the  safe  handling,  use,  storage, 
disposal  and  monitoring  of  agrochemicals:  Identify  training  needs  for  regulatory 
35 
institutions, agro-dealers, extension agents and farmers, and assess the needs for 
building community environmental awareness. 
  Development of an IPM programme for minimizing/optimizing pesticide application, 
including – if possible – provisions for monitoring residues in crops, livestock and 
in the environment.  The programme should include IPM  strategies for enhancing 
the resilience of vulnerable agroecosystems to climate variability and changes, and 
the  adaption  of  IPM  practices  to  deal  with  pests  in  different  climatic  conditions 
(World Bank, 2009). 
Thus the key steps in developing an integrated pest management plan are: 
i. 
Evaluate pests’ impact before control programs are implemented, to identify 
pests, size of problems and possible natural controls. This includes describing: 
a.  Common pest problems and estimated economic impact, current and 
proposed practices, including non-chemical preventative techniques, 
biological and chemical control. Is optimum use being made of agro-
ecosystem management techniques to reduce pest pressure and of 
available non-chemical methods to control pests? Do farmers and 
extension staffs get sufficient information about IPM approaches that 
reduce reliance on chemical control? 
b.  Relevant IPM experience within the project area, county or country, 
existing IPM practices, projects/programs, research 
c.  Discrepancies where the current or proposed practices are not consistent 
with the principles of an IPM 
d.  approach, to be able to propose a strategy to bring pest management 
activities into line with IPM. 
ii. 
iii. 
Evaluate non-pesticide management options, including a range of preventive 
measures and alternative pest control methods (physical, mechanical, and 
biochemical) 
Evaluate whether synthetic pesticides are necessary or not, whether less toxic 
varieties are available for the purpose, and how to minimize exposure for users 
and the environment 
Note that risk is a function of both toxicity and exposure. Reducing risk means (1) selecting 
less toxic pesticides and (2) selecting pesticides that will lead to the least human exposure 
before, during and after use. 
6.6 
Pesticide Management 
6.6.1  Screening Pesticides 
The use of any pesticide should be based on an assessment of the nature and degree of 
associated risks, taking into account the intended users. With respect to the classification 
of  pesticides  and  their  specific  formulations,  reference  is  made  to  the  World  Health 
Organization's  Recommended  Classification  of  Pesticides  by  Hazard  and  Guidelines  to 
Classification. The following criteria apply to the selection and use of pesticides: 
a)  They must have negligible adverse human health effects. 
b)  They must be shown to be effective against the target species. 
c)  They must have minimal effect on non-target species and the natural environment. 
The  methods,  timing,  and  frequency  of  pesticide  application  are  aimed  at 
minimizing damage to natural enemies. Pesticides used in public health programs 
must  be  demonstrably  safe  for  inhabitants  and  domestic  animals  in  the  treated 
areas, as well as for personnel applying them. 
d)  Their use must take into account the need to prevent the development of resistance 
in pests. 
36 
e)  They do not fall in WHO classes IA and IB, or formulations of products in Class II 
if (a) country lacks restrictions on their distribution and use; or (b) they are likely 
be used by, or be accessible to, lay personnel, farmers, or others without training, 
equipment, and facilities to handle, store, and apply these products properly. 
6.6.2  Reduce exposure time or the degree of exposure 
Before use 
Transporting 
  Separate pesticides from other materials being transported 
  Avoid private distribution 
  Never transport leaking or badly deteriorated containers 
  Do not transport food, beverages or animal feed together with pesticides.  
  Load and unload pesticides very carefully to minimize the chance of dropping 
containers. 
Packaging 
  Follow international and national norms and guidelines 
  Use packaging adapted to needs eliminate re-use of packaging materials (even 
when cleaned, pesticide containers are too dangerous to re-use 
  The container for the product shall be of sufficient strength and shall provide all 
the necessary 
  Protection  against  compaction,  atmospheric  moisture,  oxidation, 
loss  by 
evaporation and 
  Contamination  to  ensure  that  the  product  suffers  no  deterioration  under  normal 
conditions of transit and storage, etc. 
Storing 
  Develop strict guidelines for farm level storage 
  Ensure permanent, well-marked labeling 
  Follow and respect national norms 
  Use appropriate language and approved pictograms 
  Use and respect appropriate toxicology colour codes 
  Should be located far from human dwellings, and personal use items 
  Should be sited far from rivers and bodies of water, to prevent chemical 
contamination from entering and poisoning the water 
  Should not be sited in an area subject to flooding, especially during seasonal rains  
  Be secured from public access 
  Have a warning sign affixed to the exterior door, entrance or gate of the storage 
facility 
  Have a floor or base that is protected from pesticide absorption 
Labeling 
The purpose of a labeling is to convey a message about what the product is, who makes 
it and how it may be used safely and effectively. Label should specifically indicate: 
  Hazard symbol 
  Trade and chemical name 
Ingredient statement 
 
  Type of formulation 
  Net content of the package 
  Purpose for which it is to be used 
  Name and address of manufacturer, distributor 
  Registration or license number 
  Directions for use 
  Safety precautions 
37 
  Warnings and statements of good practice 
  Hazards to humans and domestic animals 
  Environmental hazards 
  Physical and chemical hazards 
  First-aid instructions and advice to health personnel 
  Storage and disposal directions 
  Warranty statement 
During use  
  Continuous training for farmers on transporation, storage, application, protective 
equipment  and  clothing,  mixing  of  chemicals,  disposal  of  containers,  disposal  of  
expired agrochemicals, etc 
Pre-application 
  Read and understand labeled instructions and any other information provided with 
either the agrochemical, the application equipment or the protective clothing. 
  Assess the risks of application to people, animals and the environment and decide 
what action is necessary to reduce or eliminate them. 
  Ensure that the user is competent and that he or she has received effective training 
in application techniques and the precautions to be observed. 
  Arrange  health  monitoring  as  may  be  necessary 
for  certain  hazardous 
agrochemicals based on their frequency of use. 
  Check  application  equipment  to  ensure  that  it  operates  satisfactorily  without 
leaking or spilling and is calibrated for the necessary application rates.  
  Check  that  protective  clothing  and  other  safety  equipment  including  breathing 
apparatus, if required, is complete, is of the correct quality and is in good condition.  
Replace any items that are worn or missing.  
  Decide  how  the  work  is  going  to  be  done  and  set  up  an  action  plan  to  cover  its 
implementation, together with any emergencies that may arise.  
  Check that weather conditions are satisfactory, particularly to avoid excessive wind 
speeds and consequent spray drift. 
  Ensure the safe disposal of empty containers, tank washings and surplus pesticides. 
During application 
  Do not apply agrochemicals without adequate training. 
  Wear appropriate protective clothing as prescribed on the label or information sheet 
for handling concentrated products. 
  Avoid blow-back from granule or powdered materials when transferring container 
contents into the application unit. A slow, steady release causes least disturbance 
of air and reduces the risk of particles becoming airborne and being inhaled. 
  Mix only the correct amount of agrochemical required for a particular task so as to 
avoid the need to dispose of any surplus. 
  Handle containers carefully to prevent gurgling or spillage during pouring into an 
applicator.  
  Pour correctly from large containers with the spout uppermost so as to allow air to 
 
flow into the container at the same rate as the contents flow out. 
If two or more agrochemicals have to be mixed, ensure that they are compatible 
and  without  risk  of  a  chemical  reaction  that  would  cause  a  "tank  mix"  operator 
hazard. 
 Do not eat, drink or smoke while applying agrochemicals. 
 
  Ensure that dangerous practices such as putting a blocked nozzle to the mouth to 
blow it clear are prohibited. Clean the nozzle with water or a soft probe, such as a 
grass stem. 
  Do  not  allow  other  workers  in  the  field,  particularly  when  pesticides  are  being 
applied. 
  Take particular care to observe that children are neither allowed to spray nor are 
exposed to pesticides. 
38 
  Take notice of changing weather conditions, such as an increase in wind speed. This 
would  cause  drift  and  could  blow  the  spray  towards  sensitive  areas  such  as  a 
drinking  water  supply,  resulting  in  health  hazards.  It  may  also  blow  the  spray 
towards the operator, causing an inhalation hazard. 
After use  
Know,  respect and  enforce any exclusion period after application during which humans, 
livestock,  pets  and  wildlife  must  be  kept  away  from  the  treated  area;  assure  proper 
cleaning and rinsing off; and develop a workable monitoring and evaluation system). The 
following precautions have to be followed after applying the pesticide: 
  Thoroughly wash hands, face and neck as well as other parts of the body which 
may have become contaminated. If gloves have been worn, wash them before 
removal 
  Return unused pesticide to safe storage and safely dispose of empty containers 
and any surplus in the application equipment 
  Decontaminate application equipment by washing it thoroughly. The washings 
should be drained into a soak-away or similar chamber to be safely confined and 
without risk to the environment. 
  Decontaminate protective clothing by thoroughly washing items such as apron, 
boots and face shield. Launder the work clothing each day after spraying. Gloves 
should be washed inside and out and allowed to dry. Respiratory protection 
equipment should be wiped clean 
  Bathe or wash thoroughly again after completing the above four actions. 
6.6.3  Disposal of unused and obsolete pesticide, and empty pesticide 
containers 
The  safe  management  and  disposal  of  pesticide-related  waste  (unused  and  obsolete 
pesticide,  and  empty  pesticide  container)  should  be  provided  and  coordinated  by 
regulatory  authorities,  pesticide  distributors  and  suppliers.  Other  organizations  that 
support and advise pesticide users, such as extension and health promotion services, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), agricultural colleges and schools, also have important 
roles to play. 
The Pesticide Control Products Board is responsible for regulating the manufacture, import, 
distribution and use of pesticides. These responsibilities should be extended to include the 
management of pesticide related waste products, including empty containers, which are 
often overlooked. 
A mechanism has to be designed to  collect all empty pesticide containers  from  farmers 
and safely disposed and never reused. It is extremely dangerous to use them for anything 
else. Consult the pesticide label, the manufacturer, or the manufacturer’s representative 
for specific recommendations regarding container clean-up and disposal. 
The  management  plan  has  to  be  prepared  when  there  is  the  plan  to  use  pesticide  to 
mitigate  all  the  impacts  associated  with  the  pesticide  using  the  above-mentioned 
measures. The implementation of the plan has to be supervised, monitored and audited, 
and a monitoring plan has to be prepared. 
6.6.4 
IPMP Summary 
The IPMP should include: 
i. 
A  description  of  present,  proposed  and/or  envisaged  pesticide  use  and  assess 
whether such use is in line with IPM principles. Provide purpose of pesticide use, 
39 
type  of  products  used,  frequency  of  applications,  and  application  methods.  Is 
pesticide use part of an IPM approach and is it justified? Justification of pesticide 
use  under  the  project  should  (a)  explain  the  IPM  approach  and  the  reason  why 
pesticide  use  is  considered,  (b)  provide  an  economic  assessment  demonstrating 
that the proposed pesticide use would increase farmers’ net profits, or for public 
health projects, provide evidence that the proposed pesticide use is justified from 
the best available (probably WHO supported evidence) public health evidence. 
An  indication  of  type  and  quantity  of  pesticides  envisaged  to  be  financed  by  the 
project (in volume and monetary value) and/or assessment of increase in pesticide 
use resulting from the project. 
Circumstances of pesticide use and the capability and competence of end-users to 
handle  products  within acceptable  risk  margins  (e.g.  user  access  to,  and  use  of, 
protective gears and appropriate application equipment; users’ product knowledge 
and  understanding  of  hazards  and  risks;  appropriateness  of  on-farm  storage 
facilities for pesticide).  
An assessment of environmental, occupational and public health risks associated 
with the transport, storage, handling and use of the proposed products under local 
circumstances, and the disposal of empty containers. 
Pre-requisites  and/or  measures  required  to  reduce  specific  risks  associated  with 
envisaged pesticide use under the project (e.g.: protective gear, training, upgrading 
of storage facilities, etc.). 
A selection of pesticides authorized for use, taking into consideration: (a) criteria 
set at national (if there is any) or international, (b) the hazards and risks and; (c) 
the  availability  of  newer  or  less  hazardous  products  and  techniques  (e.g.  bio-
pesticides, traps).  
A description of activities that require local monitoring during implementation. 
A  description  of  activities  that  require  monitoring  during  supervision  visits  (e.g. 
regarding  effectiveness  of  measures  to  mitigate  risks;  progress  in  strengthening 
regulatory framework and institutional capacity; identification of new issues or risks 
arising during implementation). 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix.  Monitoring  and  supervision  plan,  implementation  responsibilities,  required 
expertise and budget. 
40 
7 
Guidelines for the Preparation of an Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework 
These  guidelines  for  an  Indigenous  Peoples  Plan  Framework  (IPPF)  have  been  adapted 
from the IPPF prepared for IFAD’s Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (RK-FINFA).  
It complies with IFAD’s Policy on  Engagement  with Indigenous Peoples17 and the  Green 
Climate Fund’s Operational Guidelines for Indigenous Peoples Policy18. 
7.1  Overview 
Kenya is home to Indigenous Peoples (IP) who are either hunter-gatherers or pastoralists.  
Some of the hunter-gatherers are transitioning to agro-pastoralism, others are nomadic 
or seminomadic pastoralists and other artisanal blacksmiths and fishing communities.  It 
is estimated that pastoralists comprise 25% of the national population, while the largest 
individual hunter-gatherer community amounts to approximately 79,000. The pastoralists 
mainly  occupy  the  arid  and  semi-arid  lands  of  northern  Kenya  and  towards  the  border 
between  Kenya  and  Tanzania  in  the  south.    The  hunter-gatherers  include  the  Ogiek, 
Sengwer,  Yiaku,  Waata  and  Aweer  (Boni),  while  the  pastoralists  include  the  Turkana, 
Rendille,  Borana,  Maasai,  Samburu,  Ilchamus,  Somali,  Gabra,  Pokot,  Endorois  and 
others.19 
Initial screening of the 14 Project counties indicates the presence of indigenous peoples. 
While detailed information on the extent of IP in the project’s counties, as well as detailed 
information about their beliefs, traditions, benefits, involvement in the project activities, 
and impacts of the project on IP, among others, are limited at this stage, some general 
information is available about these groups. Nonetheless, it is highly likely that indigenous 
people will be present at some project sites and may be affected, or potentially benefit, 
from the project. Table 7-1 presents areas where Indigenous Peoples are present in the 
Project Counties. 
Table 7-1 RK-FINFA Counties that host Indigenous Peoples 
County 
Bungoma 
Busia 
Embu 
Kakamega 
Kirinyaga 
Kisii 
Machakos 
Meru 
Nakuru 
Nandi 
Nyeri 
Siaya 
Indigenous hunter-gatherers, 
including small fishing and 
agricultural communities 
Indigenous nomadic and semi-
nomadic pastoralists and agro- 
pastoralists 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Ogiek 
None 
None 
None 
Sabaot 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Maasai 
None 
None 
None 
17 IFAD (2009); Engagement with Indigenous Peoples: Policy 
18 Green Climate Fund (undated); Operational Guidelines: Indigenous Peoples Policy 
19 https://www.iwgia.org/en/kenya 
41 
County 
Tharaka Nithi 
Trans Nzoia 
Indigenous hunter-gatherers, 
including small fishing and 
agricultural communities 
Indigenous nomadic and semi-
nomadic pastoralists and agro- 
pastoralists 
None 
Sengwer 
None 
Sabaot 
Source:  Respective County Integrated Development Plans 2018-2022 
This  IPPF  has  been  developed  to  guide  development  of  Indigenous  Peoples  Plans  which 
will mitigate adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples.  
7.2  Objective of the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
IFAD’s  Policy  on  Engagement  with  Indigenous  Peoples  aims  to  enhance  IFAD’s 
development  effectiveness  in  its  engagement  with  indigenous  peoples’  communities  in 
rural areas. It sets out the principles of engagement to work with indigenous peoples, and 
the instruments, procedures and resources to be deployed to implement them.   
Essentially, the framework will provide guidance  on how the FPIC and the  IPAPs will be 
developed  and  mainstreamed  into  Project  activities.  The  IPPF  will  seek  to  provide 
guidance/processes and procedures to: 
  Screen project components to assess their impacts on Indigenous Peoples;  
  Ensure  meaningful  participation  and  consultation  with  affected  persons  in  the 
process of preparation, implementation, and monitoring of project activities;  
  Prepare an IPP to mitigate any adverse impacts found;  
  Ensure that Indigenous Peoples receive culturally appropriate social and economic 
benefits;  
  Define the institutional arrangement for screening, planning and implementation of 
Indigenous Peoples plans for projects; and, 
  Outline the monitoring and evaluation process, including budgetary requirements. 
7.3 
Free Prior and Informed Consent 
Given that indigenous peoples could potentially be present at Project sites, IFAD requires 
that the Project undertakes a process of Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) leading 
to broad based community support and consent for the project as well as the development 
of Indigenous Peoples Action Plans. 
The key elements of FPIC can be summarized as follows20: 
  Free should imply no coercion, intimidation or manipulation; 
  Prior  should  imply  consent  has  been  sought  sufficiently  in  advance  of  any 
authorization  or  commencement  of  activities  and  respects  time  requirements  of 
indigenous consultation/consensus processes; 
  Informed  should  imply  that  information  is  provided  that  covers  (at  least)  the 
following aspects: 
a)  The nature,  size, pace,  reversibility and scope  of any proposed project or 
activity; 
b)  The reason/s or purpose of the project and/or activity; 
c)  The duration of the above; 
d)  The locality of areas that will be affected; 
20 UNDG Guidelines (excerpt from the Report of the International Workshop on Methodologies Regarding Free, 
Prior and Informed Consent E/C.19/2005/3, endorsed by UNPFII at its fourth session in 2005). 
42 
e)  A  preliminary  assessment  of  the  likely  economic,  social,  cultural  and 
environmental  impact,  including  potential  risks  and  fair  and  equitable 
benefit sharing in a context that respects the precautionary principle; 
f)  Personnel  likely  to  be  involved  in  the  execution  of  the  proposed  project 
(including  indigenous  peoples,  private  sector  staff,  research  institutions, 
government employees and others); 
g)  Procedures that the project may entail. 
  Consent:  Consultation  and  participation  are  crucial  components  of  a  consent 
process.  Consultation  should  be  undertaken  in  good  faith.  The  parties  should 
establish a dialogue allowing them to find appropriate solutions in an atmosphere 
of mutual respect in good faith, and full and equitable participation. Consultation 
requires time and an effective system for communicating among interest holders. 
Indigenous peoples should be able to participate through their own freely chosen 
representatives  and  customary  or  other  institutions.  The  inclusion  of  a  gender 
perspective  and  the  participation  of  indigenous  women  are  essential,  as  well  as 
participation  of  children  and  youth  as  appropriate.  This  process  may  include  the 
option of withholding consent. Consent to any agreement should be interpreted as 
indigenous peoples have reasonably understood it. 
Free,  prior  and  informed  consent  should  be  sought  sufficiently  in  advance  of 
commencement or authorization of activities, taking into account indigenous peoples’ own 
decision-making  processes,  in  phases  of  assessment,  planning,  implementation, 
monitoring, evaluation and closure of a project. 
Indigenous peoples should specify which representative institutions are entitled to express 
consent  on  behalf  of  the  affected  peoples  or  communities.  In  free,  prior  and  informed 
consent processes, indigenous peoples, United Nations agencies and governments should 
ensure a gender balance and take into account the views of children and youth as relevant. 
Information  should  be  accurate  and  provided  in  a  form  that  is  accessible  and 
understandable, including in a language that the indigenous peoples will fully understand. 
The format in which information is distributed should take into account the oral traditions 
of indigenous peoples and their languages. 
Reference should be made to IFAD’s How to Do Note on FPIC21 and IFAD’s How To Do Note 
on Engaging with Pastoralists22. 
7.4 
Policy And Legislative Framework on Indigenous Peoples 
Indigenous  Peoples  have  an  inherent  right  to  self-determination  enshrined  in  different 
international  jurisprudence.  Indigenous  Peoples  also  enjoy  the  right  to  maintain  and 
develop their cultures, as well as the right over their lands, territories and resources. 
Constitution of Kenya, 2010 
Kenya’s 2010 The Constitution of Kenya 2010 (CoK) provides a rich and complex array of 
civil and political rights, socio- economic rights and collective rights that are of relevance 
to indigenous communities.  CoK does not specifically use the term IP, it is nevertheless 
robust in articles that define vulnerability and marginalization, including issues that IP cite 
as the reasons for their self-identification.    It also addresses social exclusion in general.     
Article 260 of the Constitution defines a “marginalized community” as:     
21 IFAD (2015); How to do: Seeking free, prior and informed consent in IFAD investment projects. 
22 IFAD (2018); How to do: Engaging with pastoralists – a holistic development approach 
43 
  A community that, because of its relatively small population or for any other reason, 
has  been  unable  to  fully  participate  in  the  integrated  social  and  economic  life  of 
Kenya as a whole;  
  A traditional community that, out of a need or desire to preserve its unique culture 
and  identity  from  assimilation,  has  remained  outside  the  integrated  social  and 
economic life of Kenya as a whole; 
  An indigenous community that has retained and maintained a traditional lifestyle 
and livelihood based on a hunter or gatherer economy;  or  (d)  pastoral  persons  
and  communities,  whether  they  are  (i) nomadic;  or  (ii)  a  settled  community  
that,  because  of  its  relative  geographic  isolation,  has experienced only marginal 
participation in the integrated social and economic life of Kenya as a whole. 
Similarly, the COK (2010), defines ‘marginalized group’ as: a group of people who, because 
of  laws  or  practices,  on,  or  after  the  effective  date,  were  or  are  disadvantaged  by 
discrimination  on  one  or  more  of  the  grounds  in  Article  27  (4)  which  prohibits 
discrimination on the basis of ethnic or social origin, religion, conscience, belief, culture, 
dress  or language.  In addition, article 27(6) calls on the state to undertake,  ‘legislative 
and  other  measures,  including  affirmative  action  programmes  and  policies  designed  to 
redress any disadvantage suffered by individuals or groups because of past discrimination’. 
This article prohibits both direct and indirect discrimination. 
Articles 56 and 260 of the Constitution are a clear demonstration of the intentions of the 
country to deal with the concerns of minority and marginalized groups: The definition of 
marginalized  communities  and  groups  by  the  COK  (2010),  and  the  provisions  for 
affirmative action programmes for minority and marginalized groups are efforts to provide 
a  legal  framework  for  the  inclusion  of  minority  and  marginalized  groups/  Indigenous 
Peoples into mainstream development of the country. These articles present the minority 
and marginalized groups including Indigenous Peoples. 
The Constitution of Kenya requires the State to address the needs of vulnerable groups, 
including  “minority  or  marginalized”  and  “particular  ethnic,  religious  or  cultural 
communities”  (Article  21.3):  The  Specific  provisions  of  the  Constitution  include: 
affirmative action programs and policies for minorities and marginalized groups (Articles 
27.6 and 56); rights of “cultural or linguistic” communities to maintain their culture and 
language (Articles 7, 44.2 and 56); protection of community land, including land that is 
“lawfully held, managed or used by specific communities as community forests, grazing 
areas or shrines,” and “ancestral lands and lands  traditionally occupied by hunter-gatherer 
communities” (Article 63); promotion of representation in Parliament of “…(d) ethnic and 
other  minorities;  and  (e)  marginalized  communities”  (Article  100);  and  an  equalization 
fund to provide basic services to marginalized areas (Article 204). 
laws,  regulations  and  policies  to  guide  and 
While important, constitutional provisions alone are not enough. They require a body of 
enabling 
facilitate  their  effective 
implementation.  In  2011,  Kenya’s  parliament  enacted  22  laws.  In  the  main,  these  laws 
are of general application and will have a bearing on the way in which the state exercises 
power  in  various  sectors,  some  of  them  of  fundamental  importance  to  indigenous 
communities. 
Other National Policies and Laws 
Kenya’s legal and regulatory  framework has inclusion of several provisions, policies and 
instruments  that  if  well  developed  and  implemented  hold  promise  for  addressing 
marginalization and inclusion of IP. These include: 
The National Land Policy (NLP): The NLP was endorsed in 2009 while the Land Act, Land 
Registration Act and National Land Commission Act were adopted in May 2012. According 
to  the  policy,  a  Community  Land  Act  has  been  enacted.  The  NLP  includes  a  key  policy 
44 
principle for restitution of land rights of minority communities as a way of restoration and 
protection  of  land  rights  which  were  violated  by  colonial  and  post-colonial  governments 
(articles  3.6.1.2  and  3.6.6  on  restitution  and  land  rights  of  minority  communities 
respectively). The policy calls on the GoK to secure community land and to “document and 
map  existing  forms  of  communal  tenure,  whether  customary  or  non-customary,  in 
consultation with the affected groups, and incorporate them into broad principles that will 
facilitate the orderly evolution of community land law” (Article 3.3.1.2, paragraph 66). 
The  Forest  Act  of  2005  and  Forest  Policy  of  2007  both  provide  some  provisions  for  the 
customary  rights  of  forest  communities  and  community  forestry:  The  Forest  Act  states, 
that “nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prevent any member of a forest community 
from using, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, such forest produce as it has 
been  the  custom  of  that  community  to  take  from  such  forest  otherwise  than  for  the 
purpose  of  sale”  (Article  22),  and  “…may  include  activities  such  as  ‘collection  of  forest 
produce for community based industries’’ (Article 47.2.e) under a license or management 
agreement. The Act defines a "forest community" as “a group of persons who: (a) have a 
traditional association with a forest for purposes of livelihood, culture or religion (Article 
3). The Forest Policy recognizes the “traditional interests of local communities customarily 
resident within or around a forest” (paragraph 4.3). 
The  National  Policy  on  Culture  and  Heritage  (2009)  aims  to  promote  and  protect  the 
cultures  and  cultural  diversity  among  Kenya’s  ethnic  communities.  This  includes  the 
protection of indigenous languages, the expression of cultural traditions, knowledge, and 
practices, traditional medicines, and community rights. 
National Policy for the Sustainable Development of Northern Kenya and other Arid Lands. 
The policy states that the Government will put in place an institutional and legal framework 
for the development of Northern Kenya and other arid lands. The policy thus calls on the 
government to establish a range  of institutions that will provide long-term continuity in 
Arid and Semi-Arid Land (ASAL) development, including a National Drought Management 
Authority and National Drought and Disaster Contingency Fund to increase responsiveness 
to drought, National Council on Nomadic Education, a Northern Kenya Education Trust, a 
Livestock Marketing Board, and a Northern Kenya Investment Fund. 
Environment and Land Court Act, No. 19 of 2011 “hears and determines disputes relating 
to environment and land, including disputes: (a) relating to environmental planning and 
protection, trade, climate issues, land use planning, title, tenure, boundaries, rates, rents, 
valuations,  mining,  minerals  and  other  natural  resources;  (b)  relating  to  compulsory 
acquisition of land; (c) relating to land administration and management; (d) relating to 
public, private and community land and contracts, chooses in action or other instruments 
granting  any  enforceable  interests  in  land;  and  (e)  any  other  dispute  relating  to 
environment and land. 
International /UN Declarations/Treaties/Agreements 
African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights (ACHPR).  The Africa region has also 
taken  important  steps  to  recognize  and  apply  the  concept  of  Indigenous  Peoples:  The 
ACHPR,  a  sub-body  of  the  African  Union,  adopted  in  2005  the  “Report  of  the  African 
Commission’s Working Group of Experts on Indigenous Populations/Communities11.” The 
report recognizes the existence of populations who self-define as Indigenous Peoples, who 
are distinctly different from other groups within a state, have a special attachment to and 
use  of  their  traditional  land,  and  who  experience  subjugation,  marginalization, 
dispossession, exclusion or discrimination because of their cultures, ways of life or modes 
of production different from those of the dominant society.  The ACHPR report concludes 
that  these  types  of  discrimination  and  marginalization  threaten  the  continuation  of 
Indigenous  Peoples’  cultures  and  ways  of  life  and  prevents  them  from  being  able  to 
genuinely participate in decisions regarding their own future and forms of development. 
45 
The  report  is  the  ACHPR’s  official  conceptualization  of,  and  framework  for,  addressing 
issues  pertaining  to  IP,  and  as  such  it  is  an  important  instrument  for  recognizing 
Indigenous  Peoples  in  Africa,  improving  their  social,  cultural,  economic  and  political 
situation,  and  for  protecting  their  human  rights.  The  report  outlines  the  following  key 
characteristics, which identify certain social groups as IP in Africa: 
  Their cultures and ways of life differ considerably from the dominant society; 
  Their cultures are under threat, in some cases to the point of extinction; 
  The  survival  of  their  particular  way  of  life  depends  on  access  and  rights  to  their 
lands and the natural resources thereon; 
  They suffer  from discrimination as they are regarded as less developed and less 
advanced than other more dominant sectors of society; 
  They often live in inaccessible regions, often geographically isolated; and 
They suffer from various forms of marginalization, both politically and socially. 
The  ACHPR  report  concludes  that  these  types  of  discrimination  and  marginalization 
threaten the  continuation of  Indigenous Peoples’ cultures and ways of life and prevents 
them from being able to genuinely participate in decisions regarding their own future and 
forms  of  development.  The  report  is  the  ACHPR’s  official  conceptualization  of,  and 
framework  for, addressing issues pertaining to  Indigenous Peoples, and as  such it is an 
important instrument for recognizing Indigenous Peoples in Africa, improving their social, 
cultural,  economic  and  political  situation,  and  for  protecting  their  human  rights.  In  line 
with  the  approach  of  the  United  Nations5,  the  ACHPR  emphasizes  the  principle  of  self-
identification, and stresses that the criteria for identifying Indigenous Peoples in Africa is 
not mainly a question of aboriginality but of the above factors of structural discrimination 
and  marginalization.  The  concept  should  be  understood  as  an  avenue  for  the  most 
marginalized to advocate their cause and not as an attempt to deny any African his/her 
rights to their African identity.  
IFAD’s Policy on Engagement with Indigenous  Peoples.  The Policy on Engagement with 
Indigenous Peoples aims to enhance IFAD’s development effectiveness in its engagement 
with indigenous peoples’ communities in rural areas.  In its engagement with indigenous 
peoples, IFAD will be guided by nine fundamental principles: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
Cultural heritage and identity as assets;  
Free, prior and informed consent; 
Community-driven development;  
Land, territories and resources; 
Indigenous peoples’ knowledge; 
Environmental issues and climate change;  
Access to markets; 
Empowerment; and  
ix.  Gender equality. 
The preparation, implementation, and monitoring of this IPPF follows this policy. 
7.5 
Project Component Screening 
The  screening  of  Project  components  will  be  a  mandatory  requirement  prior  to 
implementation to determine if Indigenous Peoples are present in the specific subproject 
area,  at  which  point  it  will  be  determined  whether  IP  are  present  in,  or  have  collective 
attachment to, the project area. In conducting this screening, the technical judgment of 
qualified  social  scientists  with  expertise  on  the  social  and  cultural  groups  in  the  project 
area will be sought. Consultations with the IP concerned, and the executing agency will be 
undertaken. 
The existing administrative structures of the County up to the village level will be used to 
inform  the  IP  about  the  proposed  project  components  and  arrange  for  consultative 
46 
meetings. Village Committee members, IP leaders will also be involved in dissemination of 
information  about  the  meetings.  Local  radio  stations  may  be  used  to  communicate  the 
meeting dates, venues, and purpose. 
To ensure inclusive participation: 
  Meetings may be conducted in indigenous languages or the national language; 
  Representatives  of  the  Indigenous  Peoples  in  collaboration  with  the  local 
administration in the sub project area will select a venue that is considered by way 
of mutual consensus as appropriate; 
  Provide adequate notice for the meetings and allow time for  consensus building, 
and the articulation by IPs of their views and preferences; and  
Ensure the time chosen for the meetings is appropriate for majority of the IPs to 
attend. 
7.5.1  Screening Methodology 
Screening  will  be  done  using  a  screening  check  list  in  a  collaborative  and  consultative 
approach.  RK-FINFA  Environmental  and  Climate  Change  Officer  (ECCO)  and  Social 
Inclusion  Officer  (SIO)  will  prepare  the  screening  forms  in  collaboration  with  the 
implementing Counties for the specific project component.  
The screening will use both IFAD’s IP policy and the GOK definition. If the results show 
that there are IP in the zone of influence of the proposed component, a Social Assessment 
(SA) will be undertaken. 
The impacts (positive or negative) on Indigenous Peoples are considered significant if the 
project:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Affects their customary rights of use and access to land and natural resources;  
Changes their socio-economic status and livelihoods;  
Affects their cultural and communal integrity;  
Affects their health, education, sources of income and social security status; and/or  
Alters or undermines the recognition of indigenous knowledge. 
7.5.2  Screening Criteria 
The  RK-FINFA  Social  Inclusion  Officer  will  visit  all  IP  settlements  near  the  selected 
subproject areas, which may be affected and influenced by the project components. Public 
meetings will be arranged in selected communities by the RK-FINFA teams with the IP and 
their  leaders  to  provide  them  information  about  the  project  and  take  their  views.  The 
consultant will be a social scientist with knowledge of IP in project areas. 
During this visit, the screening team will undertake screening of the IP with the help of 
the  community  leaders  and  local  authorities.  The  screening  will  cover  the  following 
aspects: 
  Name(s) of IP in the area; 
  Total number of IP in the area; 
  Percentage of IP to that of total area/locality population; 
  Number  and  percentage  of  IP  households  along  the  zone  of  influence  of  the 
proposed subproject; 
  Livelihood activities that the IP are engaging in and their locations in the project 
area 
  Potential impacts (positive or negative) of the project on the IP and vice versa 
  Will an IPP be required if a project component affects an IP zone? 
  Are  the  IP  willing  to  be  engaged  in  project  activities  and  to  give  consent  to  the 
project in their regions? 
If no, why? 
 
47 
7.6 
Social Assessment 
Based on screening, should IP be present in, or have collective attachment to, the project 
area, a social assessment will be undertaken to evaluate the project’s potential positive 
and adverse effects on the IP, and to examine project alternatives where adverse effects 
may  be  significant.      The  breadth,  depth,  and  type  of  analysis  required  for  the  social 
assessment will be proportional to the nature and scale of the proposed project activities’ 
potential effects on the Indigenous Peoples present.  
The social assessment will also identify if the proposed component will involve change in 
use or management of commonly held properties in the community as well as involving 
the commercial development of natural and cultural resources on lands or territories that 
IP traditionally owned, or customarily used or occupied.  
The  information  to  be  gathered  for  the  SA  should  include  (i)  a  baseline  demographic,  
socio-economic,  cultural,  and  political  profile  of  the  affected  indigenous  groups  in  the 
project  area  and  project  impact  zone;  (ii)  assessment  of  land  and  territories  that 
Indigenous  Peoples  have  traditionally  owned  or  occupied;  (iii)  assessment  of  natural 
resources on which Indigenous Peoples depend; (iv) assessment on their access to and 
opportunities they can avail of the basic and socio-economic services; (v) assessment of 
the short and long term, direct and indirect, positive and negative impacts of the project 
on each group’s social, cultural and economic status; (vi) assessing and validating which 
indigenous groups will trigger the Indigenous peoples policy principles; and (vii) assessing 
the  subsequent  approaches  and  resource  requirements  for  addressing  the  various 
concerns  and  issues  of  projects  that  affect  them.      The  information  can  be  gathered 
through meaningful consultation process.  
The  PMU’s  SIO  will  then  prepare  detailed  Terms  of  Reference  (ToR)  for  the  social 
assessment study once it is determined that IP are present in the project area.  
Further  to  this,  the  social  assessment  will  ensure 
informed 
consent/consultation with the IP during project planning and implementation. It will ensure 
that mitigation of potential adverse impacts, deriving from project activities, will be based 
on a participatory and consultative process acceptable to IFAD and the IP themselves.   
Subproject investments will comply with the following other than social screening, 
namely:  
free,  prior  and 
  Conserve and sustainably use land and other natural resources that impact on IP 
and other communities; 
  Mitigate any possible adverse impacts; 
  Be  socially  and  culturally  acceptable  to  the  IP  and  economically  feasible  Be 
institutionally feasible: Local institutionally capacity should be adequate to take up 
activities; 
  Be environmentally sustainable and avoid detrimental impacts from those activities 
that cannot be mitigated; 
  Be supported by the IP and other communities through participatory consultation; 
and 
Be  supported  by  training  and  capacity  building  if  necessary,  to  enhance  IP  and 
community development. 
7.7 
Stakeholder Engagement 
Stakeholder Identification 
All  the  interested  and  affected  stakeholders  will  be  identified  with  specific  focus  on 
Indigenous Peoples and will include an elaboration of a culturally appropriate process for 
consulting  with  the  IP  at  each  stage  of  project  preparation  and  implementation.  A 
48 
stakeholder  mapping  exercise  will  be  conducted  for  each  of  the  proposed  project 
component where there is a likelihood of IP being affected. 
Stakeholder Consultation 
Once screening has been conducted and a project component is found to be located in an 
area where IP are present, the existing administrative structures –county and sub county 
leaders and chiefs and assistant chiefs will be used to inform the IP communities about 
the  proposed  project.    County  leaders  in  collaboration  with  RK-FINFA  will  facilitate  and 
arrange for consultative meetings with members of the IP and in these meetings, there 
will be free and prior information about the proposed sub project, the proposed location, 
and potential adverse impacts of the project on the IP. 
Such consultation will include use of indigenous  languages, allowing time for consensus 
building, and selecting appropriate venues to facilitate the articulation by IP of their views 
and preferences. Representatives of the IP in collaboration with the local administration in 
the sub project area will select a venue that is considered by way of mutual consensus as 
appropriate. 
Engagement will be based on honest and open provision of information, and in a form that 
is accessible to IP. Engagement will begin at the earliest possible stage, prior to substantive 
on-the-ground  activity  implementation.  Engagement,  wherever  possible,  will  be 
undertaken  through  traditional  authorities  and  structures  within  communities  and  with 
respect for traditional decision-making structures and processes. However, recognition of 
the  limitation  these  structures  sometimes  pose  for  some  groups,  such  as  women  and 
young people will be taken into account. 
Good practice community engagement, in the context of IP and projects, will aim to ensure 
that: 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples understand their rights; 
Indigenous  Peoples  are  informed  about,  and  comprehend  the  full  range  (short, 
medium  and  long-term)  of  social  and  environmental  impacts  –  positive  and 
negative – that can result from the proposed investment; 
  Any concerns that Indigenous Peoples have about potentially negative impacts are 
understood and addressed by the RK-FINFA; 
  Traditional  knowledge  informs  the  design  and  implementation  of  mitigation 
strategies and is treated respectfully; 
  There  is  mutual  understanding  and  respect  between  the  RK-FINFA  and  the 
Indigenous Peoples as well as other stakeholders; 
 
Indigenous Peoples aspirations are considered in project planning so that people 
have  ownership  of,  and  participate  fully  in  decisions  about,  community 
development programs and initiatives; 
  The project has the broad, on-going support of the Indigenous Peoples and; 
  The  voices  of  Indigenous  Peoples  are  heard;  that  is,  engagement  processes  are 
inclusive. 
7.8 
Impact Identification  
The  assessment  of  each  project  component’s  beneficial  and  adverse  impacts  will  be 
conducted based on free, prior, and informed consultation, with the affected IP. 
In  a  participatory  process  the  determination  of  potential  adverse  impacts  will  entail  an 
analysis  of  the  relative  vulnerability  of,  and  risks  to,  the  affected  IP  given  their  distinct 
circumstances and close ties to land and natural resources, as well as their lack of access 
to  opportunities  relative  to  other  social  groups  in  the  communities,  regions,  or  national 
societies in which they live. 
49 
Another  concern  is  that  while  projects  may  consider  short-term  positive  or  negative 
impacts,  they  usually  fail  to  consider  the  long-term  impacts  that  project  interventions 
could  have  on  the  livelihood,  social  organization  and  cultural  integrity  of  IP,  such  as 
dams/water  point  improvement  projects  that  may  open  up  remote  areas  and  increase 
pressure on indigenous lands and resources. Therefore, the identification of impacts should 
consider the long-term impacts as well. 
7.9  Determination of Mitigation Measures 
The identification and evaluation, based on free, prior, and informed consultation with the 
affected IP, of measures necessary to avoid adverse effects, or if such measures are not 
feasible,  the  identification  of  measures  to  minimize,  mitigate,  or  compensate  for  such 
effects, and to ensure that the IP receive culturally appropriate benefits under the project 
will be conducted in a  participatory manner.     The above-mentioned  methods in the SA 
process will be used in determining mitigation measures. Mitigation measures may involve 
compensation as well and typical mitigation actions or compensations. 
7.10  Development of strategies for participation of Indigenous Peoples 
Participation  will  be  through  meetings  with  the  different  groups  of  Indigenous  Peoples 
primarily to ensure that: 
  The IP are aware of the project and its impacts; 
  Aware of any restrictions and negative impacts; 
  Provide support to IP participation arrangements in the project; 
  Are aware of the GRM; and 
  Provide broad community support. 
Project  component  activities  selected  should  ensure  that  the  IP  do  not:  Face  further 
physical and economic displacements from land and other natural resources traditionally 
utilized by them as source of livelihood and basis for their cultural and social system. 
Strategies for inclusion of Indigenous women and youth 
While it is important to acknowledge the role of  elders and other traditional community 
leaders, it should not automatically be assumed that those who occupy formal leadership 
positions, whether they be traditional or government appointed, represent all interests in 
the community. In particular, the RK-FINFA will need to be sensitive to those sections of 
the community who are frequently excluded from the decision-making process,  such as 
women and youth. 
During  the  Social  Assessment,  where  it  is  determined  that  traditional  decision-making 
structures exclude women and younger people, it may be necessary to obtain input from 
these groups by less direct means (for example, and where possible, via community needs 
surveys and baseline studies, or through informal discussions with small groups). 
Also,  in  instances  where  Indigenous  women  and  or  youth  are  unable  to  contribute 
meaningfully  in  consultation  meetings  due  to  cultural  requirements,  FGDs  with  women 
only or youth only to be applied. 
Overall RK-FINFA and the implementing partners will have to: 
  Confer with the IP at the outset on how they wish to be engaged; 
  Understand and respect local entry protocols as they relate to permission to enter 
a community and access traditional lands; 
  Commit  to  open  and  transparent  communication  and  engagement  from  the 
beginning and have a considered approach in place; 
  Ensure that all representatives of the RK-FINFA staff carrying out the specific sub 
project investment including third party subcontractors and agents are well briefed 
50 
on  local  customs,  history  and  legal  status,  and  understand  the  need  for  cultural 
sensitivity; 
  Regularly monitor performance in engagement and; 
Enlist the services of reputable advisers with good local knowledge. 
7.11  Combined qualitative and quantitative analysis methods 
Usually  social  assessment  (SA)  is  comprehensive  and  involves  complex  social  issues. 
quantitative analysis is preferred, such as for population structure, educational level and 
socioeconomic  indicators.  These  indicators  are  analyzed  arithmetically  and  evaluated 
objectively.  Qualitative  indicators  that  cannot  be  quantified  should  be  analyzed  and 
evaluated  through  a  combination  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis,  but  primarily 
qualitative analysis. However, in this case the impacts are expected to be minimal and the 
social assessment/analysis will be in line with the scope of impacts identified and indeed 
will focus more on how to enhance coverage to more IP. 
Comparative analysis method 
The comparative analysis method is designed to find out the social profile of a project area 
in  the  absence  of  the  project,  and  the  impacts  of  the  project  on  the  area  after  its 
completion, thereby identifying the nature and degrees of different benefits and impacts. 
Stakeholder analysis method 
Stakeholders refer to all parties directly or indirectly affected by or interested in the Project 
and  affecting  the  success  of  the  Project  directly  or  indirectly.  The  stakeholder  analysis 
method identifies different stakeholders involved in the Project and prepares a stakeholder 
table,  detailing  stakeholder  expectations,  influences,  roles  and  responsibilities  for 
successful project implementation. 
Participatory assessment 
Participatory assessment is a method that involves all stakeholders in SA. The key points 
include listening to all stakeholders’ opinions respecting all participants, showing interests 
in  their  knowledge,  speeches  and  behaviours,  and  encouraging  them  to  share  their 
knowledge and ideas.  
Through a semi-structured survey and whole-process participation, this method will make 
measures for mitigating social risks, and other programs concerning the affected persons’ 
immediate interests more operable and acceptable. 
Other methods 
A number of data analysis tools and methods may be used in undertaking SA, including a) 
socioeconomic survey; b) institutional analysis; c) social gender analysis; d) social impact 
analysis; e) poverty analysis; and f) social risk assessment. 
7.12  Conduct of the SA 
The process of gathering baseline information on demographic social, cultural, and political 
characteristics of the affected IP, the land and territories that they have traditionally owned 
or customarily used or occupied, and the natural resources on which they depend will be 
through a participatory rural appraisal mapping exercise involving the IP in the proposed 
project area.  
Mapping  the  community  resources  where  the  project  investments  are  targeted  will 
determine  the  sphere  of  influence,  how  the  vulnerable  and  marginalized  communities 
utilize the said resources so as to identify how the project can enhance utilization of these 
resources. 
51 
Regarding customary rights of IP to use of common resources, the mapping will provide 
information  on  (i)  location  and  size  of  the  area  and  condition  of  resource,  (ii)  primary 
users, including those that belong to IP that currently use or depend on these common 
resources, (iii) secondary users and the types of uses they make, (iv) the effects of these 
uses on the IP, and (vi) mitigation measures of adverse impacts if any. 
The  social  assessment  (SA)  will  be  undertaken  by  the  social  consultants  who  will  be 
recruited by the RK-FINFA as part of developing the Indigenous Peoples Plan.  The ToR for 
the work will be shared with IFAD for clearance.  The SA consultants will gather relevant 
information from separate group meetings: Discussions will focus on project component 
impacts,  positive  and  negative;  and  recommendations  for  design  of  the  project 
components.  The social consultants will be responsible for carrying out the SA, analyzing 
the SA, and for leading the development of the IPP. 
7.13  Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) 
An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is required for all projects with impacts on IP. Its level 
of  detail  and  comprehensiveness  is  commensurate  with  the  significance  of  potential 
impacts on IP. An IPP contains specific measures to ensure that the IP receive social and 
economic  benefits  that  are  culturally  appropriate,  including  measures  to  enhance  the 
capacity  of  the  project  implementing  agencies  and  other  stakeholders.  The  IPP  will  be 
prepared through a consultative process to achieve FPIC. 
The outline below will guide preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) for RK-FINFA, 
although not necessarily in the order shown. 
Executive Summary: This section concisely describes the critical facts, significant findings, 
and recommended actions. 
Description  of  the  Project:  This  section  provides  a  general  description  of  the  project; 
discusses  project  components  and  activities  that  may  bring impacts  on  IP;  and  identify 
project area. 
Social Impact Assessment:  This section: 
  Reviews the legal and institutional framework applicable to IP in project context. 
  Provides  baseline  information  on  the  demographic,  social,  cultural,  and  political 
characteristics  of  the  affected  IP  communities;  the  land  and  territories  that  they 
have traditionally owned or customarily used or occupied; and the natural resources 
on which they depend. 
Identifies  key  project  stakeholders  and  elaborate  a  culturally  appropriate  and 
gender-sensitive  process  for  meaningful  consultation  with  IP  at  each  stage  of 
project preparation and implementation, taking the review and baseline information 
into account. 
 
  Assesses, based on meaningful consultation   with   the   affected IP communities, 
and  the  potential  adverse  and  positive  effects  of    the  project.  Critical  to  the 
determination of  potential  adverse  impacts is a gender-sensitive analysis of the 
relative  vulnerability  of,  and  risks  to,  the  affected  IP  communities  given  their 
particular  circumstances  and  close  ties  to  land  and  natural  resources,  as  well  as 
their  lack  of  access  to  opportunities  relative  to  those  available  to  other    social 
groups in the communities, regions, or national societies in which they live. 
Includes a gender-sensitive assessment of the affected IP’s perceptions about the 
project and its impact on their social, economic, and cultural status. 
Identifies and recommends, based on meaningful consultation with the affected IP  
communities,    the    measures    necessary    to    avoid  adverse  effects  or,  if  such 
measures  are  not  possible,  identifies  measures  to  minimize,  mitigate,  and/or 
 
 
52 
compensate  for  such  effects  and  to  ensure  that  IP  receive  culturally  appropriate 
benefits under the project. 
Information Disclosure, Consultation and Participation: This section: 
  Describes  the  information  disclosure,  consultation  and  participation  process  with 
the affected IP communities that can be carried out during project preparation; 
  Summarizes  their  comments  on  the  results  of  the  social impact  assessment  and 
identifies concerns raised during consultation and how these have been addressed 
in project design; 
In the case of project activities requiring broad community support, documents the 
process  and  outcome  of  consultations  with  affected  IP  communities  and  any 
agreement resulting from such consultations for the project activities and safeguard 
measures addressing the impacts of such activities; 
 
  Describes  consultation  and  participation  mechanisms  to  be  used  during 
implementation to ensure IP participation  during implementation; and 
  Confirms disclosure of the draft and final to the affected IP communities. 
Beneficial Measures: This section specifies the measures to ensure that IP receive social 
and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate, and gender responsive. 
Mitigative Measures: This section specifies the measures to avoid adverse impacts on IP; 
and where the avoidance is impossible, specifies the measures to minimize, mitigate and 
compensate for identified unavoidable adverse impacts for each affected IP group. 
Capacity  Building:  This  section  provides  measures  to  strengthen  the  social,  legal,  and 
technical  capabilities  of  (a)  government  institutions  to  address  IP  issues  in  the  project 
area; and (b) IP organizations in the project area to enable them to represent the affected 
IP more effectively. 
Grievance  Redress  Mechanism:  This  section  describes  the  procedures  to  redress 
grievances by affected IP communities. It also explains how the procedures are accessible 
to IP and culturally appropriate and gender sensitive. 
Monitoring,  Reporting  and  Evaluation:  This  section  describes  the  mechanisms  and 
benchmarks appropriate to the project for monitoring and evaluating the implementation 
of the IPP. It also specifies arrangements for participation of affected IP in the preparation 
and validation of monitoring, and evaluation reports. 
Institutional  Arrangements:  This 
institutional  arrangement 
responsibilities and mechanisms for carrying out the various measures of the IPP. It also 
describes the process of including relevant local organizations and/or NGOs in carrying out 
the measures of the IPP. 
section  describes 
Budget and Financing: This section provides an itemized budget for all activities described 
in the IPP. 
7.14  Grievance Redress Mechanism for IP 
7.14.1  Overview 
RK-FINFA  will  establish  a  mechanism  to  receive  and  facilitate  resolution  of  affected  IP 
concerns, complaints, and grievances about the project’s safeguards performance at each 
project component having IP impacts.  
53 
The  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  (GRM)  will be  specific  to  addressing  the  concerns  of 
the IP. The grievance redress mechanism should be designed with the objective of solving 
disputes at the earliest possible time and at the lowest levels where the IP reside for quick 
resolution. The traditional dispute resolution structures used by IP will be used as the first 
step in resolving grievances. 
The IP will be provided with a variety of options for communicating issues and concerns, 
including  in  writing,  orally,  by  telephone,  over  the  internet  or  through  more  informal 
methods as part of the grievance redress mechanism.  
In the case of marginalized groups (such as women and young people), a more proactive 
approach  may  be  needed  to  ensure  that  their  concerns  have  been  identified  and 
articulated. This will be done, for example, by providing for an independent person to meet 
periodically  with  such  groups  and  to  act  as  an  intermediary.    Where  a  third-party 
mechanism is part of the procedural approach to handling complaints, one option will be 
to include women or youth as representatives on the body that deals with grievances. It 
should  be  made  clear  that  access  to  the  mechanism  is  without  prejudice  to  the 
complainant’s right to legal recourse.  
Prior  to  the  approval  of  individual  IPPs,  the  affected  IP  will  have  been  informed  of  the 
process for expressing dissatisfaction and seeking redress. The grievance procedure will 
be  simple  and  administered  as  far  as  possible  at  the  local  levels  to  facilitate  access, 
flexibility and ensure transparency. 
Many  of  the  factors  that  may  give  rise  to  conflict  between  IP  and  proposed  project 
investments can be a source of conflict with non-IP as well. These include, for example: 
  Establishing a project component in the absence of broad community support; 
 
 
 
  Broken promises and unmet expectations of benefits; 
  Failing  to  generate  opportunities  for  employment,  training,  supply  or  community 
Inadequate engagement or decision-making processes; 
Inadequate or inequitable compensation for land (if applicable); 
Inequitable distribution of benefits; 
development; 
  Environmental degradation 
  Disruption to amenities and lifestyle; 
  Loss of livelihood; 
  Violation of human rights and; 
  Social dislocation. 
In addition, however, there are some contextual factors that have salience for Indigenous 
Peoples  and  their  relations  with  project  components.    For  example,  a  lack  of  respect 
(perceived or actual) for indigenous customary rights or culture, history and spirituality, is 
likely to trigger a strong reaction.  
Similarly, issues around access to and control of land and the recognition of sovereignty 
are  very important for  many  IP and can lead to  serious  conflict if they are not handled 
sensitively and with due respect for the rights of affected groups. 
Grievances will be actively managed and tracked to ensure that appropriate resolution and 
actions are taken. A clear time schedule will be defined for resolving grievances, ensuring 
that they are addressed in an appropriate and timely manner, with corrective actions being 
implemented  if  appropriate  and  the  complainant  being  informed  of  the  outcome.  The 
grievance  procedure  will  be  simple  and  will  be  administered  as  far  as  possible,  at  the 
subproject level by the relevant institutions and partners. 
The grievance procedure does not replace existing legal processes. Based on consensus, 
the  procedures  will  seek  to  resolve  issues  quickly  in  order  to  expedite  the  receipt  of 
54 
entitlements,  without  resorting  to  expensive  and  time-consuming  legal  actions.  If  the 
grievance procedure fails to provide a result, complainants can still seek legal redress. 
7.14.2  Grievance Redress Process for the IPP 
The  IPP  will  establish  a  mechanism  to  receive  and  facilitate  resolution  of  affected  IP’ 
concerns, complaints, and grievances about the project’s safeguards performance at each 
component level having IP impacts, with assistance from the RK-FINFA. 
All sections of the community where a project component is identified, including those with 
low levels of literacy, should be able to access the grievances mechanism easily. The RK-
FINFA  should  facilitate  access  by  maintaining  and  publicizing  multiple  access  points  to 
complaint mechanisms, such as at the project site and in key locations within communities, 
including remote communities. 
The  procedure  for  grievance  redress  will  be  incorporated  in  the  project  information 
pamphlet to be distributed prior to implementation, and FPIC on it acquired. Participatory 
consultation  with  affected  households  will  be  undertaken  during  project  planning  and 
implementation stages. 
Establishment of Grievance Redress Committee 
A Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) will be established at the project area once it has 
been determined that IP are present in an area and that an IPP is needed. The composition 
of  the  Committees  will  include  representatives  of  the  IP,  women,  youth,  PWDs,  local 
NGOs/CBOs,  and  local administration.  The  GRCs  are  to  be  formed  and  activated  during 
the  IPPs  implementation  process  to  allow  IP  enough  time  to  lodge  complaints  and 
safeguard their recognized interests. Assistance to IP will be given to document and record 
the complaint, and if necessary, provide advocate services to address the grievances. As 
is  normal  practice  under  customary  law,  attempts  will  be  made  to  ensure  that  the 
traditional  leaders  via  the  GRC  solve  all  disputes  in  communities  after  a  thorough 
investigation of the facts. The traditional dispute resolution structures existing for each of 
the IP will be used as the first step in resolving grievances. 
Grievance Log Documentation and Recording 
Documentation  of  complaints  and  grievances  is  important,  including  those  that  are 
communicated  informally  and  orally.  These  should  be  logged,  assessed,  assigned  to  an 
individual for management, tracked and closed out or “signed off” when resolved, ideally 
with  the  complainant(s)  being  consulted,  where  appropriate,  and  informed  of  the 
resolution.  Records  provide  a  way  of  understanding  patterns  and  trends  in  complaints, 
disputes  and  grievances  over  time.  While  transparency  should  be  maintained  –  for 
example,  through  regular  reports  on  issues  raised  and  rates  of  resolution  –  provision 
should also be made for confidentiality of information or anonymity of the complainant(s) 
whenever necessary. 
A grievance log will be established by the RK-FINFA and executing partner agencies and 
copies of the records kept with all the relevant authorities at the County, Sub County and 
Village level and will be used in monitoring of complaints and grievances. 
In each sub project investment, the RK-FINFA Community Liaison Officer, will ensure that 
each  complaint  has  an  individual  reference  number,  and  is  appropriately  tracked  and 
recorded actions are completed. The log also contains a record of the person responsible 
for an individual complaint, and records dates for the following events: 
  Date the complaint was reported; 
  Date the grievance log was uploaded onto the project database; 
55 
  Date  information  on  proposed  corrective  action  sent  to  complainant  (if 
appropriate); 
  The date the complaint was closed out; and  
  Date response was sent to complainant. 
Responding to Complaints 
Once parties agree on a path forward – such as an apology, or an adjustment to operations 
–  an  action  plan  should  be  formalized  and  implemented.  Depending  on  the  issue, 
responses may vary from a single task to a program of work that involves different parts 
of the operation. Effective responses will also include engagement with parties involved to 
ensure that the response continues to be appropriate and understood. Communities should 
also be advised of the closeout of the issue and what has been done to achieve it. This 
feedback  provides  an  opportunity  for  the  PIU  to  demonstrate  that  it  has  addressed  the 
issue as well as confirming that the community considers the response satisfactory and 
the matter closed. 
Monitoring Complaints 
It is important to collect data on community interactions  – from low-level concerns and 
complaints  to  ongoing  disputes  and  higher-order  grievances  –  so  that  patterns  can  be 
identified, and project management alerted to high-risk issues. Effective monitoring may 
also help to prevent the escalation of lower-level disputes into more serious conflicts. 
Information related to monitoring of the IPPs will be gathered through various channels, 
such as formal review, evaluation and analysis or through day-to-day interaction with IP. 
Monitoring will help determine the effectiveness of processes for responding to community 
concerns; for example, by tracking complaint resolution rates over time. This information 
can  then  be  used  to  refine  the  system  and  improve  the  outcomes  being  achieved.  The 
outcomes of monitoring should be reported formally to the community on a regular basis, 
in addition to being used for internal management purposes.  
The IP/Project Community Liaison Officer for each project component will be responsible 
for: 
  Providing reports detailing the number and status of complaints; 
  Any outstanding issues to be addressed; and 
  Monthly reports, including analysis of the type of complaints, levels of complaints, 
and actions to reduce complaints. 
7.14.3  Use of Alternative Dispute Resettlement Mechanisms 
The Environment and Land Court Act provides for dispute resolution through the Land and 
Environment  Court.    However,  as  is  normal  practice  under  customary  law,  traditional 
leaders play a leading role in solving disputes in communities through investigation of the 
facts  using  the  services  of  local  officials.    The  traditional  dispute  resolution  structures 
existing for each of the IP will be used as the first step in  resolving  grievances.  Those 
seeking redress and wishing to state grievances would do so by notifying their traditional 
leader of the IP or the appropriate administrative authority, who will in turn inform and 
consult with the RK-FINFA. 
Further Redress-Kenya Courts of Law.  All the grievances that will not be resolved by the 
GRC or which the IP are dissatisfied with in terms of  resolution will be channeled to the 
existing structures in Kenya for handling grievances which is the Kenyan Courts of Law as 
the last resort. 
56 
7.14.4  IFAD Complaints Procedure 
A complaint relating to non-compliance with IFAD’s Social and Environmental Policies and 
mandatory aspects of its SECAP can be submitted in any of the following ways: 
i.  Download the complaints form (Word) 
Send an email to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org 
However, this is only encouraged if the complainant has already brought the matter to the 
attention of the government or non-governmental organisation responsible for planning or 
executing the project or programme (the Lead Agency), or to any governmental body with 
the responsibility for  overseeing the Lead Agency without adequate  resolution, or if the 
complainants  feel  they  might  be  subject  to  retaliation  if  they  went  to  the  Lead  Agency 
directly. 
7.15  Implementation of the IPPF 
The IPPF will be implemented in three phases: 
  County  and  IP  sites  disclosure  of  the  IPPF:  This  will  entail  sharing  the  IPPF 
details through county forums and specific IP sites. During this disclosure forums 
and meetings additional comments and views will be gathered and included in the 
design process as well as ensuring broad  support of the RK-FINFA by the county 
government and IP.  
  Development of standardized Capacity Development Manuals. The manuals 
will  be  developed  to  include  the  consultation  process;  Participatory  Impact 
Monitoring, conflict redress process and grievance redress mechanism. 
  Capacity  Development  and  Coaching  of  Relevant  Stakeholders:  Capacity 
development  and  coaching  activities  will  entail  training  session  for  various 
stakeholders such as RK-FINFA, County officials, IP NGOs, CBOs etc. In addition, 
during the IPPF implementation coaching sessions will be mounted on the project 
activities to ensure any negative impact on the IP are mitigated and/or avoided and 
that they share benefits that accrue from the RK-FINFA. 
7.16  Disclosure Arrangements 
This  IPPF  and  project  component  IPPs  will  be  made  available  to  the  affected  IP  in  an 
appropriate form, manner, and language. 
Once IFAD accepts the documents as providing an adequate basis for project appraisal, it 
will  make  them  available  to  the  public  in  accordance  with  its  policy  on  disclosure  of 
information,  and  the  GOK  will  also  make  the  documents  available  to  the  affected 
communities in the same manner. 
Each project component IPP will be disclosed to the affected IP. This will be done through 
public  consultation  and  made  available  as  brochures,  leaflets,  or  booklets,  using  local 
languages. Summary of the IPP will be made available in hard copies and in local language 
at:  Offices  of  the  NT&P;  Sub  County  or  County  Office;  and  any  other  local  level  public 
offices.    Electronic  versions  of  the  framework  as  well  as  the  IPPs  will  be  placed  on  the 
official website of the NT&P. 
7.17  Specific Capacity-Building for IP 
As  the  target  groups  are  consulted  and  awareness  of  the  social  and  economic  inclusion 
principle  of  the  project  is  widely  shared,  IP  will  be  invited  to  participate  in  training  and 
57 
capacity building sessions. The IP may have specific capacity building needs, and dedicated 
skills training funded through potentially dedicated funding. Youth from the IP like in other 
communities may need separate training programs, tailored to their needs and lifestyle. 
Such trainings may be proposed during the FPIC. RK-FINFA will develop a training program 
targeting relevant project actors at the national, county, sub-county and community levels 
with each target with relevant training module and knowledge, skills and practice areas. 
The targeted audience will include the IP, the Grievance Redress Committees, CSOs, IPOs, 
NGOs, FBOs among others. 
Terms of Reference and the selection process for facilitators and trainers will ensure that 
candidates who can deliver training modules in an inclusive way to be hired. Also, language 
and tools to be used in documents and training should factor in potential barriers these 
media  can  pose  to  the  participation  of  certain  excluded  groups  in  capacity  building 
measures. The county government should explore the possibility and ensure the language 
and modality of training provision would not exclude certain groups of members. 
7.18  Roles and Responsibilities 
RK-FINFA 
The ECCO and SIO will remain responsible for: 
  Screening for project components affecting Indigenous Peoples 
  Review project proposals, ensuring that they adequately apply IFAD’s Indigenous 
Peoples Policy; 
  Assess  the  adequacy  of  the  assessment  of  project  impacts  and  the  proposed 
measures to address issues pertaining to affected indigenous communities. When 
doing so project activities, impacts and social risks, circumstances of the affected 
indigenous  communities,  and  the  capacity  of  the  applicant  to  implement  the 
measures should be assessed.  
  Assess the adequacy of the consultation/FPIC process and the affected indigenous 
communities’  broad  support  to  the  project—Monitor  project  implementation,  and 
include  constraints  and  lessons  learned  concerning  IP  and  the  application  of  this 
IPPF in its progress and monitoring reports; it should be assured that affected IP 
are included in monitoring and evaluation exercises. 
Non-Governmental Organizations 
The NGOs present and active in the area will be used during the social assessment studies 
as well as during the monitoring and evaluation of each project component. The formation 
of  Grievance  Redress  Committees  for  each  project  component  will  also  include 
representation by NGOs. 
IFAD 
IFAD will receive all the IPPs prepared and review and provide a No Objection or otherwise 
prior to project component implementation. During implementation, IFAD will also conduct 
field monitoring and evaluation.  
7.19  Budget 
Implementation costs for IPPs will be financed by RK-FINFA. At this stage, it is not possible 
to estimate the exact number of IP who may be affected under RK-FINFA. It is therefore 
not possible to provide a budget for the total cost of IPP that may be associated with RK-
58 
FINFA implementation. However, after the conclusion of the site-specific socio-economic 
study, a detailed and accurate budget for each IPP will be prepared. 
The following is a list of items to budget for in an IPP: 
  Preparation of IPP 
  Sensitization/Awareness  creation  for  stakeholders  at  National,  County  and 
investment /community levels 
  Capacity building (technical staff, GRCs, and IP) 
  Disclosure costs for IPPs 
  Mitigation measures: Targeted support to the IP 
  Stakeholders trainings/ consultation forums on IPPF 
  Monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of IPP 
  Annual IPPs audit 
  Establish/Operationalize GRM Committees. 
7.20  Monitoring and Evaluation 
7.20.1  Mechanisms for monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
All  project  results  indicators  will  be  disaggregated  by  gender  to  monitor  women’s 
participation  in  the  project  interventions.  The  project  will  also  enhance  inclusion  of 
vulnerable female-headed households and child-headed households living in the targeted 
counties or those from marginalized communities of Kenya. 
The implementation of IPPs will be monitored. The PMU will establish a monitoring system 
involving the project staff at national and county level, as well as community groups of IP 
to ensure effective implementation of IPP. A set of monitoring indicators will be determined 
during  IPP  implementation  and  will  be  guided  by  the  indicators  contained  in  this  IPPF 
document. The project support consultants will carry out monitoring, as will the IFAD social 
staff.  Appropriate  monitoring  formats  will  be  prepared  for  monitoring  and  reporting 
requirements. 
For  any  project  component  found  to  have  significant  adverse  impacts  on  IP,  external 
experts or NGOs will be engaged to verify monitoring information. 
Table 7-2 Monitoring and Evaluation Indicators for IPPF 
Issues 
Indicator 
Responsibility 
Data Sources 
Accessibility of project 
benefits to IP 
Capacity Building for 
implementation of 
IPPF 
Number of IP households 
benefitting from project 
interventions 
Number of individuals & 
institutions trained 
IP Orientation and 
Mobilization 
Number of IP meetings; 
Number of IP sensitized 
Consultations with IP 
Number/Attendance reports 
of IP 
Mapping 
community resources 
critical to IP 
of 
Level of IP participation 
Reports verified and 
accepted by IP 
RK-FINFA 
Reports 
RK-FINFA 
Training reports 
RK-FINFA, IP 
Organizations/Elder
s 
RK-FINFA, IP 
Organizations/Elder
s 
RK-FINFA, IP 
Organizations/Elder
s 
Reconnaissance 
survey reports  
Community 
meeting reports 
Reports 
Baseline survey 
reports 
Community transect 
reports 
59 
Issues 
Development of 
strategies 
participation of IP and 
mitigation measures 
for 
Indicator 
Number 
passed 
screening  
Responsibility 
Data Sources 
of projects 
by social 
RK-FINFA, IP 
Organizations/Elder
s 
KEMP/PIU  
Reports 
Capacity Building 
Equitable representation 
of IPS in decision making 
organs 
Participatory M&E with 
IPS 
Number of sub projects 
implemented 
Types of training 
Number of Trainings  
Attendance by IP 
Number of meetings 
attended by IP 
representatives  
Number and types of IP 
issues articulated 
Internal M&E  
External M&E 
Implementing 
agencies reports 
Training reports 
IPSO reports 
RK-FINFA, IP 
Organizations/Elder
s 
RK-FINFA, IP 
Organizations/Elder
s 
RK-FINFA, IP 
Organizations/Elder
s 
7.20.2  Monitoring and Evaluation Benchmarks 
Typical key indicators and topics for monitoring and evaluation of IPPs are: 
  Process of consultation/FPIC activities; 
  Economic/Nutrition status of IPPs in comparison with pre-project condition 
  Status of IP as identified in the SA; 
  Any disadvantaged condition to IP that was not anticipated during the preparation 
of IPPs, that required corrective actions; and 
  Grievance redress issues.  
7.21  Reporting 
Annual progress reports will be prepared by the PMU, where the ECCO and SIO provide 
input,  supported  by  the  environmental  and  social  officers  in  the  project  counties  and 
community levels. These reports will be submitted to IFAD. 
60 
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
1/12
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Substantial
Moderate
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
High
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Stakeholders
2/12
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
Risk(s): The GoK has reiterated its support to sound macroeconomic policies, as
well as to agricultural and rural policies based on increased private-sector focus
and much increased emphasis on smallholder participation in key agricultural value
chains. Similarly, as discussed in SECAP in detail, the policy framework for CC and
environmental policies as well as appropriate gender and youth policies is largely
in place. However, the rapidly increased public debt, which has accelerated due to
COVID-19, can be seen as a major risk for political commitment to implement the
above policies in practice. The increased public debt, combined with the upcoming
2022 general elections, may impact the GoK ability to adhere to commitments on
counterpart funding. This can endanger the both the approval and subsequent
implementation of loan-based development projects, including the IFAD-supported
ones.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: During design, the GoK has repeated its full commitment to RK-FINFA,
including to its relatively high financing share of the project costs. The Government
sees RK-FINFA as an integral part of both the short-term COVID-19 recovery
efforts in rural areas and as a long-term instrument to channel increased volumes
of finance from FIs to agricultural and rural activities. In also sees the GFF,
established with RK-FINFA support, as one of the entry points for PFIs to finance
and for farmers to engage in climate smart production activities. For the guarantee
operations, the initial GoK funding would come from the existing PROFIT reflows,
and the framework for the future pipeline of state budget funds for GoK
contributions has already been agreed on.
Governance
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): Governance and transparency issues persist, as shown in 2019 Corruption
Perceptions Index for Kenya, resulting in high Governance Risk and corruption-
related risk rating. Lengthy Government processes to establish Project
Management Units and conduct procurement have delayed start-up of projects.
Despite improved systems, problems in effective monitoring and reporting by GoK
persist.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: For RK-FINFA, the main responsibility for almost all the components
has been contracted to intermediaries, with tested implementation guidelines and
methods, supported by systematic development of eligibility rules and procedures
for RK-FINFA project activities. The intermediaries are also responsible for largest
part of small scale procurements to avoid obstacles potentially emerging from GoK
procurement and management processes.
Macroeconomic
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
3/12
Risk(s): Over the past 10 years, Kenya economy has grown rapidly. The average
GDP growth in 2010 – 2019 was 5.85 per cent, supported especially by a friendly
business climate, strong public infrastructure spending and regional trade.
However, maintaining the achieved economic growth levels during RK-FINFA
period will be a challenge. The public debt has rapidly increased and currently
surpasses the standard risk levels. Due to COVID-19 and environmental shocks,
the economy contracted by 1.0 per cent in 2020. Recovery expected to take longer
than initially assumed, affecting practically the whole RK-FINFA period.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The GoK economic measures for recovery include tax reliefs, cash-
transfers, suspension of loan default penalties, and bank debt restructuring. RK-
FINFA contributes to the GoK efforts to implement counter-cyclical, pro-growth
measures especially for the rural and agriculture sector. The longer-term impact of
RK-FINFA support through R-CGS and GFF on growth and rural climate smart
diversification can be significant, especially if other external financiers can be
attracted to support these key RF-FINFA key investment instruments.
Fragility and Security
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): past trends indicate that Kenya is vulnerable to electoral violence and
political and ethnic rivalry, as has been experienced in the aftermath of the 2007
elections and to a much lesser extent in 2013 and 2017. It is possible that the
elections scheduled in 2022 could result in violence, given the current heightened
political tensions in the country. Other factors contributing to the country’s fragility
include regular banditry and ethnic clashes in some ASAL counties, and terrorist
attacks particularly in northern border areas.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: Issues of electoral and terrorism-related violence have been addressed
through: (i) the 2010 Constitution which established a two-tier government at
national and county levels, (ii) continuous sensitisation of the population in conflict
prone counties to the need to cooperate with the authorities and to participate in the
prevention of attacks; (iii) heightened border and internal security against terrorism;
and (v) stronger enacted laws that give more powers and autonomy to the anti-
corruption agency. While taking precautions for Kenya’s security issues, RK-FINFA
will avoid focusing its activities in areas where there are high levels of insecurity
due to tribal clashes and terrorism.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): Kenya’s agricultural and financial sector policies are generally well aligned
with IFAD’s core policies. However, while a full police alignment between GoK and
IFAD can be agreed on, the Government has adopted a more cautious approach in
negotiating external debt. This has often resulted in long delays in signing of
financing agreements with international financiers, which adversely affects the co-
operation between GoK and international financiers, including IFAD.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: RK-FINFA fully follows the key GoK policies on rural transformation
and financial sector development. It is also seen as a part of the GoK recovery
programme. The financial arrangements for the projects are arranged in a manner
(large private sector leverage, the use of PROFIT reflows) that supports a smoother
co-operation with Government that has been the case in some earlier IFAD-
supported projects.
Policy Development and Implementation
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Risk(s): As indicated above, the policy framework in relatively well developed and
supportive for agricultural and inclusive financial sector development in Kenya. In
reality, the implementation of many relevant policies suffers from lack of resources
and capacities in the GoK structures to develop action plans and in practice
implement these policies to diversify and modernize the rural sector.
4/12
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The key RK-FINFA investment components, R-CGF and GLL, and the
related capacity building support directly support the implementation of key rural
policies of the GoK. Importantly, potentially valuable support to policy development
and implementation will be provided through Sub-component 3.1, which is solely
geared to policy support in the observed gaps in the policy framework for the RK-
FINFA support operations.
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): Given that end line investments are targeted at smallholders and rural
enterprises, land degradation, water availability etc. may adversely affect these
investments.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: Environment and Social Management Systems (ESMS) will be
established or strengthened in the PFIs. Capacity building of the beneficiaries and
advisory services of the PFIs will inform the selection of environmentally friendly
technologies and resources provided for these investments. The Environment and
Social and Social management Framework (ESMF) will articulate measures to
manage risks.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): Climate shocks such as droughts and floods as well as incidence of pests
and diseases will impact the end line investments, particularly those in the
agricultural sector, by the smallholders and micro-enterprises. Climate change
impacts can also affect loan repayments and thus the portfolio of the PFIs. 
The marginalization of women and youth beneficiaries, and persons with
disabilities, who are more vulnerable to climate change because they face
discrimination and inequalities in accessing land and water, markets, technologies,
and credit.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: Climate change risk management will be incorporated in the ESMS of
the PFIs. Training and advisory services will be provided for the target beneficiaries
to enhance their resilience and financial resources provided for green investments.
The products under the green financing will promote climate resilience. 
RK-FINFA targeting approach is that women comprise 50% of beneficiaries, youth
comprise 30% and a minimum of 5% of beneficiaries will be from vulnerable groups
(marginalized groups including persons with disabilities and persons with HIV).
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
5/12
Risk(s): The relevance risk for the designed project instruments includes: (i)
targeted potential PFIs will not agree with the proposed RK-FINFA guarantee
scheme terms and conditions, (ii) the PFIs will continue business as usual
regardless the guarantees provided, (iii) the TSIS service providers have limited
skills to offer meaningful support to the PFIs and MSMEs and smallholders, and (iv)
PFIs, MSMEs and rural households have less than anticipated demand for the
green investment products.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The project instruments of RK-FINFA have been assessed as highly
relevant for Kenya, through comprehensive stakeholder consultations. The
mitigations include: (i) the rural credit guarantee scheme terms and conditions
have been discussed and vetted with potential PFIs; seven banks have already
signed the overall guarantee framework, (ii) the eligibility criteria for investments
under guarantee protection, as well as the respective monitoring system, have
been detailed, (iii) the TSIS service providers will be selected from private markets
and the identification is done jointly with PFIs, (iv) demand for green investment
products has been confirmed during the project design mission and through a
background study, and furthermore, during the first two project years while building
green investment pipeline the PFIs are allowed to utilize 50% of GFF resources to
normal rural and agricultural investment targets.
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The proposed project structure is based on experiences and lessons learned from
similar projects in Kenya and the ESA region. Based on experiences from these
projects, key inherent risks include: (i) processes and approvals of RK-FINFA
investment instruments are delayed, which results in loss of momentum by PFIs,
(ii) the conditions provided to the PFIs are not attractive and results in loss of
momentum by PFIs, (iii) reluctance by smallholders and agribusiness
entrepreneurs to borrow through the supported channels, (iv) non-repayment risk in
the lending provided to smallholders and agribusinesses, and (v) elite capture of
project resources.
Mitigations:
Key mitigations include: (i) RK-FINFA instruments and implementation mechanism
built on the institutional capacity developed during PROFIT, which together with
intensive IFAD start up support will minimize delays, (ii) seven financial institutions
have agreed to the conditions provided by the guarantee scheme and its
soundness was vetted during the design mission consultations, (iii) demand
mapping has been conducted by the Financial Sector Deepening Kenya, WB, and
by the RK-FINFA design mission, and demand for lending through the supported
channels has been confirmed, (iv) the TSIS will ensure that all IFAD resources will
target productive investments through sustainable and suitable lending products,
which will reduce NPLs; the grass root PFIs making loans to end-beneficiaries carry
the full GFF non-repayment risk; the guarantee scheme non-repayment risk is
expected to reduce the guarantee pool up to 2% annually, and (v) the project will
provide technical services to the participating FIs to enable them to develop :
financial products suitable for RK-FINFA target groups in the agriculture value
chains and to monitor the investments, and provide BDS and financial literacy
services to RK-FINFA target groups to ensure they have sufficient capacity to
access the developed financial services.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Substantial
High
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
Risk(s): IFAD-supported projects in Kenya have suffered from less than optimal
GoK performance in project implementation. Due to the Government’s debt
situation and decreased fiscal space, GoK continues to cut back on spending, often
putting ceilings on AWPBs of projects and potentially further lowering the
implementation capacities in government institutions.
6/12
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The whole RK-FINFA implementation approach is based on
engagement of intermediaries in the implementation of key investment
components. These include an operational CGF unit in NT, private financial
institutions as well as consultancy companies and experienced local and
international NGOs. With ring-fenced financing, these arrangements aim to
significantly improve the changes of successful and cost-efficient implementation of
RK-FINFA.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): IFAD experience has shown that most FIs are weakly motivated to invest
time or money to monitor the social aspects of project implementation progress,
outputs, and outcomes. The lack of commitment to monitoring by key implementing
partners could risk the appropriate measurement of the project’s performance and
its successes or failures.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: Effective monitoring and accurate reporting will be critical in the R-CGS
and GFF schemes, under which the issuing of the client loans is carried out by the
selected PFIs. The improvement of the MIS systems of the PFIs is a core target
function of Component 1 technical support activities. Most of the required
performance reporting data will be automatically available from the IT-based
accounting/management information systems of the CBK or SASRA-regulated
PFIs. This data will be electronically submitted by the PFIs to the NT and GFF
Host, which will aggregate it to be able to periodically present the whole scheme
level data. The estimation of the development impact of the R-CGS and GFF
interventions on supported projects, including the smallholder households, will be
surveyed by the RK-FINFA through specific, sample-based baseline studies and
then through repeat studies after the supported projects/investments are fully
implemented.
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
While the PMU shall be made up of relevantly qualified personnel with appropriate
expertise in their chosen fields, there may be lack of PMU staff familiarity with IFAD
procedures.
Mitigations:
IFAD FMD will provide capacity building training to the Finance Staff who will
selected competitively. The capacity building will include familiarization with IFAD
procedures on financial reporting, expenditures categorizations across
components, categories and alignment with Government chart of accounting,
financial reporting timelines and other financial management related to the project .
Project Budgeting
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
7/12
There may be a risk that annual work plans and budgets are not prepared or
revised on a timely basis, and not executed in a coherent manner, resulting in
funds not being available when needed, ineligible costs and reallocation of project
funds and slow implementation progress. There is also a risk that the Participating
Financial Institutions (PFIs) do not budget and contribute their co-financing of TSIS
costs which are designed at a minimum of 20% for the commercial banks, 15% for
the MFBs and 10% for SACCOs. This may affect the execution of TSIS activities.
Mitigations:
The Financial Controller of the PMU will liaise with other PMU staff led by Project
Coordinator and with close coordination with TSIS Coordinator to ensure timely
preparation budget. The expected contributions from participating financial
institutions will be embedded in MoU with the PFIs and monitored regularly by TSIS
Coordinator to ensure they are well met and do not impact on project execution.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There is a risk of commingling of funds at the entity which will be provided with
advances for implementation of project activities. These includes National Treasury
which will receive advances from IFAD and TSIS coordinator(s) for handling TSIS
activities which will be agreed with them. Also, in addition to IFAD financing, there
are finances expected estimated at USD 29 million and USD 105.75 million from
GoK and PFIs respectively. There is a risk of other financiers not meeting their
committed amounts.
Mitigations:
To mitigate on risks of commingled funds and ease of accounting of any advance
provided, funds will be held in Project dedicated accounts for which there will be
monthly bank accounts reconciliation and financial reports. There will be one
designated account held by the National Treasury at the Central Bank of Kenya
(CBK) that would receive funds from IFAD which will have a corresponding
dedicated project operational account in Kenya Shillings (Kshs). All partnering
institutions that will receive funds from the PMU will sub-project accounts for
segregating the funds received. The sub-project account will be denominated in
local currency (KES) and will be opened in financial institutions acceptable to IFAD.
There will be monthly financial reports to PMU for monitoring operations of sub-
accounts and consolidation. All partnering institutions will sign MoU with
Government of Kenya clearly highlighting the requirements for a separate bank
account and financial reporting requirements. 
In order to mitigate on risk of other financiers not meeting their contributions, IFAD
will continue to build strong relations with NT and partners and also monitor the
flow of funds from NT to the Project to assess any deviations from the planned
contribution.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There may be a risk that appropriate controls over Project funds are not in place,
leading to the inefficient or inappropriate use of project resources.
Mitigations:
Internal controls have been instituted in the whole framework of financial and
administrative procedures. The identified controls range from; proper record
keeping and posting, authorization of accounting, procurement and administrative
documents, balancing and checking, physical security of assets, double signing
(approval) arrangements, to financial reporting and monitoring. These are
prescribed in PFM act and further detailed in the project implementation manual for
the project. There will be internal audit function, as noted below, to check overall
compliance to internal controls and provide support towards improving systems,
procedures and processes.
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Risk:
8/12
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There is a risk of delays in implementation of accounting system and full adoption
of the same in accounting and generation of financial reports of the projects in line
with IFAD requirements. There is a risks of delays in submission of R-CGS and
GFF schemes financial performance reports as they will be provided by
departments/ entities outside the PMU. Data for R-CGS financial performance will
be obtained from the MSME-CGS management unit in the NT while the GFF
financial performance reports will be aggregated by the selected GFF host
institution and submitted to the NT/PMU periodically.
Mitigations:
To mitigate on this, acquisition of the accounting system has proposed as a
disbursements condition. The selection of project finance staff will also consider the
agility to use computerized systems. 
To mitigate on the risks of delayed reporting for R-CGS and GFF schemes financial
performance, the National Treasury/RK-FINFA will include the periodical financial
reporting requirements of GFF to PMU/NT in the subsidiary financing agreement
with the selected host institution. On annual basis, the GFF host institution will be
required to include in their financial statements a specific disclosure note on GFF
funds. Alternatively, the GFF host institution should provide annual financial
statements for the GFF validated by their auditor. These should be provided at
least six months after the end of GFF financial reporting period. In regards to R-
CGS, the Financial Controller of the PMU will obtain periodical R-CGS financial
statements prepared by the MSME-CGS management unit in the NT and share
them with IFAD and other stakeholders on quarterly basis. On annual basis, the R-
CGS will be audited by the Office of the Auditor General and audited financial
statements submitted within six months after the end of financial year in
accordance with the PFM Act of Kenya. These will be included in the financing
agreement signed with NT.
Project External Audit
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
There is a risk that independent and competent oversight of the Project financial
statements is not in place or performed timely leading to delayed submission of
financial reports and/or submission of unacceptable audit reports.
Mitigations:
External Audit will be carried out by the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) and
audited financial statements submitted to IFAD within six months after the period
end in accordance with IFAD guidelines. OAG has also been carrying out audits of
other IFAD projects and has been rated as satisfactory at the portfolio level based
on performance on the other existing projects. There were however delays in
submission of audit reports for the financial year 2018/19 due to the delays in
appointment of the Auditor General who is the only person authorized by the
constitution of Kenya to sign audit report. The Auditor General was selected in
August 2020 and the backlog in audit was cleared. The audit reports for the
financial year 2019/20 which were due in December 2020 were submitted in time.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): The key weaknesses of the Kenyan procurement system lie mainly at
accountability and transparency of the processes. The corruption perception index
score and existence of only one body with debarment authority are major
shortcomings in the system. Standard bidding documents are in place for local
shopping and NCB, but no bidding documents exist for ICB.
Mitigations:
9/12
Mitigations: Procurement for two components in RK-FINFA will follow GoK
procurement procedures in so far as they are consistent with IFAD guidelines.
GoK bidding documents will be used except for ICB where IFAD bidding documents
will be adopted. The project design defines the final implementing arrangements,
which propose to include project procurement being carried out by third parties for
Component 2 subject to a full due diligence being confirmed and a prior NO to
implementing arrangements being submitted to IFAD. This arrangement would
have a considerable impact on the risk assessment provided and would allow a
lower overall risk rating
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): The Country Corruption Perception Index score assigned by Transparency
International is high at 31 (in a scale from 0 to 100). Country's Public Procurement
Regulatory Authority is the sole authority for debarment. There exists a
constitutional Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission to handle corruption yet
reported corruption cases are common.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: RK-FINFA will adopt IFAD’s accountability and transparency principles
that aim to safeguard the integrity of project procurement and contract execution.
The Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and
Operations shall apply to all RK-FINFA activities. Major parts of procurement will be
carried out by co-investing implementation partners, which increase transparency
and accountability. All IFAD self-certification forms will be adopted in their entirety.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): The overall Government capacity of the NT proved to be less than optimal
in the closed PROFIT programme, leading to overall slow procurement processes
with major delays.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The project will hire a qualified procurement professional to handle all
procurement activities in the PMU, while in cases where co-investing partners are
delegated to carry out procurement activities, agreed methods and thresholds as
well as the use of SPDs and IFAD’s Handbook, will be detailed in the PIM. The two
large investment instruments of RK-FINFA (R-CGF and GFF) do not involve
procurement activities.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): Prior experience with GoK Implementing Agency shows long and
cumbersome internal processes causing major delays in project implementation.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: Processes will be led both by the Borrower through the lead agency,
but risk will also be diversified by outsourcing the majority of procurement to
relevant partners as assessed through a robust due diligence. All activities are
advertised on a dedicated project website and the project will adopt IFAD’s
Contract Monitoring Tool (ICP) where all contracts will be posted.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Risk(s): Some of the project end beneficiary investments related to improving
agricultural productivity e.g. increased use of agrochemicals, expansion of areas,
water abstraction etc. may cause adverse effects on ecosystems services and
biodiversity in their locations.
10/12
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The criteria for accessing project financing includes environmental
management considerations and the green finance will be targeted at activities that
improve environmental and natural resources management. The end line
investments made by the beneficiaries will be monitored by the PFIs through their
ESMS.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk(s): Some end line investments may result in sub-optimal use of
agrochemicals, which may cause environmental pollution. Investments in post-
harvest and processing facilities may also result in increased waste production and
energy demands that would be met using diesel generators.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: Efficient resource use will be ensured through awareness raising,
training, and monitoring of investment activities. Green investments will be
promoted including renewable energy products and improved waste management
at post-harvest facilities.
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): Kenya has social cultural norms that perpetuate the unequal status of
women through inter-locking factors, affecting poverty, discriminatory treatment in
the family including inheritance, and public life and decision-making. Men and
women in Kenya have equal ownership rights to property, however, customary
practices vary. For example, women’s access to land ownership is at only about 5
per cent.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: RK-FINFA will use the GALS methodology to facilitate women and men
at household level to address structural power imbalances affecting women, and
influence change of attitudes towards more equitable access and control of
incomes, increase women participation in decision making and balanced workloads
for households participating in the project. The TSIS capacity building activities
support this process.
Indigenous People
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk(s): Kenya’s population is a composite of over 40 ethnic communities. While
there are some specific issues that are pertinent to these communities, many of the
issues are especially relevant to marginalized populations. However, the common
denominator among Kenya’s excluded communities is poor access to resources
and opportunities, insecurity of tenure and alienation from the state administration.
Their weak voice in governance restricts their ability to address most of these
issues and increases their vulnerability in the face of environmental, economic, and
political problems.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The RK-FINFA gender, youth and social inclusion strategies consider
all vulnerable groups and communities and will inform project strategies to ensure
the inclusion of all in project interventions.
11/12
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): Women in Kenya generally fare worse than their male counterparts on
most social and economic indicators, including wage equality, political participation,
and literacy, although the situation is improving. Women are likely to work longer
hours with less pay and mostly in agriculture and the informal sector. In addition,
women bear the burden of child rearing and household and community chores due
to unequitable gender roles. The majority of Kenyan women (over 70 per cent) are
engaged in the agriculture sector but often on unpaid family basis. Women provide
more than 80 per cent of the labour in food production and 50 per cent in cash crop
production. Yet they hold only about 1 per cent of registered land titles in Kenya,
and around 5 to 6 per cent of registered titles are held in joint names. Without title
deeds, women are often unable to access cooperative membership, markets, and
credit.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: RK-FINFA has a Gender, Youth and Social Inclusion Strategy and it
will monitor the access to and impact of financial products and services on target
groups, together with key gender equality outcomes. These will include increased
access to finance and services with tailored products for women, with a special
focus on women-owned micro-businesses. At the same time, the project will
contribute to more equitable workloads between household members; and
participation of women in decision-making and leadership roles in project activities
is encouraged.
A large percentage of the training on business skills will target young women and
men. Young women and men will be selected and trained as business coaches
(ToTs) from the Counties and Wards. Business skills training will be delivered to the
various groups through these ToTs.
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk(s): Kenya’s community health system faces resource constraints and
inconsistencies around quality of services. This situation has increased with
COVID-19, adversely affecting health outcomes. Communities experience
insufficient infrastructure (e.g., health delivery structures). In addition, there are
planning and implementation gaps common due to challenges of devolution,
inadequate capacity, and inadequate sustained community engagement.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The COVID-19 experience has seen more efforts geared towards
enhancement of community health and safety especially on Water, Sanitation and
Hygiene. RK-FINFA and its implementing partners will seek to ensure that an
appropriate COVID-19 response will be integrated through the project.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Risk:
Risk(s): The project interventions will not result in physical or economic
resettlement of project beneficiaries.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: No mitigations are envisaged in this area.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
Risk(s): The project may cause result in GHG emissions albeit minimal from
synthetic fertilizer use, dairy investments, and land clearing.
12/12
Mitigations:
Mitigations: Capacity building and the advisory services can promote low emission
technologies, agricultural practices, and disincentives for land clearing.
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk(s): The project is not expected to increase vulnerability of target beneficiaries
and ecosystems in the geographic targeted areas.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The project is expected to enhance resilience of the target beneficiaries
and the ecosystems particularly through the green investments.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk(s): Elite capture of the project resources due to skewed information availability
on project services. PFIs operating in different target areas may apply different
approaches for the project activities based on their own client selection policies.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: Targeting approach will include criteria to ensure wider reach of the
project activities for the intended beneficiaries. Clear rules of engagement and
transparent monitoring and reporting systems for the PFIs including joint review and
planning sessions with the PMU will provide fora for coordination that engenders
adaptive project management.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk(s): Grievances registered by target beneficiaries and stakeholders may not be
effectively addressed and corrective measures taken by the project due to lack of
information or misinformation about the systems in place. Beneficiary grievance
might escalate through litigation.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: The project will utilise existing grievance redress mechanisms (GRM)
and have a dedicated officer in the PMU that will be responsible to ensure recorded
grievances are addressed. Stakeholders will be informed about the GRM during
project sensitization sessions.
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
ANNEX 10: RK-FINFA SUSTAINABILITY AND EXIT STRATEGY 
Component 1: Technical Support and Innovation Services (TSIS) 
The RK-FINFA Component 1, TSIS, comprises two subcomponents: 1.1 PFI Capacity Building for 
Rural  Outreach  and  Innovation,  and  1.2  Business  Development  Services  (BDS)  for 
Agribusinesses  and  Smallholders.  For  both  subcomponents,  the  exit  strategy  includes  two 
aspects: 
A. Sustainability of investments supported by TSIS. Firstly, the key result of the successful 
implementation  of  TSIS  is  the  sustainability  of  the  investments  through  R-CGS  and  GFF 
resources. The services will support PFIs to improve their capacities for long term sustainable 
increase and improvement of rural financial services and ensure that the MSMEs and smallholder 
farmers involved in the utilization of RK-FINFA resources will have the required capacities to plan 
and  sustainably  operate  the  investments.  Furthermore,  TSIS  will  introduce  specific  capacities 
and monitoring framework, to ensure that investments environmentally sustainable in view of 
natural  resource  management  and  changing  climatic  conditions.  Also,  a  targeted  grass  roots 
technical service package is deployed for Financial Literacy, which will support long term financial 
sustainability of the livelihoods among smallholder communities. 
Therefore  the  primary  exit  strategy  element  of  the  TSIS  is  the  long-term  continuation  of  the 
developed  rural  financing  models  by  PFIs  and  sustainability  of  the  investments  towards  rural 
production operations by smallholder farmers and MSMEs. See more below at Component 2 Exit 
Strategy. 
B. Sustainability of TSIS service models. Secondly, the TSIS services, including TA to PFIs, 
and the TA to MSMEs and smallholder farmers, also have an inherent aim of sustainability of the 
service model. The programme will primarily utilize local partners to implement the TSIS, with 
the exit strategy that these partners will continue to offer similar services after the end of the 
project, and that the service users continue to utilize the services. To ensure this, the services 
need to be comparable with the highest quality available in the markets, reasonably priced, and 
offer meaningful solutions to the development of rural finance private sector actors. 
The  TSIS  service  providers  will  be  competitively  selected  by  the  end  users  (PFIs,  MSMEs, 
smallholder  groups),  and  co-financed  to  the  extent  possible  in  the  various  categories 
(Smallholder, MSME, SACCO, MFB, Commercial Bank). The objective is that private sector groups 
increasingly  ‘own’  the  purchase  of  Technical  Support  Services  while  the  public  sector  and  DP 
financing is gradually reduced. The most successful TSIS service packages will be strengthened 
towards a demand-driven commercial business model, for which costs can be covered by the 
PFIs and/or MSMEs, depending on the package. 
This type of graduated model enables sustainable and larger scale  TSIS after and beyond the 
resources  made  available  by  the  project.  The  services  will  be  cascaded  in  larger  number  of 
private  sector  groups  and  local  communities  through  the  local  partners  that  organize  new 
training programmes and run additional sessions. 
Component 2: Rural Investment Instruments 
The exit strategy of RK-FINFA’s ’s core investment instruments is in-built in the design of the R-
CGS and the GFF. Both facilities operate through structures, which are planned to continue to 
operate and support rural finance intermediation after the RK-FINFA operations close, and the 
IFAD financial contribution continue to support the operations of the two facilities even after the 
RK-FINFA 6-year project period. 
Sub-Component 2.1: Rural Credit Guarantee Scheme 
The R-CGS will build on PROFIT’s Risk Sharing Scheme experiences and institution building at 
the  National  Treasury  (NT).  In  particular,  based  on  PROFIT  lessons,  the  NT  in  2020 
institutionalized  its  guarantee  tool  by  establishment  of  the  public  MSME  Credit  Guarantee 
Scheme (MSME-CGS), which was recorded as success for PROFIT. The MSME-CGS is now a part 
of the strategic COVID-19 response framework of the GoK and receives concerted technical and 
financial support from the World Bank, FSDK, USAID, as well as from IFAD for its rural aspects. 
The  MSME-CGS  is  established  and  regulated  through  the  GoK’s  Public  Finance  Management 
Regulations for the Credit Guarantee Scheme, 2020. 
The  MSME-CGS  has  an  appropriate,  fully  operational  framework,  suitable  for  the  RK-FINFA’s 
rural  R-CGS.  It  has  detailed  management  guidelines  (“Operational  Manual  -  MSME  Credit 
Guarantee Scheme”), developed with the World Bank support based  on global best practices. 
MSME-CGS is  operated  by dedicated and already operational  MSME-CGS management unit in 
the National Treasury. The Unit is appropriately staffed, housed at the National Treasury Division 
of Financial and Sectoral Affairs, and operates a digital progress monitoring system connected 
to the MISs of the PFIs. 
The RK-FINFA R-CGS will be established as a special rural window of the GoK MSME-CGS, with 
investment resources from the IFAD RK-FINFA loan and from GoK.  To enable this, it has been 
agreed  that  selected  aspects  of  the  MSME-CGS  regulations  will  be  adjusted  to  allow  efficient 
functioning of the special rural window. The adjustments will be established and regulated by 
“The R-CGS Addendum of the MSME-CGS Operational Manual”. 
With  the  above  set-up,  based  on  an  already  functional  facility  in  the  NT,  the  rural  guarantee 
window  would  operate  for  decades  after  the  end  of  the  RK-FINFA  6-year  project  period  and 
continue to encourage rural and agricultural investments of the FIs. The losses of the RK-FINFA-
provided guarantee  amount (US$ 20 million) due to justified claims by PFIs is calculated at 4 
per cent per year, based on experiences from similar schemes from Africa. It should be noted 
that the plans to compensate these outflows from the  guarantee scheme are well progressed, 
including the significant contribution from the WB’s new SAFER project and from the confirmed 
additional allocations from the GoK state budget.  
As  a  part  of  sustainability  and  exit  strategy  for  the  guarantee  operations,  the  GoK  plan  is  to 
convert the MSME-CGS into a Credit Guarantee Company during the RK-FINFA implementation 
period.  The  World  Bank  has  indicated  potential  technical  assistance  support  as  well  as  a 
significant capital investment into the CGC, with the condition that CGC will be established as an 
independent incorporated legal entity, capitalized through both public and private investments. 
RK-FINFA will pro-actively work with the NT to ensure that the specific aspects and requirements 
of the rural finance  window will be appropriately incorporated into the management structure 
and operations of the proposed guarantee company. The plan for the guarantee company using 
both private and public guarantee finance is fully in line with IFAD’s policies on the way forward 
for increased rural finance intermediation. 
Sub-Component 2.2: Green Financing Facility (GFF) 
The GFF will be established as a permanent facility to provide wholesale capital to rural oriented 
SACCOs  and  MFBs/MFIs,  for  on-lending  to  the  smallholder  sub-sector  and  rural  micro-
enterprises. The RK-FINFA budget will provide the start-up capital for the wholesale operations. 
On the medium term, a key target is to pro-actively increase the capital base of the GFF through 
additional investments (grants or loans) by other development-oriented financiers with a green 
agenda, to achieve larger GFF outreach and impact. During the RK-FINFA design process, various 
potential candidates to support the scaling up of the GFF operations have been identified.    
The GFF will be hosted in a registered financial institution that best meets the eligibility criteria 
for  the  host  institution  as  defined  in  (a)  the  PIM  of  RK-FINFA  and  (b)  the  GoK  regulations 
concerning the on-lending of public funds. A number of leading commercial banks (including the 
Co-operative  Bank,  Equity  Bank,  and  ABSA)  as  well  as  the  government-owned  AFC  have 
expressed their tentative interest to host the GFF, as the GFF objectives are in line with their 
own development vision. Furthermore, the Non-Sovereign Operations window of IFAD can serve 
as entry points to create a private sector window into the GFF with the condition that a private 
sector financial institution will be identified as  a GFF host institution. The selection of the host 
institution will be finalised after the approval of the RK-FINFA financing package by the GoK and 
IFAD.  
The GFF is designed as a permanent facility to support the mainstreaming of green lending by 
Kenyan PFIs. This financing support would continue for a long period  after the end of the RK-
FINFA loan period. To ensure the sustainability of the funding, the GFF finances will be both at 
the  Host  and  PFI  level  adequately  ring-fenced  from  other  operations  and  finances  of  the 
implementing institutions, to enable effective fund utilisation, control, and reporting. Importantly 
for the exit strategy and as a key factor for sustained operations, the credit risk in the lending 
will  be  100%  with  the  participating  financial  institutions.  Only  their  collapse  as  financial 
institutions would result in the reduction of the financial base of the GFF. The danger of collapses 
of this type can be considered as very limited, as all the wholesale borrowing PFIs are effectively 
supervised either by the Central Bank of Kenya (the MFBs) or by SASRA (SACCOs).  This fact 
and  the  substantial  interest  expressed  by  other  international  financiers  towards  this  green 
financing  operation  auger  well  not  only  for  the  sustainability  of  operations  but  for  substantial 
medium and long-term growth of the operational volumes of the GFF. 
Sub-Component 3.1: Enabling Rural Finance Environment 
The policy and institutional support operation under Sub-component 3.1 will aim to ensure that 
particularly  the  smaller  FIs  such  as  MFBs/MFIs  and  SACCOs  would  on  a  sustained  basis  be 
integrally linked to the financial sector, its support services and its regulatory and supervisory 
network. For a focused and effective RK-FINFA approach, the relatively limited project resources 
allocated  to  Sub-component 3.1  will  largely  be  directed  to  the  development  of  institutional 
arrangements  that  support  the  medium  and  longer-term  development  of  a  more  conducive 
operational  environment  for  the  Rural  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  and  the  Green  Financing 
Facility, to improve rural financial intermediation through their increased outreach and impact. 
Therefore,  a  key  result  of  the  successful  implementation  of  Sub-component  3.1 
activities will be the support to the sustainability of the R-CGS and GFF operations and 
to their successful exit after the RK-FINFA project period ends. 
In  particular,  this  sub-component  aims  to  achieve  long-term  results  in  the  form  of  a  more 
effective integration of smaller FIs with rural orientation, such as MFBs and rural DT-SACCOs, to 
the  financial  system  and  its  support  services.  A  key  target  is  to  up-grate  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory status of these institutions to a level that enables them to systematically take part 
in linkages with the liquid Kenyan commercial banks. This would sustainably increase their rural 
outreach and impact among the target group of RK-FINFA and in this manner contribute to the 
exit strategy and sustainability targets of the project. 
Kenya
Rural Kenya Financial Inclusion Facility
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Document Date:
21/10/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000003431
5786-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
1/2
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies, strategies and
 National youth policies, strategies and
 National nutrition policies, strategies and
actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
actors
actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and opportunities by youth
 Key nutrition problems and underlying
causes, by group
 Key livelihood problems and
group
opportunities, by gender
 Nutritionally vulnerable beneficiaries, by
group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives (empowerment,
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
voice, workload)
empowerment
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Policy engagement on GEWE
 Youth employment included in project
outcomes and impacts
objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Women are > 40% of outreach
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
youth
youth, and IPs (if appropriate)
beneficiaries
IFAD empowerment index (IE.2.1)
Output level CIs
CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
Outcome level CIs (at least one of
below)
CI 1.2.8
CI 1.2.9
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for IFAD empowerment index in
M&E budget
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth activities
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition activities
IFAD Adaptation Finance
$12,772,000
IFAD Mitigation Finance
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$12,772,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
RK-FINFA meets the criteria to be gender transformational through the required pathways (i) Women economic empowerment by offering access to finance through the Rural Credit
Guarantee Scheme (R-CGS) and the Green Financing Facility (GFF), which will target 50 per cent women, (ii) Enhance women participation in decision-making and leadership through
gender sensitive financial literacy trainings and include quotas for women participation in project activities and (iii) promote balanced and reduced workloads through access to Green
Financing Facility, where women will be supported to prepare investment plans for adoption of new smart technologies, energy and labour saving solutions such as renewable energy
kits, water harvesting and storage systems.
2/2
Nutrition
RK-FINFA is not considered as nutrition sensitive but it seeks to contribute to increased household food security and consumption of nutritious foods and will contribute to nutrition
outcomes in the following ways: (i) Increased access to finance and proactive assets, increased income generation, will increase consumption of nutrient-rich and nutritious foods, such
as fruits and vegetables; and increase consumption of animal-sourced foods among small holder households ii) Women’s access to education, empowerment and control over resources
will improve nutrition outcomes not only for women themselves, but for their families and communities at large and iii) Access to new smart technologies, energy and labour saving
solutions such as post-harvest technologies will improve nutrition outcomes.
Youth
RK-FINFA is considered youth sensitive. It will support creation of jobs by and for young people and increasing their employment opportunities along the different value chains through
increased access to finance, access to financial literacy and business development skills, support youth participation and representation and use of digital financial solutions to increase
reach to rural youth.
☐ No social inclusion themes
