Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AfDB
AGRA
African Development Bank
Alliance for Green Revolution in Africa
ALRMP
Arid Lands Resource Management Project
ASAL
ASAP
ASTGS
AWPB
BCA
BCC
CA
Arid and Semi-Arid Land
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme
Agricultural Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Behavioural Change Approach
Behaviour Change and Communication
Conservation Agriculture
CAHWs
community Animal Health Workers
CBO
CCCF
CCPP
CIDP
Community-Based Organization
County Climate Change Fund
Contagious Caprine Pleuropneumonia
County Integrated Development Plan
CIMES
County Integrated Management Information System
CIS
CLMC
CPCC
CPTT
CSPE
Climate Information Service
County Livestock Marketing Council
County Project Coordinating Committee
County Project Technical Team
Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation
DRSLP
Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Programme
EBL
EIWF
EMCA
ESMP
EU
FAO
FI
FIPS
FMD
FPIC
Equity Bank Limited
Eldoret Iten Water Fund
Environmental Management and Coordination Act of Kenya
Environment and Social Management Plan
European Union
Food and Agricultural Organisation
Financial Institution
Faster Implementation of Project Start-Up
Financial Management Division
Free, Prior and Informed Consent
GALS
Gender Action Learning System
GAP
GBV
GCF
Good Agricultural Practice
Gender-Based Violence
Green Climate Fund
GHGs
Green House Gases
GHI
GII
GIS
Global Hunger Index
Gender Inequality Index
Geographical Information System
GNI
Gross National Income
GoK
HDI
ICB
ICRA
ICT
Government of Kenya
Human Development Index
International Competitive Bidding
Indepth Climate Risk Analysis
Information and Communication Technology
ICT4D
Information Communication Technology for Development
IFAD
ILRI
IP
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Livestock Research Institute
Indigenous Peoples
IPAPs
Indigenous Peoples Action Plans
IPM
IPMP
IPP
Integrated Pests Management
Integrated Pesticides Management Plan
Indigenous Peoples Plan
IPSAS
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards
KALRO
Kenya Agriculture & Livestock Research Organization
KCEP
KEBS
Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme –
Kenya Bureau of Standards
KeLCoP
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
KENAO
Kenya National Audit Office
KES
KFS
Kenyan Shillings
Kenya Forest Service
KLMC
Kenya Livestock Marketing Council
KM
KMD
KWS
KWTA
KYAS
LD
LMA
LMIC
M&E
Knowledge Management
Kenya Meteorological Department
Kenya Wildlife Service
Kenya Water Towers Agency
Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy
Laboratory Disease
Livestock Marketing Associations
Lower Middle-Income Country
Monitoring and Evaluation
MALFC
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives
MIS
MoU
MSP
MT
MTR
NAMA
NCB
Management Information System
Memorandum of Understanding
Multi-Stakeholder Platform
Metric Ton
Mid-Term Review
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action Project
National Competitive Bidding
NCCAP
National Climate Change Action Plan
NCD
ND
NDMA
NEMA
NGO
NIMES
NPV
NRT
New Castle Disease
Notifiable Disease
National Drought Management Authority
National Environment Management Authority
Non-Governmental Organization
National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System
Net Present Value
Northern Rangeland Trust
ORMS
Operational Results Management System
PCR
PFI
PIM
Project Completion Report
Participating Financial Institution
Project Implementation Manual
PMCU
Project Management and Coordination Unit
PPR
PRM
Peste des Petits Ruminants
Procurement Risk Matrix
PROFIT
Programme for Rural Outreach of Financial Innovations and Technologies
PSC
PWD
R/RBA
RPLRP
Project Steering Committee
Person Living with Disabilities
(Regional) Rome-Based Agencies (FAO, IFAD & WFP)
Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project 
SCPTTs
Sub-County Project Technical Team
SDCP
Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Programme
SDG
SDL
Sustainable Development Goal
State Department for Livestock
SECAP
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
SLD
State Department for Livestock Development
SMART
Standardized Monitoring Assessment for Relief and Transition Methodology
SMSP
SOE
SSTC
SWOT
TAD
TOR
Social Mobilization Service Provider
Statement of Expenditure
South-South and Triangular Cooperation
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats
transboundary Animal Disease
Terms of Reference
USD/US$
United States of America Dollar
UTaNRMP
Upper Tana Catchment Natural Resource Management Project
UTNWFP
Upper Tana Nairobi Water Fund Project
WAO
WEAI
WFP
WRA
Ward Agriculture Officer
Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
World Food Programme
Water Resources Authority
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/27
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$22,906,000
$0
$22,906,000
The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives
(MALFC) of the Government of Kenya (GoK) and participating Counties designed a new project titled the Kenya Livestock
Commercialization Project (KeLCoP). The Livestock sub-sector plays an important role in the Kenyan economy. The sub-sector is an
ideal enterprise to improve household food and nutrition security, increase incomes, create jobs and contribute to sustainable
livelihoods of many rural people living below the poverty line. The KeLCoP will focus on selected value chains, namely small
ruminants, local improved breed poultry and bee-keeping which have the potential to provide productive employment and food
security opportunities for women, youth and marginalized segments of the population. The project design is informed by lessons
learned and best practices from a range of previous and ongoing IFAD-financed projects in Kenya and other countries in the
region.The KeLCoP’s overall goal is to contribute to Government’s agriculture transformation agenda of increasing small-scale farmer
incomes. The project’s development objective is to improve the opportunities for the rural poor, especially youth, women and
smallholders to enable them to increase their output and value added, access markets and increase their resilience to economic and
climate risks. The project is expected to benefit 110,000 households or 495,000 people, including both direct and indirect
beneficiaries. From the total  the direct beneficiaries, women and youth beneficiaries will be 54 per cent and 30 per cent respectively.
The benefits of targeted nutrition beneficiaries make up 30 per cent of the total households reached.
The project design includes several innovative elements and opportunities for the use of a host of digital technologies and
applications, which deploy Information Communication Technology for Development (ICT4D) approaches and scalable models in
partnership with the private sector. The use of innovations and information technology will be integrated into the development of an e-
extension approach and the development of e-finance to reduce the costs of access and delivery and develop e-marketing systems
for information and sale. The project will mainstream climate resilience, and sustainable natural resource management in the small
livestock, poultry and honey value chain development.
The project will also finance entrepreneurial youth engaged in innovative start-ups that support smallholders in its selected value
chains. It will also secure direct crowd-funding for its beneficiaries by developing a dashboard which would host profiles of selected
youth innovators on an online and mobile fund-raising platform for crowdfunding from philanthropic sources. The project also provides
an opportunity to operationalize IFAD’s Private Sector Engagement Strategy designed to foster strengthened collaboration with
private sector partners. There are several private sector players who can offer contractual arrangements to support out-grower and
contract farming schemes to support smallholders.
The project will have two technical and intrinsically linked components, namely: Component 1 (Climate-smart production
enhancement for the livestock sector),which includes the following sub-components: (i) integrating vulnerable households into value
chains, that combines a graduation and a gender action learning system approach. This will include training modules for business and
nutrition education and inputs based on the experience of an IFAD/Euroepan Union (EU) funded e-finance scheme. Recognizing that
capacity of County Governments to provide extension services using the traditional training and visit approach is no longer feasible
given the shrinking manpower and operational budgets of County Governments, the project will implement an Information
Communication Technology (ICT) based approach by using e-extension based models that are appropriate for the needs and literacy
levels of its participants. The component will also include (ii)climate resilient production systems, comprising activities concerning
breed improvement, livestock feed production improvement, animal health improvement and e-extension services.  
Component 2: (Support to Livestock Market Development) will include: (i) market infrastructure and capacity development; (ii)
investor fora to enhance private sector engagement and investments; (iii) building inclusive value chains; and (iv)  provision of e-
vouchers and matching grants for smallholder commercial producers, innovative start-ups by youth; peer to peer exchange; and
Learning Route Methodology training; training of young traders and transporters; multi-stakeholder platforms; and the establishment
of a dash board for crowd-funding of credible entrepreneurs. Component 2 will also involve developing an e-marketing application to
provide real-time price information, a platform for open purchase and sale for key inputs required for livestock production. Component
3: will comprise project management and coordination as well as policy and institutional support. In compliance with IFAD’s SECAP
guidelines and Government of Kenya’s Environmental Laws, the project has developed an indepth climate risk analysis report, an
Environment and Social Management Framework, an Integrated Pesticides Management Plan and an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework and Plan. The studies propose actions to enhance positive outcomes of project implementation and to mitigate negative
impacts. The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and Plan articulate procedures and provide guidelines on how to engage
indigenous peoples through the Free, Prior and Informed Consent Process, and how to ensure their active participation in the process
of developing Indigenous Peoples action plans.
The total project costs,including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$ 93.5 million over a six year implementation
period. The cost will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$ 54.8 million, Heifer International support of US$ 3.4 million, Participating
Financial Institutions (PFIs) US$ 4.5 million, Government of Kenya (GoK) contribution of US$ 19.0 million and beneficiary contribution
of US$ 11.8 million. The KeLCoP’s Net Present Value (NPV) is positive at US$ 91 million, (KES 10.1 billion) and the Economic
Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is estimated at 29.1 per cent.
The project’s Lead Agency will be the State Department for Livestock (SDL). A Project Management and Coordination Unit (PMCU)
will be established in Nakuru with a team to coordinate project activities, who will be competitively recruited. At the County level, the
County Project Co-ordinating Committees (CPCC) will oversee project implementation. Technically, county activities will be
implemented in coordination with County Project Technical Teams. Correspondingly, at Sub-County level, activities will be
implemented in coordination with Sub-County Project Technical Teams (SCPTT). 
2/27
A number of innovative technological tools will be deployed by the KeLCoP, hence calling for various thematic and specialized
expertise. Given the experience of relatively weak PMUs in the Kenya portfolio, implementing arrangements will involve contracting
an outcome-based, locally well-established NGO, with expertise in ASALs, business, ICT, and livestock development. A number of
such NGOs have already expressed interest and they include Heifer international; Precision Agriculture for Development (PAD);
USTADI Foundation, SNV; or ICCO, Resource Conflict Institute (RECONCILE), amongst others.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Political, economic and social context: In the last ten years, Kenya registered robust economic growth, averaging 5.5 per
cent, attributed to the significant political, structural and economic reforms that the country has undergone, resulting in sustained
economic growth, social development and political gains.[1] The World Bank initially estimated that the economy will grow by 5.9
percent in 2020, driven primarily by the services sector, but due to the COVID-19 pandemic, this growth is foreseen to drop to 1.0
percent in 2020[2].
Kenya declared its COVID-19 index case on 13 March 2020. As at 7 May 2020, key policy responses by Government includes
earmarking Ksh40 billion (0.4% of Gross Domestic Product - GDP) in funds for additional health expenditure for social protection
and cash transfers; food relief; and funds for expediting payments of existing obligations to maintain cash flow for businesses
during the crisis, amongst others.[3]
The country’s political environment has changed markedly following the introduction of a new constitution in 2010, which initiated
a process of devolution, transfering some powers from the national government to 47 newly created Administrative Counties,
ranging from economic development to health care, education and infrastructure. The next key political milestone is expected in
2022 when the next general election is scheduled.
The population of Kenya was 47.6 million in 2019 (actual 2019 census), of which 50.5 percent are females. Seventy-five percent
of Kenyans live in rural areas. In 2018, Kenya’s Human Development Index (HDI) was 0.590, ranking the country as the highest
in the sub-region, compared to 0.537 for Sub-Saharan Africa. However, in 2019, Transparency International ranked Kenya at 137
out of 180 countries in Corruption Perception index, with a score of 28 out of 100. Kenya’s entrepreneurship and human capital
give it huge potential for further growth, job creation and poverty reduction. However, the large youth population (18-34 years)
and those below 15 years constitute 25 per cent and 43 per cent of the population, respectively, implying a large dependent
population, and high youth unemployment, which stood at 18.34 per cent in 2019[4].
Poverty (SDG1), food security and nutrition (SDG2), smallholder agricultural and rural development context: Although
Kenya attained Lower Middle-Income Country (LMIC) status in 2014, an estimated 36.1 per cent of the population was living
below the poverty line in 2016. There has nonetheless, been a decrease in the incidence of poverty from 43.6 per cent in 2006 to
36.1 per cent in 2016, the most recent available estimate.[5] Poverty is more widespread in rural areas, and is more pronounced
in arid counties. It disproportionately affects women and youth. Food insecurity remains high with approximately 14.5 million still
characterized as food insecure. Persistent climate variability, environmental degradation, and political risks heighten the food
insecurity in the country[6].
Kenya has an area of 580,370 km² (143,974,468 acres out of which less than 20% of the land is suitable for cultivation, of which
only 12 per cent is classified as high potential (adequate rainfall) agricultural land and about 8 per cent  is medium potential land.
The rest of the land is arid or semiarid.[7] Agriculture is key to Kenya's economy, contributing 26 per cent of GDP and another 27
per cent of GDP indirectly through linkages with other sectors. The sector employs more than 40 per cent of the total population
and more than 70 per cent of Kenya's rural people. Agriculture in Kenya is large and complex, with a multitude of public,
parastatal, non-governmental and private operators participating in the sectors. The sector accounts for 65 per cent of the export
earnings, and provides livelihood (employment, income and food security needs) for more than 80 percent of the Kenyan
population, and contributes to improving nutrition through production of safe, diverse and nutrient dense foods. The sector is also
the main driver of the non-agricultural economy including manufacturing, providing inputs and markets for non-agricultural
operations such as building/construction, transportation, tourism, education and other social services[8].
Kenya largely practices mixed farming. Main crops grown include maize, rice, wheat, sorghum, millet, beans (and other lentils),
cassava, sweet potatoe, coffee and tea while livestock comprises mainly cattle, goats, sheep and poultry. Productivity is low, due
to poor quality of extension services and use of minimal inputs due to lack of working capital, which limits farmers’ ability to
purchase hybrid seeds, fertilizers and pesticides, livestock feed, and drugs. Small-scale farming systems dominate the Kenya
agriculture sector, contributing 75 per cent of total agricultural production, most of it for subsistence and minimal surplus for sale.
Challenges faced by smallholder farmers include the decreasing size of landholdings, limited access to productivity-enhancing
technology, declining soil quality, environmental degradation, climate change, weak extension services and low technology
adoption, and poor smallholder access to market.[9] In ASALs, most of the livestock is raised by pastoralists where infrastructure
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
is poor, extension and veterinary services are limited. Over 90 percent of livestock in the local markets are sold by smallholders,
making them important actors that supply to meet national demand for livestock and livestock products.
3/27
The livestock sub-sector plays an important role for Kenya’s economy with a direct contribution of around 42 per cent to
agricultural GDP and 12 per cent to national GDP.[10] It accounts for 30 per cent of the total marketed agricultural products and
provides raw materials for agro-processing and manufacturing. Investment in livestock development, directly contributes to
increased income, food and nutrition security of livestock producing households, and by extension their communities. Even in the
non-arid and semi-arid land (ASAL) areas, the livestock sub-sector constitutes an important source of family income and food
security.[11] In the high rainfall areas, small livestock provides employment and income mainly through dairy and poultry
production. The livestock sub-sector is expected to grow rapidly, fuelled largely by a growing population, and increasing rates of
urbanization, which are expected to rise. As a result, consumption of meat and milk is forecast to expand. Moreover, Kenya is
currently experiencing an annual meat supply deficit of 300,000 Metric Tons (MT). This gap requires a deductive approach to
understand why the Kenyan food system is unresponsive to demand (refer to Annex 12 for detailed supply chain analysis).
Small ruminant and poultry sub-sectors are experiencing low productivity and narrow profit margins due to high cost of feed, poor
animal husbandry, poor state of livestock infrastructure, limited availability of processing facilities and bottlenecks in the supply
chain, which hinder efficient movement of livestock and its product downstream, thus preventing reciprocal livelihood
improvement for people in the rural areas. Honey production is deemed low, with most of the honey processed in the country
coming from Tanzania, yet it is estimated that there is approximately 80% of untapped nectar every flowering season.
In the last decade, low productivity in the sub-sector was exacerbated by the increasing severity and frequency of dry spells and
heat waves, punctuated by periods of flooding, resulting from climate change and climate variability. Particularly in the ASALs,
pastures are degrading and little attention is paid to the governance arrangements to protect and manage them at the community
level. The increased heat stress is reducing water availability, increasing water scarcity and causing rangeland degradation and
loss of key grazing territory. In turn, farmers are experiencing lower livestock productivity, increased incidence of livestock
diseases and consequently higher mortality, as well as reduced grain quality and yields for animal feed.
Relevant national policies, strategies and/or programmes on smallholder agriculture, rural poverty reduction and
enhanced food security and nutrition: Kenya's policy direction to address prevailing economic and social constraints is
articulated in various policies and strategies, mainly the: 2010 Constitution; Kenya Vision 2030 (2012) that is implemented
through three five-year Medium Term Plans; Big Four Agenda (2018); National Policy for the Sustainable Development of
Northern Kenya and Other Arid Lands (2012); National Policy on Gender and Development (2019); draft National Livestock
Policy, which aims to transform livestock by applying modern technologies acquired through continuous research and
innovations; Agriculture Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy (ASTGS -2019 - 2029), designed to implement the
agriculture aspect of the Big Four Agenda; the Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy (2017 -2021);  Kenya Climate Smart
Agriculture Strategy (2017–2026); National Climate Change Action Plan (2018-2022); and the Environmental Management and
Coordination Act, 1999. The current project will assist the Government in developing a Livestock Master Plan and review the
existing policy framework to strengthen the regulation of livestock markets and the quality of inputs and livestock products.
The Government of Kenya (GoK) has committed to providing food and nutrition security to all Kenyans, and therefore, a specific
anchor of the ASTGS (2019) is to increase household food resilience by reducing the number of food-insecure Kenyans and
improving nutrition. Other policies and strategies aimed at improving Kenyan’s nutritional status exist that include the: National
Food and Nutrition Security Policy (2011); National Comprehensive School Health Policy (2007); Breast Milk Substitutes
(Regulation and Control) Act No.34 of 2012; Kenya National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable
Disease (2015–2020); Child Survival and Development Strategy (2008); Food Security and Nutrition Strategy (2008); United
Nations Development Assistance Framework for Kenya (2014–2018); National Nutrition Action Plan (2012); and School Health
Strategy Implementation Plan (2011).
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
13.
Nutrition challenges: According to the 2019 Global Hunger Index, Kenya ranked 86thout of 117 qualifying countries. With a
score of 25.2, Kenya suffers from a level of hunger that is serious.[12] The majority of food insecure families typically live in rural
areas. They live below the poverty line and depend on daily agricultural labour for income. The country’s population has tripled in
the past 35 years, straining the country’s resources and leaving young people, especially women, vulnerable to poverty and
malnutrition. Female-headed households are more likely to be food insecure than those headed by men.[13] Even though Kenya
has made substantive strides in reducing the prevalence of stunting nationally, falling from 35 per cent in 2008 to 26 per cent in
2014[14], and on course to meeting the global targets of reducing malnutrition[15], Kenya still experiences malnutrition burden
among its under-five population. Stunting is most prevalent among children 18–23 months, mainly because of poor infant and
young child feeding practices and inadequate hygiene and sanitation practices. In addition, poor complementary feeding, poor
traditional dietary practices particularly in pastoral communities and recurrent infections or chronic diseases, which cause poor
nutrient intake, absorption or utilization, also contribute to high rates of malnutrition in the country. While acute malnutrition
(wasting) among children under 5 years is relatively low nationally (4 per cent), it reaches almost 14 per cent in North Eastern
region.
14.
Children of illiterate or semi-illiterate mothers are more likely to be stunted than children of mothers with a secondary or higher
education, estimated at 17 per cent. Adolescent girls 15–19 years are the most malnourished group among women of
reproductive age. Disparities are also apparent among wealth quintiles. Vitamin A deficiency is relatively low at 9 percent in
children under 5 years, whereas, maternal and child anemia are widely prevalent in Kenya, with 36 per cent of children under 5
years and 42 per cent of pregnant women suffering from anemia. However, although undernutrition is still an issue in Kenya,
overweight and obesity are also becoming a concern, with 33 per cent of women overweight or obese. Although the total fertility
rate has reduced in the past 20 years, the adolescent fertility rate increased from 36 to 40 per cent between the 2009 and 2014
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), resulting in high prevalence of adolescent pregnancy. This has serious consequences
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
because adolescent girls are more likely to be malnourished, leading to low birth weight babies, who are more likely to become
malnourished.
4/27
The gender challenge: Kenya has a Gender Inequality Index (GII) of 0.549. Women are under-represented in decision-making
positions, especially in rural areas and are inadequately represented at County Government and national levels. The percentage
of literate women (74 per cent) is considerably lower than that of men (84 per cent)[16], and women account for only one third of
total school enrolments. According to World Bank modelled estimates,women account for about 64 per cent participation in the
labour force, and the percentage of women salaried workers (23 per cent) are starkly lower than men (53.2 per cent)[17]. The
main obstacles to women’s full participation in production and value-addition are cultural norms which limit access to, and control
of primary resources, affordable credit, knowledge, information, and agriculture inputs. Women’s poverty is exacerbated by
gender-based discrimination and violence. Women’s empowerment is hindered by cultural and traditional practices, such as early
marriage, or forced girl-school-drop out. Inheritance, land acquisition and access to benefits accruing to land produce continue to
favour men.[18] Women and girls living in rural areas spend long hours collecting water and firewood.[19] While over 80 per cent
of Kenyan women are engaged in smallholder farming, only 1 per cent own land in their own right, access less than 10 per cent
of available credit, and less than 1 per cent of agriculture credit.
Despite a progressive Constitution that promotes gender equality and women’s empowerment, gender inequality remains a key
issue of concern in Kenya. The patriarchal social order supported by statutory, religious and customary laws and practices; and
the administrative and procedural mechanisms for accessing rights have continued to hamper the goal of attaining gender
equality and women’s empowerment. Progressive provisions in law have not delivered gender equality in practice raising the
need to develop a policy that addresses the variety of manifestations of gender discrimination and inequality.[20] The State
Department for Gender in the Ministry of Public Service, Youth and Gender is responsible for promoting gender equality and
empowerment of women in Kenya. In 2019, the Department developed a National Gender and Development Policy, which
outlines the national agenda for gender equality and how Kenya intends to realise its objectives in this regard. The policy
framework is geared towards ensuring gender equality and women empowerment in the social, economic, political and cultural
spheres as envisaged in the Constitution[21].
Women are actively engaged in farming, livestock and marketing of some produce. Poultry constitutes the ‘women’s wallet’. The
income from sale of eggs and poultry is considered to belong to women. Traditionally, women had a limited role in honey
production although they were involved in selling honey in local markets. Women’s role in honey production is also changing with
the intervention of development agencies. Women in pastoralist households perform all the household tasks. One of the most
time-consuming tasks can be collection of water. They are also responsible for the care of livestock, especially small ruminants,
when they are at the homestead. In addition to the constraints faced by men, women are also limited by patriarchal norms,
double burden of work and limited assets. Traditionally, women’s ownership of livestock, including small-ruminants was limited to
raising them. Selling and buying was mostly done by men. However, this is changing, with a growing trend of women selling
livestock in the ASAL’s. There are women who own livestock herds inherited from their fathers in their own right, trade animals
and are involved in the butchery business. Donor interventions have resulted in  mushrooming of women groups that own small
ruminants collectively. The small ruminants are bought when they are young and sold after 6 months. This has been a successful
strategy for protecting assets in a highly patriarchal society that gives men authority over women’s assets.
The youth challenge: Article 260 of the Constitution of Kenya (2010) defines a youth as a person aged between 18 and 34
years. Youth account for 35.4 per cent of the Kenyan population and offer a dynamic workforce that is highly adaptable, with a
high uptake of technological innovations. Yet, youth record a high unemployment rate of 18.34 per cent (against overall
unemployment rate of 10 percent). In particular, youth school-to-work transition linkages are either slow to materialize or
incomplete in Kenya, particularly for rural youth who do not qualify for higher education. High rates of school dropouts worsen
this situation. This leads to over 90 per cent of unemployed youth having no exposure to higher education, vocational or training
skills, which limits their chance of participating in the formal workforce. This has negatively impacted labour productivity, with
GDP per capita being lower than many African countries, and increasing at a slower rate.
The agriculture sector, which directly contributes 26 per cent to the GDP and another 27 per cent indirectly linkages with other
sectors, has the potential to offer multiple livelihood and employment opportunities to youth (Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy
(KYAS- 2017-2021). The key challenges for the participation of youth in agriculture, as outlined in the KYAS, include negative
perception and attitude to agriculture among youth; inadequate skills; knowledge and information; limited access to finance and
resources such as land; as well as inadequate policies to support youth in agribusiness. Youth do not view agriculture as a viable
business as most agricultural enterprises follow traditional farming methods, which lead to poorly remunerated enterprises. In
spite of Government’s recent efforts to transform smallholder agriculture to make it more market-oriented, the sector’s growth
and job creation potential is still hindered by numerous challenges. These include: underdeveloped value chains and low value
addition, especially inefficiencies in the commodities supply chain due to limited post-harvest handling infrastructures, weather
related shocks, limited extension services (e.g. on adoption of modern technology), and limited irrigation usage[22] Therefore, in
addition to the lack of skills for youth to engage in productive climate-resilient agribusinesses, limited access to agricultural
financing (with only 4 per cent of commercial bank lending to agribusiness), and limited access to physical capital (e.g. land)
further discourages youth from seeking ventures in the sector.
Although current engagement of youth in the livestock sector is limited, young women and men are engaged at critical points in
the livestock value chains. Some of the more common activities for young men are animal walkers, traders, boda-boda
transporters of livestock and livestock products, and manual labourers at markets. Some of the young men accumulate capital
required to engage in livestock production through these entry points. Young women are more visible as producers and sellers of
honey and in groups that are formed around poultry and small-ruminants. During the design mission, the project delivery team
(PDT) met with several dynamic young men and women entrepreneurs, who are innovating and establishing modernized
agribusinesses in poultry and honey. The PDT noted that youth are attracted to agri-businesses with quick returns. Youth also
expressed a strong preference for working as individuals. They maintained that the formation of youth groups had been driven by
Government financing opportunities, predominantly funding group-based activities. Young men and women’s ability to engage in
the livestock value chain is limited by their lack of capital, limited access to finance and limited knowledge of the opportunities for
investment. KeLCoP aims to increase the visibility of youth engaged in the livestock sector by recognizing their current
engagement, aspirations and opportunities in the development of County livestock strategies, helping to identify opportunities for
youth engagement and supporting them with business skills, entrepreneurial skills and matching grants to support them in
production and marketing activities.
5/27
21.
22.
The marginalized population: Kenya does not identify with the term indigenous, but rather considers those segments of the
population who have continued to live by their traditional customs and belief systems and way of life, as marginalized. Therefore,
Kenya does not have specific legislation on Indigenous Peoples (IPs). The country has not yet adopted the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, who are often marginalized, and has yet to ratify Convention 169 of the
International Labor Organization (ILO). Chapter Four of the Constitution contains a progressive Bill of Rights, which makes
international law a key component of the laws of Kenya and guarantees the protection of minorities and marginalized groups. The
hunter-gatherers include the Ogiek, Sengwer, Yiaku, Waata and Aweer (Boni), while the pastoralists include the Turkana,
Rendille, Borana, Maasai, Samburu, Ilchamus, Somali, Gabra, Pokot, Endorois and others. The marginalized peoples of Kenya
face scarcity, insecurity in the possession of land and resources, poor service provision, low political representation,
discrimination and exclusion. The socio-economic situation of marginalized people worsens, with increasing competition for
resources on their land, effects of changes in climate, and environmental degradation.[23]
In compliance with IFAD policies on Youth, Nutrition and Gender Equality and IPs, KeLCoP is designed to leverage the inter-
linkages between rural development, economic and social empowerment of economically excluded groups such as women,
youth, small-holder pastoralists and agro-pastoralists, marginalized tribes and highly vulnerable groups (female-headed
households, persons with disabilities, and persons with HIV). The project will promote the economic and social empowerment of
these groups, through social mobilization; mentoring; Gender Action Learning System (GALS), a household methodology to
facilitate gender equality and self-efficacy; nutrition interventions; provision of assets; improved access to quality inputs, business
skills, access to markets; all of which will increase their nutrition security, productivity and participation in the selected value
chains. The project is expected to have a positive impact on nutrition of target households, through selection of value chains with
potential to increase nutrition; graduation intervention for the very poor and food insecure households; mainstreaming nutrition;
application of gender transformative approaches such as GALS; support to labour-saving technologies; and mainstreaming
improved livestock and poultry nutrition in animal husbandry practices, delivery through community mobilizers and mentors of key
nutrition messages and strategies based on county and area-specific nutritional challenges and strategies to improve nutrition,
including promoting bio-fortification of kitchen gardens.
Table 1. Mainstreaming theme eligibility criteria
☒ Gender transformational
☒ Nutrition sensitive
☒ Youth sensitive
☒ Climate focused
Situation
analysis
☒ National gender policies,
strategies and actors
☒ Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
☒ Key livelihood problems and
opportunities, by gender
☒ Use(pro-WEAI)[1]
assessment for M&E baseline
☒ National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
☒ Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
☒ Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
☒ National youth policies,
strategies and actors
☒ Main youth groups
☒ Challenges and
opportunities by youth group
Theory of
change
☒ Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
☒ Gender transformative
pathways
☒ Policy engagement on
GEWE[2]
☒ Nutrition pathways
☒ Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
☒ Pathways to youth
socioeconomic empowerment
☒ Youth inclusion in project
objectives/activities
KeLCOP is climate
focused and this has
been determined through
the application of the
Multilateral Development
Bank (MDB) approach.
Of the total IFAD loan
investment of US$ 54.8
million, an estimated
US$ 22.9 million ,
equivalent of 42% of the
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
gender
Log-frame
indicators
☒ Women are >40% of
outreach beneficiaries
☒ Pro-WEAI indicator[3]
6/27
☒ Outreach disaggregated
by gender, youth,
indigenous peoples
☒ Women reporting
improved diets and/or
Persons reporting
improved nutrition
knowledge
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
age
total project cost has
been allocated to climate
adaptation.
Human
and
financial
resources
☒ Staff with gender TORs
☒ Funds for gender activities
☒ Funds for Pro-WEIA surveys
in M&E budget
☒ Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
☒ Funds for nutrition
activities
☒ Staff with youth TORs
☒ Funds for youth activities
[1] Project level Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
[2] Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
[3] To be provided by ECG.
23.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
24.
25.
26.
27.
IFAD is an ideal development partner to support the GoK on this investment. It has a long-standing comparative advantage in
participatory approaches and rural institutional building. In addition, IFAD has an extensive experience of financing and
understanding development activities required in semi-arid regions. The KeLCoP will also provide an opportunity to scale-up a
range of technologies/models, which have already been successfully implemented under different on-going and recently
completed projects, the main ones being: Smallholder Dairy Commercialization Programme’s (SDCP) development of
community-based initiatives in animal health, business hubs and youth business mentoring; Upper Tana Catchment Natural
Resource Management Project’s (UTaNRMP) and Upper Tana Nairobi Water Fund’s (UTNWFP) replicable models for water
harvesting, fodder and pasture development, and forest management; and the Programme for Rural Outreach of Financial
Innovations and Technologies’ (PROFIT) innovative financial service models. The design of KeLCoP is consistent with Kenya’s
current COSOP which calls for the consolidation of the portfolio into a Programme Approach, with two programmes; one on
Value Chain (under which KeLCoP falls);  and a second Programme on Natural Resource Management.  The project has been
discussed with the UN Resident Coordinator and agriculture sector UNCT relevant Agencies and supported especially given the
geographical targeting of vulnerable ASAL Northern Counties.
IFAD has effectively utilized ICT4D for scaling-up and tested a range of innovative tools such as e-extension, e-finance,
crowdfunding for philanthropic contributions and crowdsourcing market information for livestock sectors. The project provides an
opportunity to scale up and test these tools. KeLCoP has potential to garner support from IFAD’s forthcoming Private Sector
Financing Programme (PSFP) for direct support to the private sector actors in the selected value chains.
Furthermore, IFAD has been requested by the Ministry of Treasury and Planning, the Nationally Designated Authority, to assist
in preparing a proposal, for submission to the Green Climate Fund (GCF), to finance  Kenya’s Nationally Appropriate Mitigation
Action Project (NAMA) for the dairy sector, which has significant potential to leverage additional GCF resources for the country.
The Dairy NAMA will complement the KeLCoP interventions.
Livestock production is an ideal enterprise to improve household food and nutrition security, increase incomes, create jobs and
contribute to sustainable livelihoods of many rural people living below the poverty line. The selected value chains, small
ruminants, local improved poultry breed and bee-keeping are economic activities predominantly carried out by women, youth and
marginalized segments of the population. Furthermore, small ruminants have the ability to survive harsh weather conditions and
they contribute very low Green House Gas Emissions (GHGs) to the environment, (estimated at 6.5 percent and 8 percent,
respectively, compared to 41 percent for beef cattle and 20 percent for dairy cattle). Poultry and honey production and processing
occupy relatively smaller spaces that do not interfere with land for agriculture and can easily be carried out by women and youth.
They are also ideal alternative income generating activities for populations living in conflict areas within four participating
counties (Marsabit, Samburu, Baringo and Elgeyo-Marakwet), which are driven by cattle rustling practices.
28.
The KeLCoP provides an opportunity for transformation of the livestock sector, which can generate major socio-economic
benefits for rural communities in a sustainable manner. It is in this regard that the GoK requested IFAD to finance a livestock
project in the high potential and pastoral counties. The geographical target is guided by the 2018 Country Strategy and
Programme Evaluation (CSPE) for Kenya recommendation to target investments towards the ASALs, to promote
commercialization and business development.
29.
7/27
The KeLCoP has several elements, which are directly in support of the prioritized climate change adaptation and mitigation
actions in the five-year National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP- 2018-2022) of the country. There are three key activities
in KeLCoP, which will directly contribute to the plan. These are: (i) restoration of degraded rangelands, pasturelands, agroforestry
and reforestation that can bring significant gains in carbon stocks; (ii) increase in small ruminant productivity and efficient pasture
management regimes, thus reducing pressure on rangelands; (iii) increase the resilience and adaptive capacity of local people to
the threats of climate change through a comprehensive package of adaptation interventions; (iv) helping the Government and
communities to set up a contingency fund to address climate risks, by allocating specific funds for threats. Examples of such risks
include drought, heavy floods, and the recent desert locusts invasions, resulting in an unprecedented threat to food security for
the sub-region.
B. Lessons learned
30.
31.
32.
KeLCoP’s design is informed by lessons learned and best practices from previous and ongoing IFAD-financed projects in Kenya
and other countries in the region, as well as similar development projects financed by the Government of Kenya (GoK) and other
development partners.
The implementation of IFAD-financed projects in the country has faced challenges in several areas, including procurement,
financial management, disbursements, targeting, gender and beneficiary participation and monitoring. As a result, concerted
efforts will be made to ensure implementation readiness, in part, by seeking support for Faster Implementation of Start-Up
(FIPS). The time, prior to formal start-up, will be used to recruit key staff, prepare a detailed procurement plan, initiate the
establishment of a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Management Information (MIS) systems, procure the services of key
service providers, prepare Terms of Reference (TORs) and recruit a third party to undertake a baseline survey. For effective
outreach, the project will use a range of ICT4D technologies, digital technologies for e-extension, digital fintech solutions to
efficiently deliver financial services and data management.
To address implementation challenges regarding targeting, gender, and beneficiary participation, the project has allocated
dedicated resources and set target quotas for inclusion of vulnerable groups, women and youth and indigenous people. A strong
team of service providers will be contracted competitively for proper identification and outreach to the intended target group. A
strong system will be put in place for beneficiary feedback, participation, mentoring and transformation, through the combined
application of a graduation approach, the GALS approach as well as a Behaviour Change and Communication (BCC) approach.
This will help identify and develop approaches, which will change decision making on livestock production and marketing and
introduce more sustainable practices. The overall project approach is demand-driven, market-oriented, with a strong private
sector engagement. The Government will competitively recruit staff for the PMCU, and provide strong technical backstopping in
procurement and M&E to maintain high quality overall implementation performance. Given the critical role that a strong and
competent PMCU plays in the performance of project implementation, IFAD will actively participate in the staff recruitment
process.
33.
Some of the key lessons that have been incorporated into project design include the following:
Strategic consolidation of resources to few counties: Past IFAD-financed projects covered wide geographic scope, in an
effort to benefit many rural poor people. This has led to spreading resources too thin, project supervision challenges, inefficient
resource use, and often difficulties in identifying and attributing benefits to IFAD-financed projects. KeLCoP will ensure greater
geographic concentration of project interventions and targeting to increase impact, effectiveness, and efficiency. It will do so
by limiting its outreach to a limited number of counties and a limited number of wards within the selected counties.
Need to address environmental and climatic risks: Experience in other IFAD funded projects, like KCEP-CRAL/UTaNRMP
showed that efforts to foster smallholder productivity and build stronger value chains will be in vain if appropriate measures
are not embedded in project design to assist smallholders deal with climate risks and natural resource management issues,
especially in the ASAL areas. The design includes several sustainable environmental management and climate risk
adaptation measures that will help smallholders manage risks. These include: provision of safety net support; water
infrastructure development, to address drought and water scarcity especially for feed; contingency fund support through the
National Government for climate related emergencies such as desert locusts and drought; support towards governance and
rehabilitation of rangelands, strengthening pests and diseases surveillance and adoption of an integrated pesticides
management plan; and, building smallholder resilience through  improved animal husbandry management capacity, etc. The
project will work with County Governments to determine key communal land governance issues and available mechanisms for
addressing them, and help them invest in long-term land management activities (e.g. institutional strengthening, grazing plans,
pasture regeneration among others). Moreover, the project has prepared an Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) that contains risk tables that propose mitigation actions to deal with environmental and social risks. The ESMF also
provides an integrated pesticides management plan (IPMP) that will guide the project on the safe use, handling, storage and
disposal of pesticides products. An in-depth climate risk analysis has also been undertaken and provides mitigation actions for
identified climate risks.
Participatory approaches to community-driven development: Grass-roots’ capacity building have been key to project
successes as it has led to local communities’ and grassroot organizations to drive project activities and ensure sustainability of
project assets and benefits (g. UTaNRMP and SDCP). Where enshrined in law, user associations have continued to be
effective as they are given real powers of enforcements and their authority is respected and many have become self-
financing[24] leading to tangible results and impacts for participants. KeLCoP has used these proven institutional
arrangements as a cornerstone in its project design and implementation.
High Impact from small-ruminant: The experience of several projects on dairy goats in Kenya, implemented by FARM
Africa International, have demonstrated a significant increase in the productivity and economic returns from goat farming.
Through focus on efficient breeding, appropriate feeding and proper management practices, an overall increase of 30 percent
was achieved in productivity. Another project, financed by IFAD, and implemented by the International Goat Association
8/27
reported even more impressive returns from goat farming, reduction in mortality of livestock by 50 per cent, improved
consumption of protein by children and mothers, and increases in livestock assets.
Adopting a comprehensive approach: The likelihood of success is higher with a comprehensive approach, which involves
technical aspects, but also motivation of individuals, producers, group organizations, and intensive training and marketing,
rather than interventions aimed at improving single aspects of production (e.g. vaccination campaigns). Effective project
design entails supporting small farmers, rural households and landless families through a holistic, flexible, inclusive, equitable
and self-reliant approach in a given time and budget framework. The Gender Action Learning Systems Approach (GALS) has
proven to be a transformational approach that gives individuals a vision about their future and mentors them for a prescribed
period of time. A common vision between women and men, facilitated through the use of GALS, increases the pace at which
smallholder farmers are able to commercialize their farms and increase their incomes. When combined with additional risk
mitigation support such as safety net payments, asset transfers and a behavior change approach to sustainably change
production and marketing practices, this can culminate in helping households to move out of poverty.
Private sector engagement: Although the IFAD portfolio has achieved significant results in improving smallholder
productivity, natural resource management and improved capacity of smallholders, interventions aimed at improving
processing and product marketing were less successful due to limited involvement of private sector actors. KeLCoP will closely
engage and partner with private sector actors. The design mission met with a range of private sector players along the value
chain of the small ruminant, poultry and honey production and designed project components and sub-components keeping in
mind the key role they can play at the county level, in enterprise development and aggregating the produce of small-holders to
obtain interest, buy-in and essential guidance from input suppliers and off-takers. The public sector will be engaged in
activities where it has comparative advantage, such as setting and enforcing regulations and sound policies for value chain
development.
Approach to design livestock production packages: In many countries, support to small livestock production is confronted
with challenges of establishing sustainable production with the most vulnerable households. Providing start-up packages that
include only an asset transfer without proper mentoring support, technical assistance or business skills may not be enough.
The establishment of helping families establish a viable herd of small ruminants, flock of poultry or bee hives requires careful
analysis of household capacity and tailoring the packages to suit household capacity for feed, housing, health care and
disease control and management. Vulnerable households have few alternative safety nets in times of financial needs. Thus,
associated to this, the importance of determining the viable number of start-up stock, safety nets, access to reliable feed and
veterinary services, working capital and strengthening technical and business capacity of recipients is key.
Animal health: IFAD has diverse lessons and experiences in supporting animal health, including establishing networks of
community animal health workers (CAHWs). These community workers have been used in different context to bridge animal
health delivery gaps, especially where animal health problems are relatively simple and for effective monitoring and disease
surveillance. A significant proportion of CAHWS, particularly in small livestock, can include women and youths. CAHWS,
effectively delivers the much-needed behavior change in remote communities, especially if they are facilitated in establishing
a small business, such as a vet village pharmacy or an agro-vet supply shop. Similarly, the use of ICT4D for disease
surveillance and extension services in collaboration with agro-vets and community workers can help to control and manage
diseases. Experience of several models of using ICT4D in Kenya will be explored, especially through South-South Triangular
Collaboration opportunities being used in Asia.
Emerging Lessons from on-going Grants: Recently approved IFAD-financed regional grants, that also target Kenya, are
the “Dairy for Social Impact: Enhanced Knowledge and Sustainability; and the Resilience Food Systems” grant. The KeLCoP
will review the emerging lessons from the innovations introduced through these grants. The three components of the project
are based on a scale up approach as the Dairy Impact Methodology and Dairy Sustainability Framework will hold regional
workshops to develop tentative roll-out programmes. The knowledge based programme (KBP) is an important component of
the grant for gathering evidence and therefore, its products have a strong knowledge management element. The Project shall
ensure that proper knowledge generation and dissemination would scale up results to all the IFAD portfolio that feature
diary/livestock projects. KeLCoP will also capitalize on presence of the IFAD/SKD Knowledge Management (KM) team
actively engaged to develop a KM platform called ”Livestock for Social Development” (L4SD), in collaboration with the GASL’s
Action Network: The L4SD platform will also be used to incorporate lessons for KeLCoP. Lessons in conservation and
sustainable management of water resources will also be drawn from GEF-funded grants such as the UTNWFP.
Cost-effectiveness of the Graduation Approach: Lessons from the financial graduation model implemented by BRAC
under the PROFIT project will be used to develop a cost effective model. The financial graduation sub-component targets poor
and vulnerable women and youth who are unable to access financial services due to lack of skills and productive assets, and
who qualify for the Government’s social transfer assistance. It was designed to pilot the ‘graduation model’ developed by
BRAC for creating pathways for the poorest out of extreme poverty to sustainable livelihoods where they no longer require
government social transfer assistance and have the basic productive assets and skills required to access financial services.
The approach is cost-effective not in terms of the reduction of the per capita costs of support but because it offers the
Government a means to reduce its social transfer assistance by helping the poor to graduate out of the Government’s social
assistance programme.
Lessons from other countries include: ensuring proper mentoring support and using a range of ICT4D options when
conventional forms of extension services are under-resourced and unable to meet smallholder needs; increased opportunities
for peer-to-peer learning; collection and dissemination of market-related information to farmers and traders; linking farmers
with buyers; and promoting opportunities for e-extension, e-finance and e-marketing opportunities. It is also important to
ensure that training for women is organized keeping in mind their various responsibilities as care givers, domestic chores and
as farmers.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
9/27
The KeLCoP’s overall goal is to contribute to Government’s agriculture transformation Agenda of increasing household incomes,
and food and nutrition security for poor rural small-scale farmers. The project’s development objective is to improve rural incomes
of rural poor livestock and pastoralist households, by increasing their output and value addition, access to markets and their
resilience to economic and climate risks. The project is expected to benefit 110,000 households including both direct and indirect
beneficiaries with a total number of 495,000 people. Of the total beneficiaries, direct women beneficiaries will be 54 percent and
30 percent will be youth beneficiaries. In addition, those specifically targeted for nutrition interventions will include 30 percent of
total households.
The development objective of the project is to increase incomes of 110,000 poor livestock and pastoralist HHs, especially youth
and women, in an environmentally friendly manner, in selected project areas of the 10 participating counties. This will be
achieved through: (i) empowered smallholder farmers and pasturalists, especially women and youth, with adequate life skills and
willing to improve their socio-economic development status; (ii) increased food and nutrition security for the vulnerable, through a
graduation approach and GALS; (iii) increased resilience and ability to cope with climate risks and enhanced productivity in the
three livestock value chains of small ruminants (sheep and goats for meat and goat dairy production) poultry and honey; (iv)
increased use of ICT by scaling up e-extension models, e-finance approaches and market information; (v) increased
commercialization and profitability of the targeted value chains by value addition and enhanced access to lucrative markets; (vi)
increased capacity of county governments to deal with the regulatory and policy environment for livestock and rangeland
development; and (vii) a proactive policy to attract the private sector.
The project design includes innovative elements and opportunities for the use of digital technologies and applications, which will
deploy ICT4D approaches and scalable models, in partnership with the private sector. The use of innovations and information
technology will be integrated into the development of an e-extension system and the development of e-finance to reduce the
costs of access and delivery and develop e-marketing systems for information and sale. The project will mainstream climate
resilience, sustainable natural resource management, as well as ensure environmental and social risks are mitigated in the small
livestock, poultry and honey value chain development. This will be done through proposed project activities and the
implementation of safeguards measures proposed in the the ESMF, ESMPs, integrated pesticides management plan (IPMP),
indepth climate risk analysis, and the indigenous peoples action plans (IPAPs).
The project will scale up the the e-voucher scheme developed and currently used under the IFAD-financed KCEO-CRAL in the
provision of subsidized inputs and services. Under the e-voucher scheme users are issued with customized debit (ATM) cards
containing different 'e-wallets' which they can use to purchase farm products or inputs from registered pre-screened agro-
dealers. The increased interaction with financial institutions is also expected to increase the opportunity for commercial credit for
smallholders facilitated by the project. The project will finance entrepreneurial youth engaged in innovative start-ups that support
smallholders in its selected value chains. The start-ups could include the manufacture of automated hatcheries or one stop-input
suppliers with options for buy-back, etc. It will also secure direct crowd-funding for its beneficiaries by developing a dashboard
which would host profiles of selected youth innovators on an online and mobile fund-raising platform for crowdfunding from
philanthropic sources. The project also provides an opportunity to operationalize IFAD’s Private Sector Engagement Strategy
designed to foster strengthened collaboration with private sector partners. There are several private sector players, who are
already offering contractual arrangements to support out-grower and contract farming schemes to support smallholder poultry and
honey production who would like to expand and others would like to enter the market.
Geographic area of intervention: The project will cover 10 counties (out of the total 47 counties), of which: four (4) in the
western region; four (4) in Rift Valley region; and two (2) in the Northern Region. In line with the CSPE’s recommendations,
KeLCoP’s target areas will include two (2) Semi-Arid counties (Elgeyo Marakwet and Baringo) and two (2) Arid counties
(Marsabit and Samburu).
The selection of the counties was made by scoring counties on the following criteria: (i) incidence and prevalence of rural
poverty; (ii) aridity of the geographical area; (iii) potential for commercialization of selected commodities (iv) population of
targeted livestock; (v) priority given to the value chain by the county in its strategic plans (vi) potential to build on and collaborate
with existing development interventions (vii) security. In the selected counties, project activities will focus on value-chains with
high potential in that county. Within counties, the same criteria used to select counties will be used to select a focal area for the
project intervention within the county. Demographic details on the target counties are presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Demographic details on the target counties
No County
Area
km2
% of
Total
% of
Population
Total
Pop.
% of rural
Population
Population
Density
Total
Sheep/
Goats
Total
Poverty
Chickens
Index
1
2
3
Siaya
2,530
0.4
993,183
2.1
89
Busia
1,695
0.3
893,681
1.9
84
Bungoma
3,032
0.5
1,670,570
3.5
78
393
527
551
473,464
1,115,347
33.8
133,838
1,017,045
69.3
249,157
2,493,848
35.7
Kakamega 3,051
0.5
1,867,579
3.9
10/27
85
612
256,457
3,193,849
35.8
Trans
Nzoia
Elgeyo
Marakwet
2,496
0.4
990,341
2.1
80
397
155,490
836,820
34.0
3,029
0.5
454,480
1.0
86
150
660,600
531,960
43.4
Baringo
11,015
1.9
666,763
1.4
89
61
1,267,182
1,016,911
39.6
Nakuru
7,499
1.3
2,162,202
4.5
54
288
878,059
2,176,865
29.1
4
5
6
7
8
9
Marsabit
70,961
12.2
459,785
1.0
78
10
Samburu
21,022
3.6
310,327
0.6
83
Source: Basic Report on Wellbeing in Kenya, World Bank, UNICEF.
Project Target Group
6
15
4,357,786
93,855
63.7
1,255,658
318,530
75.8
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
Beneficiaries: The primary target group will comprise: (i) very vulnerable, ultra-poor, mostly women headed households,
pastoralist and agro-pastoralist households; (ii) commercially orientated pastoralist and agro-pastoralist households; (iii) young
women and men involved in production and entrepreneurial activity at critical points in the value chain. The KeLCoP has a strong
focus on the inclusion of women and youth, marginalized tribes and persons with disabilities. In addition, the project will engage
with value chain drivers, such as farmers who have the resources to function as breeders of livestock, traders, retailers,
wholesalers, private sector companies, transporters, private agro-vets and input suppliers who will also comprise the members of
multi-stakeholder forums for the relevant value chain.
Targeting approach: The project will use a variety of targeting mechanisms to implement the project in a manner sensitive to
the needs and constraints of smallholder women and men farmers, as well as youth and vulnerable groups. This will include
geographic targeting to identify areas where smallholder producers of selected value chains are located and where there is
potential for developing the value chain. Direct targeting will be used to ensure social inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable
groups (marginalized tribes e.g indigenous people, persons with disabilities, persons with HIV).
Social Inclusion Strategy: The KeLCoP has a clear strategy for the inclusion of women, youth, ultra-poor households and highly
vulnerable persons. Women’s intrinsic, instrumental and collective agency[25] will be promoted through: (i) Developing gender
sensitive livestock strategies reflecting the strategic interests of women; (ii) Use of GALS methodology to address gender issues
including distribution of work, control over income and Gender-based violence (GBV); (iii) prioritization of ultra-poor women for
graduation packages; (iv) promotion of women leadership and collective agency through working with women groups and
representation in decision-making bodies, coordination and steering committees created by the project; (v) exposure through
peer exchange visits; and (vi) well-being through nutrition training.
Similarly, there is a strong focus on providing youth with: (i) capacity building through apprenticeship, entrepreneurship training,
business skills and formal courses in animal husbandry; (ii) access to capital through matching grants; (iii) voice through
representation on decision-making and coordination bodies such as multi-stakeholder forums and project. Marginalized tribes
such as indigenous people and vulnerable groups will benefit from the project interventions described above through quotas and
delivery mechanisms sensitive to their needs and aspirations. Further caution will be taken to ensure that social risks associated
with the various target groups are mitigated. The ESMF identifies potential social risks such as GBV, child labour, early
marriages, elite capture, FGM, and sexual harassment and provides mitigation actions that the project will follow. The project
should work closely with county based agencies dealing with these issues and keep them informed at all times. An indigenous
peoples planning framework and plan has been developed and will inform the development of indigenous peoples action plan in
consultation with indigenous people, once the COVID 19 movement restrictions are lifted.
The project will directly target 6,000 ultra-poor households combining the graduation approach with GALS. These households
will also be empowered using the GALS tools of visioning that can contribute to gender equality and economic empowerment.
Women will constitute 54 percent of the total beneficiaries of all project activities with many of the activities focusing on women
and women-headed households. Young men and women will constitute 30 percent of total beneficiaries in the project. The
beneficiary table in the PIM and LFA provide the details of the number of beneficiaries for each component and sub-component
disaggregated by gender and age.
Nutrition Sensitive Strategy: KeLCoP will adopt a nutrition sensitive approach and mainstream nutrition in its various
investments starting from the policy level (Livestock Master Plan), to the institutional level (county Government), the community
level (groups formed by the project) and at the household level (GALS and mentoring approach). In terms of the investment area
which KeLCoP has chosen, namely livestock, there is considerable evidence which shows that production of specific, nutrient-
rich produce has more of an effect on improving diet quality than simply emphasizing overall production[26]. Livestock production
has shown to be one asset strongly associated with an increased frequency of milk and dairy consumption among children.
Furthermore, the KeLCoP approach is based on the evidence that achieving a sustainable decrease in malnutrition rates
requires an integrated response[27].
11/27
46.
47.
48.
The project is designed to choose its targets on the basis of nutritional vulnerability. It seeks to engage women and include
interventions to protect and promote their nutritional status, decision making and overall empowerment. It also incorporates
nutritional behaviour change communication through the use of GALS tools at the group level, and at the household level for the
ultra -vulnerable households, supported by GALS mentors trained in nutrition.
The nutrition support will provide training and awareness about nutrition at the household level, mentoring and support with
homestead production to increase dietary diversity, and focus on nutrient rich foods such as dairy, meat and poultry packages.
Specially tailored messages will also be delivered through the e-extension ICT services. These messages will be context specific
given the widely varying nutrition habits of the targeted communities such as the Masai  who only consume the milk and blood of
livestock. The project is expected to reach 38,500 households (173,000 people) with targeted messages and support regarding
nutrition.
The relevance of the household approaches being used by the project was further confirmed through a review of the stock take
by IFAD of the use of the GALS and household mentoring approach[28]. The review showed that many projects are designed
based on the intuitive promise of this approach, which has stood the test of time based on feedback from projects. In so far as
the use of GALS for women’s empowerment is concerned, that in itself is a pathway for improved nutrition. As the use of GALS
for nutrition is in its infancy, and evidence is not yet available from projects that are using it, this use of GALS in combination with
other pathways, can be considered an innovation and documented to provide evidence for future projects. Research[29] on the
subject shows strong evidence that income and assets controlled by women are used differently than male-controlled income. It
also  show that female income and asset ownership was associated with a significantly higher probability of consumption of a
much more varied diet, and that women's involvement in decision making was positively, significantly related to better-quality
household diets[30].
In addition, as GALS comprises a set of tools, which can be easily adapted for multiple purposes, it can be further used to develop a
vision for the households’ nutrition intake and status, analyse current challenges and identify strategies for overcoming them. The
project is also providing support to the targeted households for developing and improving homestead food production and kitchen
gardens for food diversity. The GALS approach which empowers women with a range of tools, combined with the intensive visits by
mentors who have received training in nutrition, provides the requisite support needed for behavior change over a period of time. This
intervention is being supplemented by the strengthening of kitchen gardens and transfer of livestock assets to women for increased
food availability and diversity.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
Component 1: Climate-smart production enhancement for small livestock
Sub-Component 1.1: Integrating vulnerable households (HHs) into value chains
The project will use a service provider to identify, mobilize and mentor vulnerable smallholders, through a comprehensive approach
that provides strong mentoring support, gender action learning, provision of a graduation package (involving asset transfer combined
with strong business skills and technical trainings). All grant recipients will be identified and mobilised using this approach to increase
their productivity and participation in the selected value chains. A service provider will be competitively recruited to ensure the
inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable households as well as indigenous people.
49.
50.
51.
The project will use the Graduation Approach, which combines elements of social protection, livelihood development, savings
and access to finance to protect participants in the short run, while promoting sustainable livelihoods for the future. The project
expects to reach 6,000 households with graduation packages. In addition, 1,000 of the most vulnerable of these will also receive
specific support in nutrition packages. A service provider will be contracted to deliver a full graduation package[31] to the
marginalized and highly vulnerable small-holder households. Heifer International will provide technical and financial support to
graduate the households. In addition, as vulnerable households’ financial situation improves on the graduation ladder, they will
be able to access inputs through the e-voucher system to support their enterprise to become viable.
Among the vulnerable poor households, 90 will be selected, after two years of mentoring support and tracking, and will be
provided with matching grants based on an assessment of their investment capacity. This support will be available to women
(70 percent ) and youth (30 percent) producers as well as persons living with disabilities (PWDs). The project will facilitate
linkages between producers and rural finance institutions to enable them access commercial credit.
Around 6,000 smallholder farmers and processors participating in the project will be sensitized directly, using GALS. In addition,
4,500 households will be reached, through community GALS champions. The Graduation Approach will be combined with GALS
for the vulnerable smallholder households to ensure that the engagement with households results in women’s empowerment and
promotes an equitable distribution of food, assets, decision-making, and workloads. The household members will go through a
four-step GALS process to ensure that the negotiated collective vision reflects the different interests and priorities, and identifies
their roles in implementing the vision of the household. Business Skills Training will be provided directly by well-qualified
business coaches to groups of small-holder farmers/processors. The business coaches will train Graduation Mentors so to
provide this training to vulnerable families at the household level. Activities suited to indigenous peoples will be determined
through a consultative and participatory FPIC process, through which they will develop indigenous peoples action plans that will
be embedded in the graduation approach and/or matching grants.
52.
In each county, the project will also disseminate key nutrition messages, based on area-specific nutritional challenges and
strategies for improving nutrition. A manual for nutrition education and training will be developed and delivered to Group mentors
and Graduation mentors. The project will deliver these nutrition awareness and education messages to those included in the
graduation programme and GALS training directly and those reached through the community GALS champions. Efforts to
address the challenges will focus on nutrition education around the importance of dietary diversity, appropriate weight gain
during pregnancy, benefits of exclusive breastfeeding, and sanitation concerning safe drinking water, good hygiene, etc.[32] The
project will provide direct support to households for improving homestead production in nutrient rich foods. Heifer International
will provide its technical assistance in enhancing production. The system of e-extension will also be used to relay key nutrition
messages, through ICT4D platforms.
12/27
Sub-Component 1.2: Breed improvement
53.
Through this sub-component, the project will strengthen the capacity of four existing breed improvement centres[33]. Support to
breed multiplication centres will be as follows: i) material support for fencing, cking, upgrading of training facility, procurement of
small equipment for animal husbandry practices and support to water supply; and ii) supply of additional parent stock to breed
multiplication centres where the commercial/elite farmers or breeders can buy the parent stock through auction. The project will
also source and deliver additional breeding stock to community groups. In this arrangement, the farmer groups will pay 50
percent costs while the project will match the other 50 percent of the purchase cost. This activity will be implemented in
partnership with an international research institution and other institutions with demonstrated expertise and experience in
community breed improvement interventions.
Sub-Component 1.3 : Climate resilient production systems
54.
55.
56.
In livestock fodder interventions, the project will support two activities. The first will be  upscaling the production of grass
seeds, which include fencing, water supply and supply of initial stock of indigenous grass seeds to 100 groups in four ASAL
counties. This will facilitate the establishment of group owned pasture plots that will provide grass seeds and pasture for sale.
This activity will be implemented with groups already active in hay production and sale and willing to tap into the growing
demand for fodder. The project will explore specific commercial opportunities for women and youths in fodder business.  The
second support will involve establishment of feed storage facilities and provision of infrastructure and equipment (e.g. hay sheds,
baling equipment, hay harvesting equipment and other labour saving equipment.
In rangeland management interventions, the project will implement a number of activities. One activity will be establishing
status of rangeland governance in three counties (Marsabit, Samburu and Baringo) through analysis of institutions, rules and
regulations and their enforcement status. This improved analysis will shape county specific interventions required for improved
rangeland governance and management.
Another project support will be in the form of  participatory rangeland mapping to articulate priorities for the protection of key
grazing resources and the seasonal access. Geographical Information System (GIS) to form digital maps displaying resource
distribution data[34] with high spatial precision will complement this. The county level capacity to generate maps and upscale
innovations will be supported through equipping GIS laboratories and providing equipment for rangeland observations. The
project will also empower local level governance, through supporting development of appropriate by-laws, laws, recognition of
local institutions and capacity building in by-law formulation and facilitation of by-law development process with the County
Government. In Marsabit and Samburu the project will partner with Northern Rangeland Trust (NRT)[35] to strengthen rangeland
user associations and grazing committees to combat land degradation. Additional investment in rangeland governance
introducing agreements and enforcement mechanisms in the selected ASAL counties will deter/reduce incidences of conflicts
and foster peaceful coexistence within agreed governance framework.
57.
The project will also support establishment of climate resilient water infrastructure such as solar-powered boreholes, sub-
surface dams, rock catchments, water pans and shallow wells. In each county, prior hydrological surveys, environmental social
impact assessments and community consultations will inform the type, location and suitable technologies for water harvesting
and storage in strategic grazing areas and for pasture production. Communal sharing of livestock water infrastructure, e.g. from
additional water pans, sub-surface dams or boreholes to be developed in this project will strengthen relations between two or
more pastoralist groups and minimize clashes over grazing rights and resources.
Sub-Component 1.4 Animal health improvement
58.
59.
60.
In small ruminant systems, the endemic diseases are Contagious Caprine Pleuropneumonia (CCPP), Peste des Petits
Ruminants (PPR) and blue tongue, while poultry production is adversely affected by New Castle Disease (NCD), fowl typhoid,
coccidiosis and fowl pox diseases, among others, which lead to high mortality, economic losses. Some diseases affect market
operations. While these diseases are controllable, through timely vaccination, the veterinary service delivery model for disease
surveillance/monitoring and reporting, is dysfunctional in all the counties. This is due to a number of factors: poorly structured
veterinary service delivery; low veterinary doctors to livestock ratio; lack of disease monitoring equipment; inadequate vaccine
cold storage facilities; weak diseases contingency mechanism; and deficiency of harmonized veterinary public health policies
across bordering counties which hamper the management of transboundary animal diseases (TADs).
Due to poor extension and outreach services, vaccine standardization remains a challenge and results in livestock mortalities,
especially for poultry producers. Other contributors to high mortalities include mis-diagnosis, poor storage of vaccines and limited
knowledge of farmers on proper animal management. The outreach services of agro-vets are below optimal despite the rapid
growth of veterinary services.
In all the counties, the system for disease surveillance and monitoring will be evaluated and interventions for strengthening the
systems will be identified and supported. KeLCoP will also reinforce preparedness to sanitary crisis by supporting the
development of contingency plans, the organization of simulation exercises, and the establishment of a disease contingency fund
for major outbreaks of TADs. Disease contingency plans will be developed in order to be ready to respond to any sanitary crisis
and veterinary services needed in response to diseases affecting small ruminants (PPR, RVF and blue tongue). For each
disease at risk, the response will be different depending on the specie affected and the epidemiology of the disease. The project
will support the government to develop contingency plans, which is currently weak, but also support response to any other known
61.
62.
or emerging disease depending on the epidemiological situation in the region and the actual major risks.
13/27
The government has traditionally supported preventive measures through establishment of dips and crushes to minimize tick
borne diseases. This approach has not been very successful especially where the animal numbers are low or community
management arrangements are not strong. Learning from this experience, the project will instead invest in community capacity
through a Behavioural Change Approach (BCA) for improving animal husbandry practices. Behaviour change interventions
take into account the specific psychological and social influences that guide decision-making and behaviour in a particular
setting. This entails designing and implementing interventions in a manner, which is iterative and a process whereby discovery,
learning and adaptation is followed. The project will secure the services of a specialist service provider to work closely with
community groups to develop appropriate messages for behaviour change and develop a series of audio-visual and other
training materials for dissemination and delivery of messages.
At the county level, to strengthen disease surveillance and monitoring, agrovets will be evaluated and improved through a series
of measures. The surveillance could include equipping with Smart Device for tracking and monitoring disease and a starter kits
for animal well-being. To bridge the current gaps in veterinary officers and animal health workers, the project will offer
scholarship to young men and women to pursue certificate training in animal health. Taking recognition of the current gaps
across different counties, 200 students will be sponsored to pursue certificate courses at animal health colleges such as
technical and vocational colleges like Ahiti in Kabete and other recognized animal health colleges. The skills of the young
graduates will be further enhanced through hands-on training at the local animal multiplication centres.
Sub-Component 1.5: E-Extension services
63.
Recognizing that the capacity of the County Governments to provide extension services using the traditional training and visit
(T&V) approach is inefficient. Given the shrinking manpower and operational budgets of County Governments, the project will
introduce e-extension based models, which are appropriate for the needs and literacy levels of its participants. The project will
work with Precision Agriculture for Development, a well-established organization that is already in partnership with the Ministry of
Agriculture, State Departnment of Crops in e-extension development in Kenya.. Nutrition awareness messages and importance
of dietary diversity and the dietary practices during pregnancy, weaning and early child development will also be integrated into
these e-extension messages. In addition, the service provider will develop modules, which allow farmers to access expert
veterinary advice on call for the diagnosis and treatment of ailments for which local expertise may not be immediately available.
Customer willingness to pay for the services will be assessed by the service provider to enable the establishment of a sustainable
model of e-extension. It is envisaged that some sub-counties currently practicing farmer field school approach will also continue
to provide extension services in the traditional manner where appropriate, particularly in those areas where cellular network is
limited and unreliable.
64.
The indepth climate risk analysis, the integrated pesticides management plan and the preliminary ESMF identify potential
environmental, climate or social risks associated with sub-component 1. The indepth climate risk analysis, the integrated
pesticides management plan and the overall ESMP propose mitigation actions which the project will take into consideration
during implementation. Exclusion lists have also been provided to ensure that the nature and scale of operations do not lead to
adverse/irreversible impacts. The risks and mitigation actions will be further elaborated in the final ESMF and ESMPs of the
various sub-projects. The indepth climate risk analysis provides guidance on value chains that are suitable for the various
targeted counties based on the climatic trends and future projections.
Component 2: Support to livestock market development
Sub-Component: 2.1:Market infrastructure and capacity development
65.
66.
67.
KeLCoP will improve market infrastructure and governance. Few secondary livestock markets in the targeted counties meet
the 2017 Kenya Bureau of Standards (KEBS). Meeting these standards will improve human safety, result in healthier livestock,
help control epidemics and associated market closures, reduce losses to theft and conflict from crowding, misidentification of
livestock and double taxation. It will also improve record keeping and information flows to all stakeholders and increase consumer
access capacity for regulation of veterinary services and tax collection.
The project will invest in rehabilitating 20 livestock markets in the selected counties. These markets are key for small-scale
livestock producers and traders. Infrastructure at existing markets will be improved by building holding pens, sheds, and feed
storage facilities to accommodate up to 2,000 small ruminants and 100 larger animals, at any one time. Upgrading of the markets
will follow the 2017 KEBS Livestock Market Standards and include construction of appropriate shelter for vendors of cooked food,
raw fruits and raw vegetables. The project will also improve sections of the markets that trade in poultry, and establish such
sections where there are none.[36]
Interventions are for existing markets, which are deemed important for smallholders. The county governments will lead in
choosing markets and adapting KEBS standards and designs to local circumstances. Interventions will be climate adapted. This
includes durable metal fencing and roofing, local rock and mortar construction, and appropriate drainage. Interventions will
include hygienic disposal and management of human and animal waste and emphasize green technology, including solar energy,
use of biogas, water efficient technologies and practices, and strategic location of infrastructure to reduce adverse environmental
impacts.
68.
Management and revenue collection at any livestock market is the mandate of local authorities, as stipulated by the laws of the
Country. Over the years, some of the counties have been collecting revenues from livestock markets, without ploughing any
share back to the markets. Under this sub-component, the project will upscale the co-management model[37], in order to
increase communities’ participation in the management of the newly constructed markets.
69.
As a sign of mutual commitment, the LMAs and the local authorities will enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)[38].
In order to ensure that the views of the different stakeholders are incorporated into the management and decision-making with
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
respect to the markets, at least two women and two young men will form part of the LMA.
Training will focus on awareness of KEBS Livestock Market Standards and best practices for organization and management of
livestock markets. Each LMA will be evaluated for its specific needs.
14/27
In Kenya, lack of an integrated policy and institutional framework between the State Department for Livestock Development
(SLD) and County Governments has constrained the development of a regulation on livestock marketing. Since devolution,
only two county Governments have passed Livestock Sale Yards Bill[39] in 2016  (Marsabit and Samburu Counties). KeLCoP will
assist those participating counties without a Livestock Sale Yard Bill to formulate their bills and also examine those aspects of the
bills in Marsabit and Samburu, which might need to be refined. This will be done in a participatory manner with key stakeholders
such as smallholder producers, traders, wholesalers and retailers and will include women and men involved in the markets.
Training will also be provided to county officials and will focus on KEBS regulations. Also, similar to the proposed activities with
LMAs, training will include use of smart phones and establishment of a communication protocol between county officials and
LMA members at different markets. This protocol will serve as a foundation for the implementation of real-time price information
system. Different than the LMA training, implementation will begin with the county’s own regulatory plan. In cases where the
county does not have a regulatory plan, the PMCU will assist the county to develop one.
All counties have put together CIDPs (2018-2022) which define their overall investment plans and also outline their strategies for
capital financing, resource mobilization and asset management strategies. Almost all Counties have invested in livestock
infrastructure such as abattoirs, dairy processing facilities, breed multiplication centres, holding grounds, markets and tanneries
which are lying unutilized. Most of these were constructed either with donor funds or the Counties’ own resources. The County
Governments are in the process of compiling a list of their assets and want to secure the assistance of private companies to take
over these facilities. The Public Finance Management Acts, at County level, regulate purchases of assets in accordance with the
guidelines provided in the Public Procurement & Disposal Acts.
The project will assist the County Governments to host investor forums to allow private sector investors to assess the potential
for investment in the selected counties, including possibilities of taking over the exisiting underutilized facilities. It is foreseen that
KeLCoP will finance the initial round of investor forums in each county to promote the opportunities for investment in the key
value chains supported by the project. Thereafter the County Government would make links and support these on its own.
The project will assist the County Governments to prepare a strategy under which it would attract the private sector through
regulations, which facilitate ease of doing business, and land grants. Investments in value addition and marketing of livestock
products will offer income and livelihood for communities emerging from conflicts (including women, youths) to rebuild their
livelihoods. Linking such groups to strategic markets that offer better prices as well as to credit facilities to maximize the
potentials of such products is another peace dividend support.
Sub-Component 2.2: Building inclusive value chains
76.
Some of the common marketing issues in the small ruminant, poultry and honey sector for the smallholder producers is
fragmented production, lack of storage and processing capacity, poor quality of produce and limited capacity for branding, quality
assurance and limited access to finance. The project will assist in removing some of these constraints faced by the smallholders
especially, women and youth. The project will develop a strategy for identification of promising individual entrepreneurs and or
groups to invest in the selected value chains and further grow their business, promote existing innovative small cottage industries
and enhance their level and quality of production for support in marketing through e-finance and provision of grants.
Sub-Component 2.2.1: E-Finance through E-voucher schemes
77.
To address delivery of inputs and extension service challenges in production of small ruminants, poultry and honey, the project
will use the e-voucher scheme[40]. Based on its experience with the IFAD/EU funded e-finance scheme, Equity Bank has
developed an on line mobile platform (FinServe), which it has used for beneficiaries under the SDCP and KCEP-CRAL IFAD
finanaced projects. The e-voucher card wallets enable farmers access to various inputs (i.e. vaccines, medicines, feed, feed
supplements, extension services, veterinary care, AI, etc.). In collaboration with service providers, livestock production officers
will mobilize and recruit farmers along established and validated eligibility criteria for community-based targeting and screening of
participants. Participating rural Financial Institutions (PFIs) will enroll clients and raise their financial literacy, account opening and
introduction of available financial services, etc. Farmers will make contributions on an increasing scale starting with 10 per cent
the first year, 40 per cent, the second year, 80 per cent the third year and 100 per cent in the fourth year.
Sub-Component 2.2.2: Matching Grants
78.
79.
The project will also provide matching grants for marketing activities under this component. It is expected that up to 300
individual entrepreneurs and groups, which are already engaged in marketing, but would like to increase the quality and volume
of their sales and add value to their produce will be targeted. The amount of grants will depend on the enterprise and will be up
to US$ 5,000 for an individual and up to US$ 15,000 for a group with a minimum of 3 to 15 members. The project will also
introduce smallholder commercial producers to the PFIs partnering with the project to enable their groups access  commercial
credit. The purpose will be to link them, through  the value chain, to inputs suppliers and/or off-takers.
Targeted activities will include: a) improvement of existing small scale livestock slaughter facilities (slaughters slabs), through
renovation and improvements that conform to standards in the Kenya Meat Control Act; b) introduction or improvement of poultry
processing centers by equipping them with micro-slaughter and refrigeration capacity for meat storage; c) improvement or
construction of sheds in the rural areas for chicks, eggs and honey aggregation; d) introduction or improvement of new meat
processing technologies (smokers, sausage makers, picklers); f) provision of manual centrifuges in the case of honey;
pasteurizing equipment in the case of goat milk; f) harvesting, refinement and sale of honey by products (beeswax, pollen,
propolis, bee venom, royal jelly, bee colonies, bee brood, queen bees, and package bees); g) making of cheese and soaps from
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
goat milk; h) hide transformation into leather, shoes or sandals, purses, masks, ornaments and other apparel for the urban and
export market, etc.
15/27
Special consideration will be given to: (i) ICT platforms that bear on the target market chains; (ii) those exploring innovative feed
formulation or storage strategies; (iii) distributors of innovative feed formulations; (iv) innovators of new storage technologies; and
(v) agro-vets that help to deliver vaccination services thereby reducing the need for closing of markets due to livestock epidemics.
Participants will be selected based on a combination of selective head hunting using (recruiting) and call for proposals. The ICT
call for proposals will target a range of innovators in the field as well as candidates from the Agronomy and Computer
Programming/Science collegesand universities.
The implementing service provider will vet applicants, assist each successful applicant to develop a business plan, and provide
the PMCU with three notarized witnesses who are non-family members from each applicant’s community, thereby ascertaining
the legitimacy of the investment. The project will fund up to 70 per cent of the total proposed investment. The beneficiary must
provide a minimum of 30 per cent of the investment, whether it is from intermediary financial institution (e.g. bank or SACCO)
loans, or group contributions. Similar to market infrastructure, all new technologies and processing equipment or building
construction should be climate adapted.
The project will provide opportunities for training, peer-to-peer learning and exposure visits to those participating in the
selected value chains. The training opportunities will include a host of modules for business skills, economic analysis and
technical aspects regarding the processing, storage, value addition and marketing of meat, dairy, poultry and honey products.
The project will also identity opportunities for peer-to peer learning by sponsoring visits to successful entrepreneurs and groups
as well as private sector players along the value chain. It is expected that the project will provide opportunities for this type of
training, peer learning and exchange visits for about 2,000 participants. From among this, 60 percent will be women and 30
percent will be youth. The Component Lead for the Marketing Component will organize the training and learning opportunities in
consultation with the county Governments. A selection criterion will be developed for participants in the training to ensure
seriousness and utility of the training.
There are many young men and women in the livestock sector who operate at the fringes of the value chains selected due to lack
of opportunities, skills and capital. These include the young men and women who are found in the livestock markets attempting to
trade in livestock, as well as those engaged in poultry and honey production. To encourage these youth, the project will arrange
opportunities of learning and apprenticeship for them by placing them at key nodes in the value chain with agro-vets and input
suppliers, placement at livestock markets, apprenticeships with private sector firms, in order to understand  market analysis and
trends in the selected value chains. Lessons from the Kenya Youth Employability Programme will be incorporated  in
implementing this activity. An estimated 500 young men and women will be selected for such training opportunities. From among
these, at least 30 per cent will be women.
One of the key constraints along the value chain in the selected counties is the limited transport facilities to carry the produce
to markets. The road networks between villages and primary or secondary markets are not well developed. This becomes critical
when smallholder produce is fragmented, the means to aggregate it are limited, and the produce is perishable, such as dairy milk
which is produced daily in small quantities, dressed poultry or slaughtered meat. Furthermore, when chickens are kept beyond
their maturity date, they add to feed cost without adding to the value as live chickens are generally sold by piece and not by
weight. The KeLCoP will provide matching grants to young men and women to purchase motorbikes for transporting goods to
primary and secondary markets for smallholders. Those interested in playing the role of aggregators will also be supported.
Multi-Stakeholder Platforms (MSPs) have proven to be an effective mechanism for bringing together key players along the
value chain for dialogue, brokering and vertical and horizontal coordination among key actors in the selected value chains. The
KeLCoP will establish MSPs in the selected counties to enhance sourcing of information and remove bottlenecks to increase
trading and profits, and identify practical opportunities for linkages and growth among smallholders and private and public sector
actors. The project will support the initial round of MSPs for the selected value chains. The MSPs will be facilitated by the project
marketing specialist and the respective county chief officer of trade and Livestock. KeLCoP will invite farmer groups[41],
interested stakeholders from commercial service providers and suppliers (of technical or financial services or inputs), government
departments, research institutions etc., to be members of the MSPs. The meetings are expected to foster trust among the
different stakeholders and creates greater common understanding of the opportunities and challenges.
Many young men and women in the project counties, engaged in the selected value chains, are linked to a large number of
smallholders and provide them with key inputs for livestock production. They also purchase their produce in open or contractual
agreements. Some of these youth are very innovative and provide a one-stop shop for farmers to get their chicks, feeds,
medications and extension services. Farmers are also provided with free training and advice before the birds are delivered to the
farm and are also assured of a secured market for all the grown birds and provide a range of live and dressed chickens to the
market. There are a host of other entrepreneurs and start-ups initiated for the supply of equipment and other inputs, which supply
incubators with automatic controlling of temperature and humidity with hatching rates of more than 98 per cent. These innovative
start-ups are important to help smallholders grow their business and modernize their operations. The KeLCoP will thus issue a
call for proposals to provide matching grants for these start-ups. It is expected that KeLCoP will provide support to 30 such start-
ups at an average of USD 30,000 per grantee. The start-ups will also be introduced to the PFIs, partnering with the project to
enable the groups access commercial credit.
87.
The project will also select young men and women who might need additional financing support through philanthropic
crowdfunding opportunities. The KeLCoP will carefully screen and select around 20 to 50 young men and women, who are
credible entrepreneurs from among its beneficiaries and develop their profiles and detail their specific business venture and their
opportunities for growth. The selection of the candidates will be from among those who also provide an employment generation
opportunity for and growth to others associated with the business. These profiles will be posted on a specially designed on-line
mobile platform, such as M-Changa in Kenya. Funds have been allocated in the budget to further screen the candidates and
develop their profiles. The service provider selected for providing social mobilization and GALs training will also be asked to
identify candidates for the purpose together with county Governments and the PMCU.
Sub-Component 2.3 Value chain management information systems
16/27
88.
89.
Poor and uneven access to market information is a well-known constraint to livestock trade in the project area. The project will
thus source appropriate ICT technologies for the smallholder farmers. ICT can provide a mechanism to: a) crowdsource market
prices to make real-time price information available to buyers and sellers; b) provide a platform for open purchase and sales
orders; and c) maximize use and availability of transport as when a truck is loading for transport to or from market destination; d)
publicize the availability of feed and fodder, water, vaccinations and AI breeding services; (e) identify available and appropriate
financial services; (f) disseminate nutrition messages; (g) notify producers of incidences of disease among livestock, something
that, because of imperfect information flows, necessitates market closures in an effort to contain the diseases; and j)
crowdsourcing climactic conditions for real-tracking impending drought thereby facilitating early harvesting, transport, sale and
stockage of fodder.
The indepth climate risk analysis and the preliminary ESMF identify potential environmental, climate or social risks associated
with component 2 and its sub-components, namely, market infrastructure and capacity development, building inclusive value
chains, and value chain management information systems. Exclusion lists have also been provided to ensure that the nature and
scale of operations do not lead to adverse/irreversible impacts. The indepth climate risk analysis and the overall ESMP propose
mitigation actions which the project should take into consideration during implementation. The risks and mitigation actions will be
further elaborated in the final ESMF and ESMPs of the various sub-projects. The indepth climate risk analysis provides guidance
on value chains that are suitable for the various targeted counties based on the climatic trends and future projections.
Component 3: Project management and coordination
Sub-component 3.1: Policy and institutional support to national Government
90.
A host of policy issues, relevant to enhancing the livestock sector, have been identified for support. Funds have been set aside to
support the Government in: (i)  development of a Livestock Master Plan, that will guide policy and investment interventions in the
sub-sector in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the International Livestock Research Institute
(ILRI); (ii) preparation of the necessary regulations on feed quality, market regulation, etc; and (iii) development of Livestock Sub-
Sector Strategies at the county level to implement livestock related policies. Women’s strategic interests will be addressed
through these policies and relevant action plans. This will be undertaken by promoting their visibility, by recognizing the critical
role that they play in the livestock sector and their involvement at different stages of the livestock value chain as producers,
traders, butchers, processors etc.
91.
The livestock strategies will also identify the main constraints faced by women and men in accessing, controlling and managing
livestock, while highlighting the additional and specific challenges faced by women, and specific strategies to address them. The
strategies will also identify the role of youth in livestock value-chains, their specific challenges and opportunities and strategies for
their meaningful involvement. The policy will also examine opportunities for integrating nutrition related aspects relevant for the
livestock sector. Improved food safety standards and regulations can also enhance nutrient content of products.
Sub-component 3.2: Project Management & Coordination Unit Support
92.
93.
This component will cover the incremental costs of project management and coordination by the Project Management Unit
(PMCU), which will be based in Nakuru. The PMCU will be a lean structure given that most of the work will be out-sourced to
NGOs and private sector entities and county governments. It will comprise of a Project Coordinator, a Financial Controller, a
Procurement Specialist, a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, a Knowledge Management TA, a Procurement Assistant, an
Environment and Climate Officer, and a Monitoring and Evaluation Assistant. This team that will possess appropriate project
management skills, will be competitively recruited through advertisements and interviews, and will be supported with drivers,
Secretaries, General Administrative and support staff. The project will support the operational expenses related to project
management staff salaries, coordination, and implementation, including the start-up workshop, Annual Work Programme and
Budget (AWPB) at the national and county level and monitoring and evaluation. The component will provide, additional vehicles
to the SDCP available fleet, required as well as other office equipment and facilities at the PMCU and the participating counties.
The PMCU will be supported by short-term consultants in the areas of a Production Lead Specialist, a Marketing Development
Specialist, a Social Inclusion and Mobilization Specialist, a Financial Assistant. An environmental safeguards specialist and a
social safeguards specialist will support the finalization of the ESMF and the FPIC, as well as build the capacities of the PMCU
and county teams in implementing proposed environmental,social and climate safeguards actions.
Given the four innovative technological tools in the project, which will call for various thematic expertise, and given the
experience of often weak PMUs in Kenya-IFAD portfolio, implementing arrangements will involve contracting a well-established
ICT4D organization, Precision Agriculture for Development (PAD) to coordinate the development and implementation of all the
four planned ICT4D tools.  PAD is already working with Kenya’s Ministry of Agriculture, State Department of Crops. Under this
partnership, PAD has already developed an e-extension tool in select counties. To operationalize the various ICT4D tools PAD
will work with with output-based, competitively, locally well-established NGO(s), with expertise in ASALs, business, technology,
livestock development. A number of such NGOs have already expressed interest and these include: USTADI Foundation[42],
SNV; ICCO Cooperation, Resource Conflict Institute (RECONCILE), among others. PAD will support the PMCU to set up quality
M&E and knowledge management systems and processes through streamlining and digitizing. PAD will also assist PMCU to
develop high quality relevant knowledge products.
94.
Implementing Arrangements: Considering that each County is responsible for the implementation of activities within its
jurisdiction, activities will commence in the first year, in all counties, phased according to the speed of setting up the County-level
implementation Committees. The Business model is centred around area specific value chain Multi-Stakeholder Platforms. The
sequence of activities in the implementation of KeLCoP will involve: (1) formation of County Committees; (2) nomination by the
CECs of the County and Sub-County Project Ipmplementation Teams; (3) contracting of value chain facilitators; (4) sensitization
of target groups; (5) identification of other commodities within the value chain and the key actors (production, processing and
marketing) in each of the 3 selected value chains; (6) formation of Area specific (Ward/sub-Ward) Multi-Stakeholder Platforms
(MSPs), with member agreement on governance structure and election of members to Commodity Ward/sub-Ward Value Chain
Committees of the platforms; (7) Identifying constraints (weak links) of the value chain; (8) Development of activities based on the
identified multi-stakeholder platforms public infrastructure, and expressed demand for project support by value chain actors; and
(9) on a continuous basis, value chain facilitators will proactively present to platform members other potential partnerships or
products and hold joint private sector fora, with KEPSA.
17/27
95.
Corresponding to the above sequence of activities, the project will finalize contractural arrangements with PAD, to initiate the
development of ICT4D tools (e-extension; e-voucher; e-marketing; crowd-funding) in close collaboration with value chain multi-
stakeholder platforms.
E. Theory of Change
96.
97.
98.
99.
KeLCoP’s theory of change (TOC) is based on a multi-dimensional view of poverty and careful assessment of the factors, which
could help households improve their well-being on a sustainable basis, in counties which have high rates of poverty and food
and nutrition insecurity. Apart from promoting activities that are expected to have a high-pay off, there is also need to deal with
issues of gender disparity, youth inclusion within the household and society which lead to unequal access to opportunities,
services and assets. The project will address the unique challenges and opportunities for women and youth in the agriculture
sector by incorporating tailored opportunities for these groups as an integral part of delivering Government’s ASTGS.
In terms of poverty reduction, community led development, value chain development and graduation approach are all proposed
as approaches to promote inclusive transformation of the lives of excluded vulnerable groups to lift them out of poverty. Under
these two approaches, a number of work streams or activities are planned, notably: GALS methodology to empower women;
skills training for youth  and women; matching grants; e-voucher (access to inputs); new livestock breeds (goats, chicken); e-
extension (access to agriculture TA); range land management; livestock market infrastructure; investment forums for investors;
capacity development of county governments; as well as policy diagnosis and dialogue. 
The TOC will  achieve nutrition outcomes in KeLCoP based on three pathways as follows: (i) Increased income to be
accompanied with nutrition education and Social and Behavior Change Communication (SBCC) activities, that will improve the
demand side and facilitate the consumption of more nutritious and healthy food; (ii) Increased availability of nutritious foods, such
as milk, meat and honey; and (iii) Women’s Empowerment in ways that improve nutrition, such as increasing women’s incomes
and assets, promotion of gender equality and women’s empowerment, as well as targeted messages to help women and men
make more informed dietary choices. GALS provides the tools for behavior change for nutrition and women’s empowerment and
will complement the income pathway with an adequate awareness on the importance of consuming diversified and nutritious
food.
The analysis on the ground shows that a value chain approach, which supports both production and marketing relevant for the
smallholder can appreciably increase household incomes but also help farmers become more resilient to climate change. The
project’s TOC also recognizes that smallholders and rural households cannot access timely information on reliable input
suppliers, improved breeds, production advise, feed formulation, timely and reliable disease diagnostic services, weather
services, markets and financing. Farmers need support in breed, feed and improved management practices as well as strategies
to develop the rangelands to help increase productivity of their stock and provide them with strategies to improve rangeland
productivity and the capacity for storage of hay to cope with dry seasons. Environment, climate and social safeguards will be
observed in all sub-projects, to ensure appropriate mitigation actions are put in place to address risks and impacts. The ESMF,
indepth climate risk analysis and the integrated pesticides management plan spell out the potential risks and propose appropriate
mitigation measures.
100.
The project approach is premised on the evidence that the traditional extension approach has not been effective and new
information technologies need to be deployed to provide farmers with relevant and timely information on animal health, disease
control and treatment through developing on-line portals for technically strong veterinary services. The project will use a host of
digital technologies and applications and deploy ICT4D approaches and scalable models in partnership with the private sector
which has a range of services already available in Kenya.
101.
The project TOC with respect to youth postulates that they can be attracted to participate in the livestock sector by providing
them with opportunities for innovation, modernization and access to enhanced assets, skills, finance and opportunities. The
project thus provides specific entry points for engagement, by defining specific targets for the youth. Youth from vulnerable
households with no education or experience will be integrated into value chains through the GALS, as well as through the
graduation scheme. Youth from vulnerable households who show growth promise and the commitment to enhance production
capacity will be supported through matching grants as individuals or as members of a group. Youth will be provided opportunities
for learning and apprenticeships with private sector firms, and be placed at key nodes of the value chains with agro-vets and
input suppliers. Young innovators who may be at early start-up stage of initiating a venture will be supported through grants and
promoted through the crowd funding platform, etc.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
102.
Activities to be financed under KeLCoP will contribute to the achievements of many SDGs and will contribute to the GoK’s goal of
increasing incomes of rural small - scale livestock farmers and pastoralists, to make them more resilient to climate risks,
environmental degradation and economic shocks. The project design is harmonized with the CIDPs and its implementation will
be coordinated closely with the different departments and agencies at the Counties and National levels. KeLCoP is aligned with
IFAD’s 2016-2025 Strategic Framework and strongly reflects the key mainstreaming themes of IFAD with respect to gender,
youth, nutrition, environment and climate change. Indigenous peoples will also form part of the target groups in this project. The
project is also strongly aligned with the GoK’s key strategy documents in its focus on smallholders and the livestock sector.
103.
The project will capitalize on the opportunity to partner with Heifer International (HI) in Kenya, which has rich experience of
working in the dairy and poultry value chains in partnership with producer groups, financial institutions, county governments,
processors, and input and service providers. HI has indicated its commitment to provide technical and financial support to the
project.
18/27
104.
Partnerships are also envisaged during implementation with both national and international institutions such as: (i) National
Environment Management Authority (NEMA) on climate and environmental aspects; (ii) FAO for developing  the Livestock Master
Plan; (iii) Resident Coordinator’s Office leading a consortium of UN Agencies and GoK in the implementation of programmes to
address internal inter-community pasturists conflicts in the targeted counties. (iv) ILRI for technical expertise in livestock
breeding, animal husbandry and pasture management. In addition, complementarity will be ensured with the: (i) African
Development Bank’s (AfDB) ‘Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Programme’ (DRSLP); (ii) the World Bank’s
‘Regional Pastoral Livelihoods resilience Project’ (RPLRP); (iii) private sector associations for public-private-producer partnership
(4P) development; (iv) financial institutions; (v) other on-going IFAD programmes; and (vi) potentially the Green Climate Fund
(GCF). The types of activities that the GCF financing could be used to scale up would be those activities of the project, which
could increase the climate resilience of smallholder pastoralists and livestock farmers and enhance their adaptive capacity.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
105.
The total project costs including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$ 93.5 million over a six-year
implementation period. Project costs by components are summarized in table 3, while a complete set of project summary tables
and detailed costs tables are presented in Annex 3.
106.
Table 3: Project costs by component and financier (US$’000)
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
The total project costs, of US$ 93.5 million, will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of US$ 54.8 million of which US$ 22.91 million,
representing 42 per cent of the total IFAD financing is climate finance; (ii) a GoK contribution of US$ 19 million, of which taxes and
duties account for US$ 12.6 million, cash contribution US$ 1.5 million and in-kind contribution  US$ 4.9 million; (iii) a Beneficiary
contribution of US$ 11.8 million, of which in-kind accounts for US$ 9.2 million and cash for US$ 2.6 million; (iv) Heifer International
contribution of US$ 3.4 million; and (v) PFIs for an amount of US$ 4.5 million.
Table 4: Project costs by expenditure account and financier (USD’000)
107.
The Financing Plan covers: i) an IFAD loan of US$ 54.8 million (58.6 per cent of the total cost); ii) GoK contribution of US$ 19
million (20.3 percent); of which taxes and duties account for US$ 12.6 million (13.5 per cent), cash US$ 1.5 million (1.6 per cent)
and in-kind contribution of US$ 4.9 million (5.2 per cent); iii) a Beneficiary contribution of US$ 11.8 million (12.7 per cent) of
which in-kind accounts for US$ 9.3 million (9.9 per cent) and cash for US$ 2.6 million (2.8 per cent); iv) Heifer International
contribution of US$ 3.4 million (3.6 per cent) ;and v) PFIs for an amount of US$ 4.5 million (4.8 per cent).
19/27
Table 5: Project components by year –Total including contingencies (USD’000)
108.
Disbursement flow. To enable easy monitoring of progress, the below graph forecast the expected disbursement per year.
Around US$ 52.2 million (56 per cent) of project resources is expected to be disbursed by Year 3 and the remaining US$ 41.3
million (44 per cent) will be disbursed in the last three years of the project.
Graph 1:  KeLCoP-Expected Disbursement Trend (USD’000)
a.   Disbursement Methods
109.
There will be three types of disbursement mechanisms for the project, which consist of: (i) Advance Withdrawal; (ii) Direct
Payment; and (iii) Reimbursement. Disbursements from IFAD will be made by way of an advance to the Designated Account
which will be replenished on the bases of expenditure incurred,  supported with Statement of Expenditures (SoEs). There will be
one designated account, which would receive funds from IFAD, which will have a corresponding dedicated project operational
account in Kenya Shillings, to be managed by the PMCU. The participating counties will also have dedicated project operational
accounts at the county level for receiving funds to facilitate activities to be carried out at the county level.
Figure 1: Flow of Funds
20/27
Note to Figure 1: (a) Transfer of GoK counterpart funds to a separate bank account that will be managed by PMCU; (b) Payments for
expenditure from counterpart funds bank account; (c) Transfer of IFAD funds to KeLCoP US$ designated account; (d) Transfer of
IFAD funds to PMCU operational account in local currency for payments at PMCU. This account will be held in a commercial bank;
(e) Transfer of IFAD funds to County Project Accounts; (f) Payments of eligible expenditure at county levels; (g) Payments of eligible
expenditure at PMCU; (h) Direct payment to suppliers or partners by IFAD. This will be on exceptional basis and for payments of more
than USD 100,000 as will be guided in the letter to borrower.
c. Disbursement
110.
Disbursements from IFAD will be made by way of an advance to the Designated Account and subsequent replenishments based
on expenditure incurred as supported with Statement of Expenditure (SoE). There will be one designated account that would
receive funds from IFAD which will have a corresponding dedicated project operational account in Kenya Shillings (Kshs)
managed by PCU. The participating counties will also have dedicated project operational accounts at the county level for
receiving funds to facilitate activities to be carried out at county levels. The project operations bank account both at the national
level and counties will be opened at a commercial bank account to ensure that expenditure can takes place even during the
IFMIS downtime which has been a big challenge in other projects.  The project will maintain separate accounts for funds from all
the different financiers.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
111.
The findings of the economic and financial analysis are presented in Annex 4. In summary, the KeLCoP will benefit about
110,000 households, equivalent to 495,000 beneficiaries. The expected benefits are: (i) at least 60 per cent of the households
reporting increase in income and 60 percent reporting increase in the production volume; ii) at least 50 per cent of the targeted
women reaching the minimally adequate diet diversity (measured by MDD-W indicator); iii) approximately 60 per cent of the
targeted households reporting adoption on environmentally sustainable and climate resilient water infrastructure and practices;
iv) access to 6,000 packages for vulnerable households; v) 300 grants distributed for smallholder commercial producers
activities; vi) 500 grants and training of young entrepreneurs; vii) 140 grants to youth for the innovative start-ups; viii) at least
50,000 rural producers accessing production inputs and/or technological packages; ix) around 7, 255 households accessing
financial services; x) around 22,000 women owning productive assets; xi) US$ 9.4 million value of volume of credit advanced to
project beneficiaries by the financial institutions, xii) 30,000 individuals would benefit from the upgrading of 20 market
infrastructure and xiii) 20,000 beneficiaries accessing water infrastructure and around 304,000 livestock.
112.
The KeLCoP’s net present value (NPV) is positive (US$ 91.3 Million; KES 10.1 Billion). Its Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) is estimated at 29.1 percent, which demonstrates the KeLCoP’s profitability. The economic analysis implies that KeLCoP
is feasible.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
113.
The overall approach in the KeLCoP project is designed to embed an exit and sustainability aspect in all key project components
(Annex 10). The focus of the project in helping the National Government with a Master Plan for Livestock as well as the
regulations associated with the Livestock Bill for the three value chains, and the County Governments with strategic planning for
key aspects of the livestock sector is likely to add to the long-term strategic and regulatory capacity at the national and county
level. The comprehensive package of support to vulnerable households, is expected to graduate households to higher levels of
income as well as transform subsistence producers to commercial producers. The GALS approach empowers the individual,
enhances their vision about their future and has proved to be a transformative approach. When it is combined with a graduation
approach and asset transfers, skills training and access to key inputs and markets, it is a powerful mechanism for households to
enhance their resilience to risks and improve their livelihoods in a sustainable manner.
21/27
114.
The project will help to enhance the capacity of county governments and smallholder livestock producers especially women and
youth in key aspects of livestock production. This is expected to improve breeds and their productivity, reduce morbidity and
mortality rates as well as the capacity for disease surveillance, treatment and control in all three key value chains namely small
ruminants, poultry and honey production. All investments in County Infrastructure such as breed multiplication centres will be
undertaken after ensuring that the county governments have the technical staff and allocated sufficient operating and
maintenance funds for these facilities. No investment will be made without this assurance in a written MoU between the County
Government and the PMCU, thereby enhancing the chances of sustainability of the investments. Similarly, the investments in
community hay sheds, community seed banks, water infrastructure will all be demand driven schemes which will be designed
keeping in mind the capacity of the community to manage them. The approach of the project towards the marketing component is
also designed in a manner that is cognizant of sustainability. Provision of training for the county environment and NRM officers
on environment, climate and social safeguards as well as the close working relationship with NEMA will ensure set safeguards
are complied with post project.
115.
The project will follow a market and private sector led approach in which all marketing groups will be facilitated to link with
markets and understand the types of volumes, quantity and other product attributes and specifications required before any
investments are made in enhancing production. The investment in the Producer Groups and Associations will be based on
proper feasibility assessment and market demand in partnership with key market drivers and private sector investors.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
116.
There are several risks, which are detailed in Annex 9. The main ones are as follows:
117.
Governance risks. These are associated with the limited financial and personnel capacity at the county level, as well as the
forthcoming elections in 2022. The Project will invest adequately in technical and financial support to boost capacity of county
personnel and also contract qualified Technical Assistant service providers and use of e-extension approaches where necessary
to bridge capacity gaps in extension service provision. The project is expected to receive a start-up advance that will allow the
project to commence implementation of the start-up activities and prepare adequately for implementation. There will be
orientation and capacity building training for all key staff especially the finance team at PMCU and participating counties. The
finance teams from one of the best performing IFAD-financed projects will carry out the training in collaboration with IFAD
Financial Management Division (FMD). This will be done early in FY 2021/22 after selection of the finance team. IFAD-led
supervision and implementation support missions, will support project implementation.
118.
Macroeconomic risks. While the medium-term growth outlook is stable, recent threats of drought and continued subdued
private sector investment could drag down growth in the near-term, not to mention the serious effect of covid-19 on the economy.
The livestock sector is a promising pathway for generating rural growth and investment. The project has a strong focus on private
sector led growth in the selected counties and has identified a host of opportunities for encouraging the participation of the private
sector in the selected value chains through hosting investor forums and multi-stakeholder forums.
119.
Sector strategies and policies. There is no overarching strategic policy or planning at the national or the county government
level for livestock breed, feed and animal disease surveillance and control. The project will contribute to the National Government
led development of a Master Plan for Livestock, in collaboration with FAO and ILRI, and assist the county governments with
strategic plans for the livestock sector. The livestock policies and strategies that are in place do not adequately acknowledge the
role, needs, priorities and interests of smallholder farmers, women, youth and marginalized communities in agriculture. The
project will facilitate the National Government and the County Governments to develop inclusive livestock strategies. The
strategic interests of smallholder pastoralist and agro-pastoralist farmers, rural women, youth and marginalized traditional tribes
will be addressed by promoting their visibility through recognizing the critical role that they play in the livestock value chains and
addressing their needs and priorities.
120.
Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability. There lacks  capacity for  any one service provider to deal with
the implementation of the GALS and graduation programme for vulnerable households. Several service providers will be
recruited competitively  to implement these two activities. The project has also included many innovative aspects such as e-
extension, e-finance, crowdfunding and e-marketing and financing of start-ups which entail certain risks. However, these
investments also provide high rewards. In order to minimize the risks, the project will use agencies with considerable experience
in implementing these approaches in Kenya as well as provide opportunities for learning from South-South Collaboration, and
lessons from those who have developed and refined the use of digital services. Kenya is a forerunner in the implementation of
digital technology and the risk is probably lower in the country than many other countries.
121.
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions. The main negative environmental risks, which are likely to impact from the
project include overstocking, overgrazing, land/pasture degradation, deforestation, soil erosion, pollution from effluent discharge,
wildfires, and resource use conflicts among others. In order to mitigate these risk, the KeLCoP has elaborate measures within its
components, the SECAP and the ESMF to minimise or reverse these risks. Some proposed mitigation actions include water
infrastructure development, sustainable land and water management practices, rehabilitation of degraded pasture lands,
promotion of sustainable rangeland and pasture management practices, development of a grievance redress mechanism, and
promotion of integrated pests management among others. It is expected that if the project implements the proposed mitigation
actions, builds capacities of farmers, and works closely with relevant authorities, the risk levels in the project areas will reduce
significantly or even be reversed.
22/27
122.
Contagious and deadly animal disease and market closures. This risk, as well as risk of disease outbreaks and pest
infestation will be mitigated through support to epidemio-surveillance and strengthening of monitoring mechanisms including
adoption of innovative ICT based applications. The project includes a contingency budget to assist the Government in case of
any outbreaks such as the locust attacks, which recently destroyed crops in the country. The threat, which has emerged from
COVID-19 has further highlighted the need to build capacity to be prepared for various types of disease surveillance and
monitoring systems. The project will support the implementation of agreed safety protocols where there is danger of a contagious
virus affecting livestock or humans.
123.
Risk of delay in provision of funds from GoK. IFAD will negotiate for a firm commitment from GoK during loans negotiations
that transfer of counterpart funds is undertaken on timely basis for smooth implementation of the project.
124.
The project Inherent risk is assessed as high and with the proposed mitigation measures this is foreseen to come down to
medium. The main foreseen risks for the project include delayed start up due to the recurrent issue of timely procurement of the
right accounting software and implementation of a proper accounting system. This is being mitigated by the ongoing policy of
harmonization of the accounting package used across the Kenyan portfolio and thus building up the staff capacities. This will be
facilitated through the start-up funds. Similarly due to the decentralized administrative structure of the governance within the
country, fund flow to the 10 participating counties is a potential risk. It is envisage tio use the existing finance staffing in these
counties and thus, training will be key for these staff to get well versed with IFAD financing guidelines and requirements. Each
county will also maintain a separate account to manage the facilitation (operation funds) that they will manage and thus provide
the necessary audit trail for the use of the funds. Major purchases for the Counties will be centralised and carried out through the
PCU.
I. Environment and Social category
125.
KeLCoP’s environment and social risk categorisation is B. The project will have no significant negative environmental and social
impacts. Those that were identified are reversible or can be mitigated through proposed interventions. The main environmental
and social risks that were identified during the design were related to: overgrazing and overstocking; land/pasture degradation,
deforestation, all leading to soil erosion and low livestock productivity etc. The key potential social risk is community based
resource use conflicts. The project will address these risks through investment in sustainable water and pasture/land
management interventions such as climate resilient water infrastructure (e.g. solar powered boreholes), sustainable rangeland
governance, and setting up a contingency fund to deal with climate related emergencies etc. The SECAP review note, the
preliminary ESMF and its ESMP, the integrated pesticides management plan and a grievance redress mechanism have been
prepared to guide the project on interventions needed to mitigate negative impacts and enhance positive ones. To mitigate
negative impacts and enhance positive outcomes, the project has developed a preliminary ESMF, an integrated pesticides
management plan, and an indepth climate risk analysis. To ensure indigenous communities in the project sites are well
integrated, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and Plan has been developed, which provides guidance to the project
on how to undertake a Free Prior Informed Consent (FPIC) process and develop IPs action plans through extensive
consultations with IPs and in seeking their consent. The movement restrictions resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic
have limited field visits and consultations with communities and relevant stakeholders. Thus, the project will finalise the ESMF
and ESMPs of the various sub-projects as well as undertake the FPIC and develop action plans once movement restrictions are
lifted by Government. Finalisation of the ESMF and FPIC will inform the revision of the PIM at pre-implementation stage.
J. Climate Risk classification
126.
KeLCoP’s climate risk classification is high. Some of the project counties are exposed to extreme weather events, mainly drought
and floods. Droughts in ASAL counties[43] have continued to affect livestock production/productivity and the livelihoods of
pastoralists/agro-pastoralists. Temperatures in Kenya have increased moderately over the years (by 0.25-0.5o C). The decrease
in rainfall, combined with the moderate increase in temperature, has resulted in reduced lengths of seasons and increases in
heat stress. Drought frequencies have increased to every 1-3 years, which has in some cases resulted in losses of up to 60 per
cent of livestock in recent years, in most ASAL Counties. During the drought, livestock are emaciated and their value drops
drastically. Climate change and variability could lead to emergence or re-emergence of climate related diseases and pests, such
as the Rift Valley Fever and desert locusts . The western counties[44] are relatively cooler, wetter and the mean annual
temperatures are lower. In various climate projection scenarios, western regions will more likely experience floods and
landslides, which could lead to disease outbreaks, loss of livestock and human lives.
127.
The KeLCoP has undertaken an in-depth climate risk analysis which identifies climate risks and proposes mitigation actions. The
indepth climate risk analysis provides guidance on value chains that are suitable for the various targeted counties based on the
climatic trends and future projections. The proposed adaptation and mitigation actions will be embedded in the Project
Implementation Manual (PIM) and in the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), to guide implementation.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
23/27
128.
KeLCoP will be implemented through the GoK’s existing structures. The project’s Lead Agency will be the SDL, which has
representation in all counties, but the implementation will be at the County level which makes the project a joint venture between
the National Government and the concerned County Governments. An Inter-Ministerial Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be
established with representation from all the concerned ministries and agencies, with the mandate to provide overall policy
guidance to the project, approve AWPBs, review project progress against targets, assess management effectiveness, decide on
corrective measures where appropriate, and review lessons learned and good practices.
129.
Kenya County Governments have well-established structures covering all County economic sectors. In the agriculture sector, a
County Executive Committee (CEC) member of the County Assembly, appointed by the Governor, is in Charge of Agriculture
Development in that County, and is assisted by Department Directors organized by Counties’ major sub-sectors. Counties are
relatively well staffed with subject matter specialists (crops, livestock, fisheries, irrigation experts, environment and climate), who
at devolution were posted to counties from: the National Government; the then Local Governments; or recruited by County Public
Service Boards (CPSBs). CPSBs have been established in each county to handle all human resource issues - staffing,
formulating and implementing human resource policies and frameworks, and building capacity. Appropriate structures therefore
exist, to enable effective project implementation. Counties are often well-funded with resource transfers from the National
Government. They therefore often have the means and the autonomy to address local needs.
130.
However, due to slow replacement of staff, who have either retired or resigned, and mismanagement of resources, constraints
are experienced in project management, especially in terms of procurement, financial management (FM), disbursements,
targeting, gender and beneficiary participation and monitoring. The project will address these issues through recruitment of
appropriate staff for the project management and coordination unit, which will be responsible for all project activities. Resources
will also be provided for capacity building of the existing staff in areas of gender, beneficiary mobilization, targeting etc. IFAD will
encourage the counties to recruit required staff where there are gaps, as counties have the resources.
131.
The project management and coordination Unit (PMCU) will be established in Nakuru with a strong team to coordinate
project activities (refer to PIM, in Annex 8). The PMCU team will be competitively recruited. At the County level, project
implementation will be overseen by the County Project Coordinating Committees (CPCCs). On the ground, at county and sub-
county levels, the project will be implemented by County Project Technical Teams (CPTTs) supported by Sub-County Project
Technical Teams (SCPTTs). Details are provided in the PIM. Heifer International will provide financial and technical assistance in
the following Counties: Bungoma, Kakamega, Marsabit, Samburu & Siaya. Heifer will establish a field presence in these counties
and prepare annual workplans and budgets for each of these counties, and in the specified activities. This will include  integrating
vulnerable households into value chains and supporting the target groups in homestead production for improved food and
nutrition security.
132.
The project will establish MSPs in the selected counties to bring together various stakeholders for the selected value chains. This
will promote information collection on available opportunities and challenges, remove bottlenecks to livestock commercialization
due to increased chances to link producers with input suppliers, markets, processors, traders, services providers, private and
public actors.
133.
Multi-Stakeholder Partnerships (MSPs): MSPs bring together representatives from different interest groups (stakeholders) to
discuss shared challenges, opportunities, policy actions and advocacy strategies. They promote better decision making by
ensuring that the views of the main actors concerned about a particular decision are heard and integrated at all stages through
dialogue and consensus building. Because of the inclusive and participatory approaches used, it gives stakeholders greater
sense of ownership for decisions made. The process takes the view that everyone involved in the process has a valid view and
relevant knowledge and experience to bring to the decision making. Everyone involved takes responsibility for the outcome, and
they are thus more likely to comply with them. Nutrition and the other mainstreaming themes (environment and climate, gender
and youth, indigenous people) will be largely represented by key actors from relevant sectors (e.g. the Human Nutrition and
Dietetics Unit within the Division of Family Health in the Ministry of Health, the Department of Social Development, etc.)
24/27
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
134.
The project will adopt and apply the international accounting standards and the accounts will be maintained using IPSAS cash
accounting. The project will be managed through a standalone accounting system. Given the current financial management
challenges with the ongoing projects, set up of the proper system will be a condition for disbursement and the facilitation of a
proper set up is foreseen through the use of start up funds. Disbursements will be through the three different mechanisms of
replenishments through the Special Account, Direct payments and Reimbursement depending on the nature of expenditures.
Disbursement to the counties will be made as advances. Recording of expenditure to the project accounting system will be done
by PCU based on expenditure reports submitted by the counties. At county level the accounting will be done through the IFMIS
system where a code will be assigned to the project for tracking the funds and expenses within the system. The project will keep
 up with timely planning to ensure that the deadlines for national budgeting will be met given that the project as with the current
projects will be within captured and reported through the national budgeting system through the Revenue and appropriation in
Aid and hence government policy guidelines will be adhered to in order to receive timely budgetary approvals.
135.
External audit will continue to be provided by the Office of the Auditor General as it is for the current portfolio. The audit will be
performed in accordance with the guidelines from IFAD as contained in the Hand book for financial management and auditing for
IFAD funded projects. Although the audit reports have been timely and auditor quality of work has been rated highly satisfactory,
a delay was experienced this year due to the vacant position of the Auditor General who is constitutional mandated to sign the
reports at the time the reports were due. This is not expected to become a common occurrence
136.
The PMCU will recruit a Financial Controller and a Financial Assistant, install a financial management software and train the
finance staff on its use since IFAD portfolio in Kenya is moving towards having a harmonized financial management software for
all upcoming projects.
137.
External Audit: On annual basis, the consolidated financial statements for the project will be audited by Office of the Auditor
General and audited financial statements submitted to IFAD within six months after the period end in accordance with IFAD
guidelines. The quality and timeliness of the external audit by the Office of the Auditor General has been rated as highly
satisfactory at the portfolio level based on performance on the other existing projects.
Procurement
138.
As part of the design process, a Project’s Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM) has been developed, with the overall procurement risk
rated “Medium”. Despite the robust legal and policy procurement framework in the country, the assessment identified the
following potential risks: (i) currently GoK-led projects have insufficient staff handling procurement; (ii) delays in initiating planned
transactions; (iii) poor technical specifications and evaluation criteria; (iv) incomplete record-keeping and filing; (v) excessive use
of non-competitive procurement methods, without proper justification; (vi) weaknesses in contract management, particularly due
to underestimating costs during contract drafting often resulting in cost overruns; (vii) lack of accountability of procurement
decisions; and (viii) weak procurement planning.
139.
The project will put in place mitigation measures to ensure quality and timely implementation of procurement. This will involve
recruiting a competent two-person procurement team, building its capacity, providing close implementation support, supervision
and follow-up to ensure compliance to procurement procedures and guidelines. Details of these measures are presented in the
PIM (Annex 8).
140.
The KeLCoP will adopt Kenya’s Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act No. 33 of 2015 (Revised Edition 2016), to the extent
that it is consistent with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines (2010). National systems will be applied to all procurement activities
except those above the threshold for International Competitive Bidding (ICB), in line with World Bank guidelines. KeLCoP design
has put in place safeguards to ensure project implementation does not experience problems faced during implementation of
other IFAD-financed projects. This includes: (i) providing intensive training at start-up phase to familiarize the PMCU and CPTTs
with IFAD guidelines and strengthen procurement skills capacity, and (ii) reduction of the thresholds during the initial period of
implementation, as PMCU staff acquire experience and demonstrate confidence in executing procurement systems and
methods.
141.
The KeLCoP PMCU will manage and oversee all project-related procurement including ICB, National Competitive Bidding (NCB)
procurement and selection of consultants, as well as other procurements at national level. At County level, CPTTs will be
established within the participating Counties and lead the execution of small value procurement activities that use “request for
quotations” method. The effectiveness of procurement will be assessed during supervision and alternate arrangements will be
put in place, if deemed necessary. Emphasis will be placed on ensuring that procurement processes by the PMCU and its
contractors comply with IFAD’s environment and social safeguards procedures.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
25/27
142.
KeLCoP will deploy a participatory Knowledge Management/Monitoring and Evaluation (KM/M&E) system to be developed and
managed by the PMCU. A key element of the KM/M&E system will be involvement of primary stakeholders as active participants
to provide inclusive assessments of results, and to reflect the perspectives and aspirations of those most directly affected by the
project. The PMCU will bear overall responsibility for the continuous M&E and regular reporting on progress and the achievement
of project objectives, milestones and results. As indicated in the Kenya COSOP (2020-2025), the Kenya portfolio is currently in
the process of developing a portfolio KM Plan. Therefore, the KM Plan developed through KeLCoP will be aligned with this
overarching portfolio KM Plan.
143.
Moreover, a web-based Management Information System (MIS) will be developed to facilitate data management and allow
automated production of a number of draft progress tables. Learning, KM and South South Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) will
be key aspects of KeLCoP implementation and have been budgeted for accordingly. The project log-frame includes the relevant
core indicators at both output and outcome level.  Progress on log-frame indicators will be measured at baseline, MTR and
completion, using the standard methodology, which is also presented in IFAD’s COI guidelines. The project’s operational M&E
framework will, among others, have key indicators to monitor progress in the implementation of the ESMPs and key actions
proposed in the indepth climate risk analysis and IPs action plans.
144.
Beneficiary feedback, grievance redress and E-Citizen Portal: KeLCoP will hold regular beneficiary feedback surveys that
will enable it to assess how the participants view the various activities and their recommendations for improving these for greater
relevance, efficiency and impact. The project will promote SSTC. Details are presented in the PIM.
b. Innovation and scaling up
145.
The project design includes some innovative elements and includes opportunities for the use of a host of digital technologies and
applications that deploy ICT4D approaches and scalable models in partnership with the private sector. The use of innovations
and information technology will be integrated into the development of an e-extension approach and the development of e-finance
to reduce the costs of access and delivery, and develop e-marketing systems for information and sale. The project will scale up
the provision of digital financial services such as the e-voucher scheme previously used in Kenya for the cereal sector under
which users are issued customized debit (ATM) cards containing different 'e-wallets' which they can use to purchase farm
products or inputs from selected agro-dealers. The project will also secure direct crowd-funding for its beneficiaries by developing
a dashboard which would host profiles of properly selected and screened youth innovators on an online and mobile fund-raising
platform for crowdfunding from philanthropic sources.
146.
The project is also planning to mainstream a gender transformational methodology for households into the graduation approach,
which to date has demonstrated success in graduating households but not addressed gender issues within the household. IFAD
projects have typically used one or the other to graduate households. This will be the first time that both approaches will be used
to complement each other. The project will also establish a grievance and beneficiary engagement system by using ICT4D to
develop an -e-Citizen portal for grievance communication and redress and proper tracking to refine the project approach and
intervention strategies.
147.
The project also provides an opportunity to operationalize IFAD’s Private Sector Engagement Strategy designed to foster
strengthened collaboration with private sector partners. There are several private sector players who can offer contractual
arrangements to support out-grower and contract farming schemes to support smallholders. The project will strive to secure
funding from IFAD’s forthcoming Private Sector Financing Programme (PSFP) for direct support to the private sector.
M. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
148.
An important lesson learned from other investment projects financed by IFAD and other Development Partners is implementation
start-up delays, which may be occasioned by delays in recruitment and setting up of PMCUs; procuring and installing of
appropriate FM software and delays in fulfilment of other disbursements conditions. To mitigate against this, the project would
utilize the facility for faster implementation of project start-up (FIPS) to implement key start-up activities in the first six months of
the project effectiveness and to finance the SECAP studies (ESMF, FPIC and IPs action plans, and integrated pesticides
management plan). A start up advance of US$ 500,000 has been proposed, which will cater for the following: i) recruitment of the
PMCU staff and setting up of PMCU Offices; (ii) procurement of FM software and training staff on its use; (iii) initial baseline
survey activities; (iv) salaries for key PMCU staff; (v) operating costs during the start-up period; (Vi) ensuring mobility of PMCU
staff; and (vii) setting up of the M&E systems and training project staff on M&E processes.
149.
Project supervision and implementation support: KeLCoP will be supervised jointly by GoK (represented by the National
Treasury & Planning and State Department of Livestock) and IFAD. Annual supervision, followed by shorter follow-
up/implementation support missions six months later, will be organized every year during the project’s lifetime. In addition to
monitoring implementation and reporting on project performance status and results, supervision missions will be used as
opportunity to assess achievements and lessons learnt, and to reflect upon ways to improve implementation and impact.
150.
Mid-term review (MTR): GoK and IFAD will jointly carry out an in-depth joint mid-term review of KeLCoP no later than the third
year of the project. The MTR mission will take stock of the achievements of project objectives and constraints and recommend
any reorientations that might be required. GoK (the National Treasury & Planning and SDL) will ensure that the agreed actions at
MTR are implemented within the agreed time frame.
151.
Project completion: After KeLCoP completion date and no later than 30 days to project closure date, GoK will carry out a
project completion review and submit the Project Completion Report (PCR) to IFAD. The PCR discussions will focus on bringing
implementation to a closure, reflecting on progress achieved and lessons learned, taking stock of overall performance of both
GoK and IFAD and reviewing sustainability and the project’s exit strategy. In addition, the PCR will benefit from the project impact
evaluation to be carried out by the PMCU.
26/27
Footnotes
[1] Kenya Economic Update: Policy Options to Advance the Big Four. World Bank Group. April 2018. Edition 17.
[3]https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/imf-and-covid19/Policy-Responses-to-COVID-19#K
[4]ILO, 2019:  https://www.statista.com/statistics/812147/youth-unemployment-rate-in-kenya/
[5] Basic Report on Wellbeing in Kenya, World Bank, UNICEF
[6] USAID. 2017a. “Country Profile: Kenya.” Available at: http://www.feedthefuture.gov/country/kenya
[7]https://www.nationsencyclopedia.com/Africa/Kenya-AGRICULTURE.html
[8]FAO, 2020:  http://www.fao.org/kenya/fao-in-kenya/kenya-at-a-glance/en/
[9] Kenya Agricultural Sector Risk Assessment Stephen P. D’Alessandro, Jorge Caballero, John Lichte, And Simon Simpkin World
Bank Group Report Number 97887 November 2015
[10] National Livestock Policy. Ministry Of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries And Irrigation State Department For Livestock. February
2019.
[11] Ibid. February 2019.
[12] https://www.globalhungerindex.org/kenya.html
[13]https://www.wfp.org/countries/kenya
[14] Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2010 and 2014.
[15] UNICEF global database in Infant and Young Child Feeding, UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Group: Joint child malnutrition
estimates, UNICEF/WHO Low birthweight estimates, NCD Risk Factor Collaboration, WHO Global Health Observatory. Notes: Data
on adult indicators are based on modelled estimates
[16]http://datatopics.worldbank.org/education/country/kenya /http://www.education.go.ke/images/REPORTS/BasicEducation-
Statistical-Booklet---2016.pdf
[17]http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/kenya
[18]https://africa.unwomen.org/en/where-we-are/eastern-and-southern-africa/kenya
[19]https://www.usaid.gov/kenya/gender-equality-and-womens-empowerment-kenya
[20] National Policy on Gender and Develoopment. Sessional Paper No 2 of 2019. Republic of Kenya. October 2019.
[21] Ibid
[22] http://datatopics.worldbank.org/education/country/kenya / http://www.education.go.ke/images/REPORTS/BasicEducation-
Statistical-Booklet---2016.pdf
[23]https://www.iwgia.org/en/kenya
[24] IFAD. Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation. Kenya. Paragraph 24.
[25]The Pro-WEIA defines indicators for intrinsic, instrumental and collective agency as follows: intrinsic agency - autonomy
in income self-efficacy attitudes about intimate partner violence respect among household members; Instrumental agency - Input in
productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets access to and decisions on financial services, control over use of income,
work balance, visiting important locations; collective agency - group membership, membership in influential groups
[26] Current Developments in Nutrtion CDN, 2018
[27] WFP, 2014
[28] IFAD, 2019
[29] CDN, 2018
[30] Ibid.
[31] Consumption support, savings, asset transfer, business and asset management skills, intensive mentoring and coaching.
27/27
[32] AJFAND, 2017
[33] Nomotio in Samburu, Kimose in Baringo and Naivasha sheep and goat centre for the small ruminants as well as KARLO Center
in Naivasha/Kakamega for poultry
[34] GIS maps will form effective legislative and management tools and together this will be used to: i) protect key grazing resources,
ii) better inform community led resource management, and iii) link customary to formal systems through appropriate legislation.
[35] Model built on wildlife conservation built on commercial ranchers in Laikipia
[36] For example, in the Siaya livestock market for ruminants, the poultry market is located in the nearby vegetable and fish market. In
this case the definition of the livestock market may include the poultry section of other non-ruminant livestock markets.
[37] The co-management model allows for a partnership between County Government, Livestock Marketing Councils and Livestock
Marketing Associations. This co-management system empowers communities to take part in the management of livestock markets in
the country.
[38] This will serve as a regulatory framework to ensure that the two parties adhere to the terms of the agreement, which will specify
the revenue sharing arrangements, the amount that has to be invested in the markets and the necessary checks and balances in the
management setup.
[39] These bills regulate a wide range of aspects including establishment and administration of livestock sales yards, transportation
and movement of livestock, matters relating to unfit livestock handling, feeding and watering of livestock, offences and penalties, and
matters and fee related to sale. While these two Bills have been well drafted, there are some aspects which need further refinement
such as the levying of fee multiple times when an animal is not sold on the same day.
[40] An electronic voucher platform for managing inputs and service subsidies through the private sector
[41] County livestock officers with support from PMU should create a database of farmer groups in their regions to facilitate ease of
their identification for MSP convening. This database (disaggregated per farmer group) should include: location of farmer group,
contact information for two group officials, type of livestock, breed of livestock, monthly production volumes, approved livestock
vaccination timesheets.
[42] Offers local capacity development services at the sub national level.
[43] Such as Marsabit, Samburu and Baringo.
[44] Trans Nzoia, Kakamega, Bungoma, Siaya and Busia.
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Logical Framework
1/7
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
PMCU MIS
quarterly reports
Annually
PMCU
Household members
148500 495000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Households
33000 110000
PMCU MIS
quarterly reports
Annually
PMCU
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
PMCU MIS
quarterly reports
Annually
PMCU
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Total number of persons
receiving services
18000
60000
15000
50000
9900
33000
13333
77000
110000
Project Goal 
Contribute to the Government's agriculture transformation
Agenda of increasing rural small-scale farmers' incomes,
food and nutrition security
Increase in income of the targeted households
Percentage
25
35
Third Party
household
surveys,
poverty/gender
studies
PMCU
Baseline,
Midline and
End Line
Project initiates its
activities on expected
timelines and all
approvals and
implementation
arrangements are in
place.
Households’ incomes
increase due to
increased
production/productivity
and better market
access / Continued
political and economic
stability
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Development Objective 
Increase incomes of 110,000 poor livestock and pastoralist
HH, especially youth and women, in an environmentally
friendly manner, in selected project areas of the 10
participating counties.
Beneficiary households reporting increase in income
Percentage
0
20
60
Baseline asset
survey, mid & end
line survey
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Outcome 
Outcome 1 Enhanced poor rural people’s production
capacities
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of new/improved
inputs, technologies or practices
Households
500
23000
77000
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Households
10
20
60
Targeted women reporting an increase in empowerment
using WEAI index
Percentage
50
80
Project baseline/
mid-term
/completion
Surveys
Project baseline/
mid-term
/completion
Surveys
Surveys by the
project
baseline/mid-
term/completion
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW) Surveys by the
30
50
project baseline/
mid-term
/completion
Women (%)
Women (number)
Households (%)
Households (number)
Household members
PMCU
PMCU
PMCU
PMCU
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Poor rural people are
willing to adopt
innovative
technologies.Private
sector engaged in the
project
implementation
through SMEs. Both
local and regional
markets remain stable
Financial sources will
be available to the
households to
enhance adoption.
Poor rural people are
willing to adopt
innovative
technologies.
Households willing to
increase consumption
of other sources of
foods/Community
customs facilitate
women empowerment
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 1.1 Develop Livestock Masterplan, regulations and
strategies for livestock at the county level
Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies
proposed to policymakers for approval, ratification
oramendment
PMCU Records
Annual
PMCU
Output 
Output 1.2 Improve access to agricultural technologies and
production services.
Output 
Output 1.3 Improve access to inclusive financial services
Number
10
2
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
1
2
4
4
PMCU records
Annual
PMCU
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or
technological packages
PMCU records
Annual
PMCU
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Total rural producers
1000
15000
50000
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
PMCU records
Annual
PMCU
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services
- savings
Young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - savings
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - savings
Men in rural areas
accessing financial services
- savings
Provisions are made
for review, formulation
and ratification of
relevant policies
/Political environment
is supportive of policy
reviews, formulation
and amendments
Poor rural people are
willing to adopt
innovative
technologies
Availability of
improved breeds
Financial service
providers are available
to support project
engagement with FIs.
Farmers and other
value chain actors are
willing to take up
financial services from
banks
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Men in rural areas
accessing financial services
- credit
Women in rural areas
accessing financial services
- credit
Young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - credit
Not young people in rural
areas accessing financial
services - credit
Total persons accessing
financial services - savings
Total persons accessing
financial services - credit
250
1500
3627
250
1500
3628
Volume of credit advanced to project beneficiaries by the
financial institutions
PMCU records
Annual
PMCU
Amount
2400
9400
Output 
Output 1.4 Improve nutrition of vulnerable households
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to
improve their nutrition
PMCU Records
Annual
PMCU
Outcome 
Outcome 2: Strengthen the environmental sustainability
and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic
activities.
Households
11550
38500
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and
practices
Households
5
25
60
Outcome surveys Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
PMCU
Communities are
willing to adopt
environmentally
sustainable and
climate resilient
technologies and
practices such as
rangeland governance
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 2.1: Improved rangeland management and access
to water infrastructures
Households accessing water infrastructure
PMCU Records
Annual
PMCU
Number
10000
20000
Outcome 
Outcome 3: Enhanced poor rural people’s benefit from
market participation
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural
resources and climate-related risks
PMCU Records
Annual
PMCU
Groups supported
15
50
200
Rangeland under improved governance
PMCU Records
Annual
PMCU
Hectares
1000
3000
2.2.1 New jobs created
Job owner - men
New jobs
Job owner - women
Job owner - young
Job owner - not young
Outcome surveys
at county level /
Integrated
Development
Plans (IDPs)
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
PMCU
1000
3000
County governments
are willing to partner
with project to improve
market infrastructure.
County Governments'
tax regimes are
facilitative and
incentivize local
traders to use market
infrastructure
2.2.2 Supported rural enterprises reporting an increase in
profit
Percentage of enterprises
10
60
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to
markets, processing and storage facilities
Households reporting
improved physical access
to markets
Households reporting
improved physical access
to processing facilities
333
5000
11666
333
5000
11666
Outcome surveys
at county level /
Integrated
Development
Plans (IDPs)
Outcome surveys
at county level /
Integrated
Development
Plans (IDPs)
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion
PMCU
PMCU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/7
Name
Households reporting
improved physical access
to storage facilities
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
333
5000
11666
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 3.1: Improved livestock market infrastructure
2.1.6 Market, processing or storage facilities constructed
or rehabilitated
Total number of facilities
10
50
150
Annual
PMCU
PMCU Records
County Integrated
Development
Plans
County governments
are willing to partner
with project to improve
market infrastructure
Recipients of
matching grants
invest in processing
and storage facilities
Market facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Processing facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Storage facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Output 
Output 3.2: Improved access to e-marketing services
Farmer groups registered in the database and participating
in the MSPs
Number
500
1500
3000
Private sector actors participating in the MSPs
(disaggregated per value chain and role in the supply
chain)
Number
100
250
500
Market linkages created
Number
10
18
60
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or
business management
Females
Males
Young
Output 
Output 3.3: Diversified rural enterprises and employment
opportunities
PMCU Records
County Integrated
Development
Plans
PMCU Records
County Integrated
Development
Plans
PMCU Records
County Integrated
Development
Plans
PMCU Records
County Integrated
Development
Plans
Annual
PMCU
Annual
PMCU
Value chains actors
are willing to work
together through the
platforms and to
create market
linkages
Annual
PMCU
Annual
PMCU
Value chain Actor
demand for training
exist / Entrepreneurs
are willing to able to
access business
development services
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
7/7
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Not Young
Persons trained in IGAs or
BM (total)
500
5000
11000
2.1.1 Rural enterprises accessing business development
services
Rural enterprises
1000
2000
8000
PMCU Records
County Integrated
Development
Plans
Annual
PMCU
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2: Theory of Change 
  1 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3: Project cost and financing 
(and Detailed costs tables) 
1.  This  annex  covers  the  project  costs  and  financing  plan,  while  it  also  describes  the 
assumptions  underlying  them  and  sets  out  the  basis  and  details  of  the  estimated  project 
costs.  
Project costs and financing  
2.  Main assumptions. The project is financed over a six-year (6) period, and it is assumed to 
start in 2021 year. Costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing during project 
design in January 2020. 
3.  Physical and price contingencies. Price contingencies have been applied on all costs, with the 
exception of grants. 
4.  Inflation. The rate is expected to remain between 4-5 percent target range for the upcoming 
few  years1.  For  the  purpose  of  this  analysis;  annual  local inflation  rates  have  been  set  at 
between 4 to 5 percent throughout the six project years. For foreign inflation, an average 
inflation  around  4  percent  has  been  retained.  Below  table  1  is  providing  more  details  in 
regards forecasted local and international inflation rate for each year.  
Table 1. Projected inflation rate 
Forecasted inflation Rate 
2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024 
Kenya 
Emerging market and developing economies 
5 
4,5 
4,6 
4,4 
5 
4,3 
5 
4,3 
5 
4,3 
5 
4,3 
Source: IMF, 2020 2 
5.  Exchange  rate.  The  exchange  rate  used  is  1  US$:  KES  101.18,  which  is  calculated  as  the 
prevailing exchange rate during design mission that occurred in January 2020. 3 
6.  Taxes and duties. Part of the Government co-financing of the project will be in form of waiving 
of  all  taxes  and  duties  on  goods  and  services  procured  under  the  project.  The  rates  and 
amounts of the taxes and duties in the project’s costs presented below are defined only  to 
determine the Government contribution and to value the total project cost.  
7.  The  items  to  be  imported  for  the  project  attract  import  and  excise  duties  of  varying 
proportions, and a value-added tax (VAT) levied on all imported goods.  
Project costs  
8.  The total project costs including physical and price contingencies are estimated at US$ 93.5 
million over six years implementation period. Project costs by components are summarized 
in  table  1,  while  a  complete  set  of  project  summary  tables  and  detailed  costs  tables  are 
presented in attachments 1 and 2 of this appendix.  
9.  Project  costs  by  components.  Project  investments  are  organized  into  three  major 
components: (i) “Climate Smart Production Enhancement for small livestock” (58.8 percent 
of the total costs) (ii) “Support to livestock Market Development“ (25.1 percent of the total 
costs); (iii) “Project Management and Coordination Unit (PMCU)” (16.1 percent of the costs). 
A summary breakdown of the project costs by components and financier is shown in table 2 
below. 
2 International Monetary Fund. Source retrieved from: IMF Inflation rate on Jan 2020, Inflation rate, average consumer prices (Annual 
percent change). Link retrieved from: https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/PCPIPCH@WEO/OEMDC/ 
3 Operational UN exchange rate, retrieved from: https://treasury.un.org/operationalrates/OperationalRates.php 
  1 
Table 2: Project costs by component and Financier (US$’000) 
10. Project Financing. The total project costs of US$ 93.5 million will be financed by i) an IFAD 
of US$ 54.8 million (ii) a GoK contribution in the amount of US$ 19 million, of which taxes 
and duties account for US$ 12.6 million, cash US$ 1.5 million and in kind contribution in the 
amount of US$ 4.9 million; iii) an Beneficiary contribution of US$ 11.8 million of which in 
kind  account  for  US$  9.2  million  and  cash  in  the  amount  of  US$  2.6  million;  iv)  Heifer 
International in the amount of US$ 3.4 million and v) PFIs in the amount of US$ 4.5 million. 
11. Expenditure  and  disbursement  accounts.  The  project  will  be  rolled  out  through  the 
project  management  and  coordination  unit  -which  will  manage  and  coordinate  the  flow  of 
funds  and  the  expenditures  incurred  on  account  of  the  project  activities.  Financial 
management and procurement procedures are described in Annex 7. A summary of the total 
costs  by  expenditure  accounts  and  financier  is  shown  in  Table  3  and  a  summary  of 
expenditure accounts by components with totals including contingencies is presented in Table 
4.  
12. Expenditure Category Overview. Technical Assistance is the major expenditure account, 
estimated at US$ 25.3  million, or about  27.9 percent of the total project costs. The other 
investment expenditure accounts are Civil Works for an amount of US$ 21.6 million or 23.1 
per cent of total costs, followed by grants and subsidies for an amount of US$ 17.1 million 
or 18.3 percent of total costs, Equipment’s, Goods and Vehicles for an amount of US$  9.5 
million or about 10.2 percent of the total cost, Credit lines for an amount of US$ 9.4 million 
or 10 per cent of total costs. The recurrent costs represent 11.3 percent of total costs at US$ 
10.6  million,  comprising  salaries  and  allowances  for  an  amount  of  US$  5.2  million  or  5.6 
percent  of total costs,  operations and maintenance for an amount  of  US$ 5.4 million (5.7 
percent of project costs). The breakdown of expenditure accounts by component is reflected 
at the table 2 and table 3.  
Table 3: Project costs by expenditure account and financier (USD’000) 
  2 
Table 4: Expenditure accounts by Components-Totals including Contingencies (USD’000) 
13. Total Cost per Component: Total Project Cost including physical and price contingencies 
are  estimated  at  US$  93.5  million  over  a  6-year  period.  Component  1  on  “Climate  Smart 
Production  Enhancement  for  small  Livestock  “is  the  main  investment  and  represents  59.1 
per  cent  of  the  total  project  costs,  while  Component  2  on  “Support  to  livestock  Market 
Development“, representing 24.7 per cent of total project costs. ‘Project Management and 
Coordination Unit’, represent 16.2 percent of the total project costs (of which subcomponent 
policy  and  institutional  support  to  the  National  Government  represents  1.2  per  cent  and 
project management and coordination unit support subcomponent represent 15 percent).  
14. Project  Financing:  The  Financing  Plan  covers  i)  an  IFAD  loan  of  US$  54.8  million  (58.6 
percent  of  the  total  cost),  ii)  GoK  contribution  of  US$  19  million  (20.3  percent),  of  which 
taxes  and  duties  account  for  US$  12.6  million  (13.5  percent),  cash  US$  1.5  million  (1.6 
percent)  and  in  kind  contribution  in  the  amount  of  US$  4.9  million  (5.2  percent);  iii)  a 
Beneficiary contribution of US$ 11.8 million (12.7 percent) of which in kind account for US$ 
9.3 million (9.9 percent) and cash in the amount of US$ 2.6 million (2.8 percent); iv) Heifer 
International contribution of US$ 3.4 million (3.6 percent) and v) PFIs in the amount of US$ 
4.5 million (4.8 percent). 
15. The base costs are calculated at January 2020 prices and include estimated duties and taxes. 
Total contingencies are respectively at US$ 4.2 million or 4 per cent of total costs, or 5 per 
cent of total base costs.  
16. Investment costs are US$ 82.9 million and represent 89 per cent of total costs. Taxes amount 
to US$ 12.6 million, that is 13.5 percent of total costs and the foreign exchange component 
is at US$ 10.2 million or 10.9 percent of the total Project costs. The recurrent cost accounts 
for US$ 10.6 million or equivalent to 11.3 percent of the total costs. The exchange rate used 
is USD 1.0 = KES 101.18. The cost per direct beneficiary household amounts to about US$ 
850 or US$ 189 per beneficiary.  
17. Table 5 shows project components by year-total including contingencies in local currency and 
US$ respectively. 
  3 
Table 5: Project Components by Year –Total including contingencies (USD’000) 
18. Financing  and  co-financing  strategy  and  plan.  The  KeLCoP  will  be  financed  by  IFAD, 
GoK and Beneficiaries totaling amount of US$ 93.5 million. In total, domestic co-financing is 
estimated at US$ 35.4 million or 38 per cent of the total project costs, consisting of GoK, 
Beneficiaries and PFIs. International co-financing accounts for US$ 58.1 million (62 per cent) 
through  IFAD  funds  and  Heifer  International.  The  domestic  contribution  is  robust,  for 
instance, for each IFAD one dollar invested shows 1:0.6 dollars of domestic contribution. The 
project origin funds shows that domestic contribution accounts for robust 38 per cent of the 
total project costs (US$ 35.4 million) and it includes the following financier and its respected 
amount: (i) GoK (taxes and duties) in the amount of US$ 12.6 million, of which cash in the 
amount of US$ 1.5 million through county and sub-county modest percentage of salaries as 
direct  support  and  contribution  to  the  project  and  in-kind  contribution  in  the  form  of 
infrastructure,  ,equipment’s,  offices  etc.  in  the  amount  of  US$  4.9  million  and  (ii) 
beneficiaries (cash & in-kind) in the amount of US$ 11.8 million, of which in -kind contribution 
in the amount of US$ 9.2 million and cash in the amount of US$ 2.6 million.  
19. Disbursement flow. To enable easy monitoring of progress, the below graph forecast the 
expected disbursement per year. Around US$ 52.2 million (56 per cent) of project resources 
will be disbursed till Year 3 and the remaining US$ 41.3 million (44 per cent) will be disbursed 
in the last three years of the project. 
Graph 1. KeLCoP-Expected Disbursement (USD’000) 
  4 
Comp 1. Climate Smart Production Enhancement for Small Livestock 
Project costs Detailed tables 
Detailed Costs 
Quantities 
Unit Cost 
Base Cost 
(US$ '000) 
Totals Including 
Contingencies (US$ 
'000) 
Unit 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
(US$) 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
 I. Investment Costs 
A. Integrating Vulnerable HHs into Value 
Chains 
1. Social Mobilisation, GALS and 
Graduation Packages 
a. Social Mobilization and Mentoring 
of Smallholder Farmers /a 
    Socio-Economic Assessment /b 
study 
10 
    Regional Managers /c 
person-year 
    Senior Supervisor of Mentors /d 
person-year 
    Group Mentors 
    Graduation Champion 
    Business skills training 
    Nutrition training 
    Service Provider Overhead costs /e 
Subtotal Social Mobilization and 
Mentoring of Smallholder Farmers 
  b. GALS Training 
person-year 
person-year 
workshop 
workshop 
lumpsum 
    GALS TOT workshops Basic tools /f  workshops 
    GALS TOT Advanced tools /g 
GALS workshops with SHG groups 
/h 
workshops 
workshops 
    GALS champions-basic tool 
    GALS champions /i 
Supervision monitoring and 
documentation 
    GALS Fair 
Management fee for service 
provider 
Nutrition training for manual 
development 
  Subtotal GALS Training 
  c. Graduation Package 
ToT 
stipend 
lumpsum 
event 
lumpsum 
training 
manual 
    Procurement and Transport Costs 
lumpsum 
    Graduation package 
package 
    Nutrition training and mentoring 
Homestead Food production for 
Dietary Diversity 
unit 
unit 
  Subtotal Graduation Package 
  d. Grants to Youth Innovative Start-Ups 
e. Acess to commercial credit for 
production 
  f. Mobility 
Subtotal Social Mobilisation, GALS 
and Graduation Packages 
individual 
unit 
Ls 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10 
12 
80 
80 
400 
40 
10 
1 
10 
10 
44 
10 
- 
3 
20 
20 
100 
10 
10 
1 
10 
10 
22 
- 
- 
- 
10 
- 
3 
20 
20 
100 
10 
- 
- 
- 
- 
22 
10 
- 
3 
20 
20 
100 
10 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
300 
300 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
20 
20 
100 
10 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10,000 
100.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
46,080 
12,000 
9,600 
4,200 
2,280 
600 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
138.2 
138.2 
138.2 
138.2 
240.0 
240.0 
240.0 
240.0 
192.0 
192.0 
192.0 
192.0 
420.0 
420.0 
420.0 
420.0 
22.8 
22.8 
22.8 
22.8 
6.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,014,000 
-  1 014.0 
100.0  2 033.0  1 013.0 
1 013.0 
1 013.0 
10,000 
10,000 
600 
10,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
249.9 
600 
150 
5 
23,000 
- 
260.1 
10 
3,000 
- 
30.0 
100.0 
100.0 
- 
- 
13.2 
13.2 
100.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
45.0 
45.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
115.0 
- 
- 
510.0 
243.2 
158.2 
45.0 
115.0 
1 023.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  1 170.0  1 170.0 
1 560.0 
780.0 
1 500 
1 500 
2 000 
1 000 
- 
6 000 
1 000 
1 000 
1 000 
1 000 
1 000 
5 000 
1 000 
1 000 
1 000 
1 000 
1 000 
5 000 
780 
59 
200 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100.0 
553.0 
960.0 
768.0 
1 680.0 
91.2 
6.0 
1 014.0 
122.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
172.9 
300.1 
240.1 
525.2 
28.5 
7.5 
1 268.0 
- 
176.3 
306.1 
244.9 
535.7 
29.1 
- 
- 
- 
179.8 
312.2 
249.8 
546.4 
29.7 
- 
- 
- 
183.4 
318.5 
254.8 
557.3 
30.3 
- 
- 
5 172.2 
122.6 
2 542.2 
1 292.1 
1 317.9 
1 344.3 
100.0 
100.0 
26.4 
100.0 
90.0 
249.9 
115.0 
260.1 
30.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
257.4 
- 
268.0 
125.0 
125.0 
16.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
37.5 
- 
- 
16.8 
127.5 
57.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
58.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
152.6 
- 
- 
1 071.4 
525.4 
304.1 
201.8 
58.5 
152.6 
1 023.4 
1 054.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4 680.0 
1 463.0 
1 492.3 
2 029.5 
1 035.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
122.6 
712.5 
1 236.9 
989.5 
2 164.6 
117.5 
7.5 
1 268.0 
6 619.2 
125.0 
125.0 
33.3 
127.5 
115.9 
257.4 
152.6 
268.0 
37.5 
1 242.5 
1 054.3 
6 019.9 
- 
- 
58.5 
58.5 
58.5 
58.5 
58.5 
292.5 
200.0 
200.0 
200.0 
200.0 
200.0 
1 000.0 
73.2 
250.1 
74.6 
255.1 
76.1 
260.2 
77.6 
79.2 
380.7 
265.4 
270.7 
1 301.5 
1 023.4  1 428.5  1 428.5 
1 818.5 
1 038.5 
258.5 
6 995.9 
1 054.3 
1 786.3 
1 822.0 
2 365.8 
1 378.1 
349.9 
8 756.4 
20 
- 
30 
600 
30 
600 
10 
600 
- 
90 
11,000 
200 
2 000 
1,000 
- 
- 
571.2 
220.0 
330.0 
330.0 
110.0 
- 
990.0 
600.0 
600.0 
600.0 
200.0 
2 000.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
571.2 
588.5 
231.2 
- 
- 
353.7 
714.0 
- 
360.8 
714.0 
- 
122.7 
- 
1 068.3 
714.0 
238.0 
2 380.0 
- 
- 
588.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 204.6  3 924.7  3 529.7 
3 806.5 
2 876.5 
458.5 
16 800.7 
2 290.8 
4 863.8 
4 383.6 
4 817.1 
3 711.7 
587.9 
20 654.8 
  5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Detailed Costs 
Quantities 
Unit Cost 
Base Cost 
(US$ '000) 
Totals Including 
Contingencies (US$ 
'000) 
Unit 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
(US$) 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
2. CPIT County Project 
Implementation Team 
  County Livestock Production Officer /j 
County Director of Veterinary Services 
/k 
  Subject Matter Specialist /l 
  County Water Officer /m 
County Social Services Development 
Officer /n 
County level environment and NRM 
Officer /o 
  County Revenue Officer /p 
  County M&E Officer /q 
  County Nutritionist /r 
Subtotal CPIT County Project 
Implementation Team 
3. Sub County Project 
Implementation Officers 
  Livestock Production Oficer /s 
  Veterinary Officer /t 
  Animal Health Assistant /u 
  Livestock Health Assistant /v 
Subtotal Sub County Project 
Implementation Officers 
4. Local Technial Specialists 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
120 
120 
120 
120 
240 
240 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
240 
240 
240 
240 
240 
240 
240 
240 
  Livestock Production Specialist 
Social Inclusion and Mobilization 
Specialist 
Environment Climate and Safeguards 
Specialist 
month 
month12 for 6 
month12 for 6 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
Subtotal Local Technial Specialists 
Subtotal Integrating Vulnerable HHs into 
Value Chains 
  B. Climate Resilient Production Systems 
1. Breed Improvement 
a. Strenghtening County Breed 
Multiplication Centers /w 
Infrastructure 
    Equipments 
Improved Breeds 
    Technical Assistance 
Subtotal Strenghtening County 
Breed Multiplication Centers 
b. Community Breed Improvement 
Programme 
Training to Outreach farmers/elite 
breeders farmers by Technical Staff 
/x 
Improved Breeds (small ruminants 
for meat & dairy) /y 
Apprenticeship for young men and 
women breeders /z 
Subtotal Community Breed 
Improvement Programme 
Subtotal Breed Improvement 
Centers 
Centers 
Centers 
- 
- 
- 
0.15 
0.1 
0.1 
Centers 
0.06 
0.07 
individuals 
100 
150 
groups 
- 
100 
individuals 
50 
100 
120 
120 
240 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
240 
240 
240 
240 
12 
12 
12 
0.1 
0.1 
0.15 
0.07 
150 
150 
50 
120 
120 
240 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
240 
240 
240 
240 
12 
12 
12 
0.05 
- 
0.05 
- 
- 
150 
- 
120 
120 
240 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
240 
240 
240 
240 
12 
12 
12 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
120 
120 
240 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
120 
240 
240 
240 
240 
12 
12 
12 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
720 
720 
1 440 
720 
720 
720 
720 
720 
720 
1 440 
1 440 
1 440 
1 440 
240 
240 
200 
150 
250 
250 
200 
213 
170 
255 
255 
228 
228 
28.8 
28.8 
28.8 
28.8 
28.8 
28.8 
48.0 
48.0 
48.0 
18.0 
18.0 
18.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
24.0 
24.0 
24.0 
25.6 
25.6 
25.6 
20.4 
20.4 
20.4 
28.8 
28.8 
48.0 
18.0 
30.0 
30.0 
24.0 
25.6 
20.4 
28.8 
28.8 
48.0 
18.0 
30.0 
30.0 
24.0 
25.6 
20.4 
28.8 
28.8 
48.0 
18.0 
30.0 
30.0 
24.0 
25.6 
20.4 
172.8 
172.8 
288.0 
108.0 
180.0 
180.0 
144.0 
153.4 
122.4 
35.3 
35.3 
58.8 
22.1 
36.8 
36.8 
29.4 
31.3 
25.0 
36.0 
36.0 
60.0 
22.5 
37.5 
37.5 
30.0 
32.0 
25.5 
36.7 
36.7 
61.2 
23.0 
38.3 
38.3 
30.6 
32.6 
26.0 
37.5 
37.5 
62.4 
23.4 
39.0 
39.0 
31.2 
33.3 
26.5 
38.2 
38.2 
63.7 
23.9 
39.8 
39.8 
31.8 
33.9 
27.1 
39.0 
39.0 
65.0 
24.4 
40.6 
40.6 
32.5 
34.6 
27.6 
222.7 
222.7 
371.2 
139.2 
232.0 
232.0 
185.6 
197.7 
157.8 
253.6 
253.6 
253.6 
253.6 
253.6 
253.6 
1 521.4 
310.8 
317.1 
323.4 
329.9 
336.5 
343.2 
1 960.9 
61.2 
61.2 
61.2 
61.2 
61.2 
61.2 
54.7 
54.7 
54.7 
54.7 
54.7 
54.7 
61.2 
61.2 
54.7 
54.7 
61.2 
61.2 
54.7 
54.7 
61.2 
61.2 
54.7 
54.7 
367.2 
367.2 
328.3 
328.3 
75.0 
75.0 
67.1 
67.1 
76.5 
76.5 
68.4 
68.4 
78.1 
78.1 
69.8 
69.8 
79.6 
79.6 
71.2 
71.2 
81.2 
81.2 
72.6 
72.6 
82.8 
82.8 
74.1 
74.1 
473.3 
473.3 
423.2 
423.2 
231.8 
231.8 
231.8 
231.8 
231.8 
231.8 
1 391.0 
284.2 
289.9 
295.7 
301.6 
307.7 
313.8 
1 792.9 
72 
72 
72 
4,500 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
4,500 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
4,500 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
162.0 
162.0 
162.0 
162.0 
162.0 
162.0 
324.0 
324.0 
324.0 
972.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
324.0 
324.0 
324.0 
162.0 
162.0 
162.0 
162.0 
162.0 
162.0 
972.0 
2 852.0  4 572.1  4 177.1 
4 453.9 
3 523.9 
1 105.9 
20 685.1 
3 047.9 
5 632.8 
5 164.7 
5 610.6 
4 517.8 
1 406.9 
25 380.6 
0.3 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
400 
400 
200 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 
- 
- 
- 
300.0 
200.0 
100.0 
200.0 
200.0 
- 
200.0 
300.0 
100.0 
2,000,000 
120.0 
140.0 
140.0 
- 
120.0 
840.0 
840.0 
200.0 
260 
26.0 
39.0 
39.0 
- 
1,600 
- 
160.0 
240.0 
240.0 
500 
25.0 
50.0 
25.0 
- 
51.0 
249.0 
304.0 
240.0 
171.0  1 089.0  1 144.0 
440.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
600.0 
400.0 
600.0 
400.0 
- 
- 
- 
147.1 
375.1 
250.1 
250.1 
175.1 
255.1 
255.1 
382.6 
178.6 
2 000.0 
147.1 
1 050.4 
1 071.4 
104.0 
640.0 
100.0 
844.0 
31.9 
- 
30.6 
62.5 
48.8 
200.1 
62.5 
311.4 
49.7 
306.1 
31.9 
387.7 
2 844.0 
209.6 
1 361.7 
1 459.1 
130.1 
- 
130.1 
- 
260.2 
- 
312.2 
- 
312.2 
572.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
760.3 
505.2 
762.8 
500.7 
2 529.1 
130.4 
818.4 
125.1 
1 073.9 
3 602.9 
  6 
Detailed Costs 
Quantities 
Unit Cost 
Base Cost 
(US$ '000) 
Totals Including 
Contingencies (US$ 
'000) 
Unit 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
(US$) 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
2. Livestock feed production 
improvement 
  County Livestock Feed Strategy /aa 
lumpsum 
  Boreholes with solar power /bb 
Sub-surface dams or rock-catchment 
/cc 
Water pans and shallow wells with 
solar panels /dd 
Upscaling production of grass seeds 
/ee 
  Feed storage infrastructure /ff 
  Rangeland Governance System /gg 
  Rangeland Plans and GIS Maps 
unit 
unit 
unit 
groups 
groups 
study 
plans 
  Support to GIS Laboratory 
laboratories 
  Rangeland Policy Support /hh 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
proposed actions and capacity building 
Subtotal Livestock feed production 
improvement 
regulation 
lumpsum 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
5 
5 
5 
30 
30 
3 
- 
- 
- 
3. Animal Health Improvement 
Strengthen the system of disease 
surveillnace and monitoring 
Certificate Training for agrovet as 
Paravets for young men and women 
Smart Device for Agrovets for tracking 
and monitoring diseases 
Behavioral Change Communication 
Campaign (BCCC) for Animal health 
and disease 
  Contingencies Plan /ii 
Subtotal Animal Health Improvement   
4. E-Extension services 
systems 
3 
5 
para vets 
100 
100 
devices 
- 
30 
lumpsum 
lumpsum 
1 
- 
- 
  a. E-Extension System /jj 
platform 
0.1 
0.6 
  b. e-Extensions 
0 
- 
- 
0.3 
- 
Subtotal E-Extension services 
Subtotal Climate Resilient Production 
Systems 
  Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
  A. Mobility related running costs 
  Total Recurrent Costs 
Total 
- 
15 
10 
5 
30 
30 
- 
3 
4 
1 
2 
- 
30 
- 
15 
10 
5 
20 
20 
- 
- 
- 
1 
- 
- 
- 
5 
5 
5 
20 
20 
- 
- 
- 
1 
- 
- 
20 
20 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
40 
30 
20 
100 
100 
3 
3 
4 
3 
10 
200 
100 
71,500 
- 
71.5 
- 
- 
- 
200,000 
100,000 
125,000 
17,000 
15,000 
30,000 
20,000 
15,000 
40,000 
-  1 000.0  3 000.0 
3 000.0 
1 000.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
416.5 
500.0  1 000.0 
1 000.0 
500.0 
625.0 
625.0 
625.0 
625.0 
510.0 
510.0 
340.0 
340.0 
450.0 
450.0 
300.0 
300.0 
90.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
60.0 
60.0 
40.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
40.0 
40.0 
- 
- 
416.5  3 246.5  5 745.0 
5 305.0 
2 805.0 
50,000 
150.0 
250.0 
100.0 
2,000 
200.0 
200.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
200 
- 
6.0 
6.0 
4.0 
4.0 
324.9 
1 
150,000 
150.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
824.9 
456.0 
106.0 
4.0 
4.0 
1 
-  
1,158,000 
115.8 
694.8 
347.4 
- 
- 
- 
115.8 
694.8 
347.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 528.2  5 486.3  7 342.4 
5 749.0 
2 809.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
71.5 
8 000.0 
3 000.0 
2 500.0 
1 700.0 
1 500.0 
90.0 
60.0 
60.0 
120.0 
416.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
429.1 
89.4 
- 
- 
- 
1 250.5 
3 826.4 
3 902.9 
1 327.0 
625.2 
1 275.5 
1 301.0 
781.5 
637.7 
562.7 
112.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
797.2 
650.5 
574.0 
- 
76.5 
76.5 
51.0 
- 
813.1 
442.3 
390.3 
- 
- 
- 
52.0 
- 
663.5 
829.4 
451.2 
398.1 
- 
- 
- 
53.1 
- 
17 518.0 
429.1 
4 059.6 
7 327.6 
6 901.7 
3 722.2 
500.0 
400.0 
20.0 
324.9 
150.0 
1 394.9 
183.9 
245.2 
- 
334.7 
183.9 
947.7 
312.6 
250.1 
7.5 
- 
- 
127.5 
- 
7.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5.2 
5.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
570.2 
135.2 
5.2 
5.3 
1 158.0 
142.0 
868.8 
443.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 158.0 
142.0 
868.8 
443.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
22 914.9 
1 728.3 
6 860.4 
9 365.0 
7 479.3 
3 727.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
89.4 
10 306.8 
3 865.2 
3 221.2 
2 181.7 
1 925.1 
112.5 
76.5 
76.5 
156.1 
429.1 
22 440.1 
624.1 
495.3 
25.7 
334.7 
183.9 
1 663.6 
1 453.9 
- 
1 453.9 
29 160.5 
4 380.2 10 058.4 11 519.5 
10 202.9 
6 332.9 
1 105.9 
43 600.0 
4 776.2 
12 493.1 
14 529.7 
13 089.9 
8 245.3 
1 406.9 
54 541.1 
Operational costs- mobility 
p.y. 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
60 
9,600 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
96.0 
576.0 
576.0 
117.7 
117.7 
120.0 
120.0 
122.4 
122.4 
124.9 
124.9 
127.4 
129.9 
742.4 
127.4 
129.9 
742.4 
4 476.2 10 154.4 11 615.5 
10 298.9 
6 428.9 
1 201.9 
44 176.0 
4 893.9 
12 613.2 
14 652.1 
13 214.8 
8 372.7 
1 536.8 
55 283.5 
\a the staff for social mobilization (senior supervisors of mentors, GALS Champions) will be empoyed through social mobilization SPs  
\b 1 in each County  
\c 1 per County  
\d 1 per County  
\e partial of it will be used for hiring additional 40 mentors, 40 Senior Supervisor of mentors, for training in bus.skills and GALS  
\f these 5 days workshops will be attended by thte Graduation and Group Mentors Supervisors Regional Manager  
  7 
\g these 5 days workshops will be attended by thte Graduation and Group Mentors Supervisors Regional Managers and will take place 3 months after first TOT  
\h these workshops will be conducted in teams of two by the Group Mentors and Senior Supervisors fo rhte SHF groups formed by the proejct 20 -25, this is the cost for materials and some refreshments participants  
\i succesful practitioners will be selected from poor and ultra poor households to receive a ToT in GALS  
\j 1 in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 20% of position salary  
\k 1 in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 20% of position salary  
\l 2  in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 20% of position salary  
\m 1 in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 15% of position salary  
\n 1 in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 25% of position salary  
\o 1 in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 25% of position salary  
\p 1 in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 20% of position salary  
\q 1 in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 25% of position salary  
\r 1 in each County. GoK in kind contribution as 20% of position salary  
\s 2 in each County. 30% of the salary GoK in kind contribution  
\t 2 in each County. 30% of the salary GoK in kind contribution  
\u 2 in each County. 35% of the salary GoK in kind contribution  
\v 2 in each County. 35% of the salary GoK in kind contribution  
\w small ruminants: Samburu ( Nomotio), Baringo (Kimose), Naivasha. Poultry: Kakamega (KARLO Center). Fencing, additional parent stock, training facility, small equipments for husbandry practices, support to water supply etc. GoK  in-kind contribution 
Include 
\x per training 40 individuals per County, 5 days training includes breeding concepts, animal management, record keeping and follow-ups. GoK in-kind contribution captured through Trainer salary paid by GoK  
\y partnership with intenrational research institutions through TAs, estimated 200 ewes per group (i.e. 20 members  per group eech having 10 female goats). Each group will need 4 bucks, therefore 160 bucks per county. Ben contribution is 50%  
\z targeting 4 Counties:Samburu, Marsabet, Baringo and Elgeyo Marakwet. Beneficiaries in-kind contribution captured through labour costs 50/50 share , and in some cases through local materials (rocks etc.), 
\aa it required 2 TAs, for strategy development and formulation of the bull for the County Assembly  
\bb it includes hydrological assessment, NEMA approval, water resources, management authorities, safe guards etc. In-kind contributions through operations and maintenance, its opportunity cost of time and personnel. + incporate environmental management plans  
\dd 30% Beneficiaries in-kind contribution through Water User Assocations maintenance and management. Contribution through maintenance and operations, and its opportunity cost of time + incporate environmental management plans  
\ee Fencing and seeds in 4 Counties. Beneficiaries in-kind contribution through labour, some local materials for fencing,planting/seed broadcasting  
\ff Hayshed's, equipments for baling, hay harvesting equipment, labour saving equipment etc  
\gg Assessment of rangeland governance system in 3 counties (Marsabit, Samburu and Baringo  
\hh involves development of by-laws, passing through County Assembly and Adopting  
\ii e.g. emergencies in participating counties  
\jj through SPs who has established reocrd of managing database 
  8 
Comp 2. Support to Livestock Market Development   
Quantities 
Unit Cost 
Base Cost 
(US$ '000) 
Totals 
Including 
Contingencies 
(US$ '000) 
For. 
Unit 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
(US$) 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
Exch. 
  I. Investment Costs 
  A. Market Infrastructure and Capacity Development 
   Upgrading Market Infrastructure /a 
   Capacity Building Support to Livestock Market Associations (LMAs) 
   Support to Regulatory Mechanisma for Markets 
markets 
LMAa 
counties 
- 
- 
2 
5 
5 
8 
   Investor Forums for private sector engagement /b 
forums 
10 
10 
10 
10 
- 
- 
5 
5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
  Subtotal Market Infrastructure and Capacity Development 
  B. Building Inclusive Value Chains 
   Matching Grants for smallholder commercial producers /c 
   Access to Commercial credit for value chains 
   Training and peer to peer exchange and exposure visits & SSC /d 
   Training of Young Enterpreneurs /e 
   Grants to Young Enterpreneurs 
   County Level multi-stakeholder platforms (MSPs) 
   Grants to Youth Innovative Start-Ups 
   Building dashboard for Crowdfunding 
   E-finance voucher support ( 10/90 rule) /f 
   E-finance voucher support ( 40/60 rule) /g 
   E-finance voucher support ( 100% Ben rule) /h 
  Subtotal Building Inclusive Value Chains 
  C. Value Chain Management Information Systems 
   ICT for Market Livestock System 
  D. Technical specialist 
   Livestock Marketing Specialist 
Total 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10 
- 
- 
- 
20 
20 
10 
20 
130,000 
5,600 
- 
- 
10,000 
20.0 
5,000 
50.0 
650.0 
1 300.0 
650.0 
28.0 
80.0 
50.0 
56.0 
28.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
70.0 
808.0 
1 356.0 
678.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 075.0 
2 150.0 
2 150.0  1 075.0 
- 
1 000.0 
1 000.0 
550.0 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
- 
- 
150.0 
150.0 
500.0 
500.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 600.0 
112.0 
- 
- 
853.4  1 741.0 
35.0 
71.4 
100.0 
24.5 
100.0 
100.0 
61.3 
62.5 
- 
- 
887.9 
36.4 
- 
- 
2 912.0 
85.8  1 051.0  1 812.4 
924.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6 450.0 
-  1 279.3  2 558.5 
2 558.5  1 279.3 
2 550.0 
400.0 
300.0 
1 000.0 
-  1 000.0 
1 000.0 
550.0 
125.0 
127.5 
130.1 
132.7 
- 
- 
191.3 
595.0 
195.1 
595.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
50.0 
200.0 
300.0 
300.0 
200.0 
- 
- 
- 
100.0 
165.0 
660.0 
495.0 
330.0 
- 
- 
- 
1 000.0 
100.0 
1 650.0 
- 
- 
132.0 
528.0 
396.0 
264.0 
1 320.0 
- 
105.6 
422.4 
528.0 
1 056.0 
12.5 
12.8 
13.0 
13.3 
13.5 
65.1 
238.0 
357.0 
357.0 
238.0 
- 
- 
- 
132.7 
173.4 
707.4 
541.2 
368.0 
- 
- 
- 
132.7 
22.3 
- 
- 
141.5 
577.2 
441.6 
300.3 
1 460.6 
- 
115.4 
471.0 
600.6 
1 187.0 
1 550.0 
5 002.0 
5 338.6  3 183.4 
802.0 
15 876.0 
-  1 828.2  5 691.0 
6 082.6  3 626.5 
914.4 
18 142.7 
22.3 
3 482.4 
585.3 
142.9 
124.6 
123.8 
- 
- 
- 
3 873.6 
585.3 
7 675.5 
2 550.0 
515.4 
386.5 
1 190.0 
1 190.0 
1 789.9 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
50 
100 
- 
100 
100 
100 
50 
55 
500 
500 
500 
500 
- 
- 
10 
10 
- 
250 
250 
10 
15 
- 
250 
250 
10 
15 
- 
- 
- 
10 
10 
1 
500 
2 000 
1 500 
1 000 
unit 
unit 
individuals 
persons 
individuals 
MSPs 
individuals 
dashboard 
persons 
persons 
persons 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
400 
1 600 
1 200 
800 
4 000 
- 
320 
1 280 
1 600 
3 200 
300 
21,500 
255 
10,000 
2 000 
500 
500 
50 
50 
200 
600 
2,000 
1,000 
20,000 
1 
100,000 
5 000 
330 
330 
330 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
platform 
0.05 
0.4 
0.3 
0.25 
- 
- 
1 
620,000 
31.0 
248.0 
186.0 
155.0 
- 
- 
620.0 
38.0 
310.1 
237.2 
201.7 
- 
- 
787.0 
198.4 
month 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
72 
4,500 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
324.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
54.0 
324.0 
- 
155.0 
2 660.0 
6 598.0 
6 225.6  3 237.4 
856.0 
19 732.0 
177.8  3 243.3  7 794.7 
7 262.6  3 680.5 
968.4 
23 127.3 
806.0 
\a Community in-kind contribution in terms of land, personnel  
\b engagement of KPSA and County Goverments as a key drivers of these forums including County Chamber of Commerce  
\c Beneficiaries in-kind contribution as working capital as well as maintenance and operational cost over the life of the project, 
\d business planning, financial literacy, transport pooling strategies, linkages to market, B2B learning etc. 
\e 3 to 6 month apprenticeship  
\f e-voucher package includes feeds, extension services, vaccines, marketing etc,  
\g e-voucher package includes feeds, extension services, vaccines, marketing etc.Ben contribution is 60% and it is assumed that 80% of the farmers from the initial package will adopt second approach succesfully  
\h e-voucher package includes feeds, extension services, vaccines, marketing etc.Ben contribution is 60% and it is ass 
  9 
Comp. 3 Project Management and Coordination Unit 
\a KM support to the PCU ( 3 month p.y.consultant) 
\b including studies: ESMF and pesticides man.plan;FPIC and Ind. peoples action plan; EIAs and ESMPs for sub-projects 
\c in 10 counties 
\d 1 consolidated one 
\e it will include indicators to assess minimum dietary Diversity for Women +study on socio economic and env survey will address environmental climate indicators 
\f it will include indicators to assess minimum dietary Diversity for Women + study on socio economic and env survey will address environmental climate indicators 
\g study on socio economic and environmental survey will address environmental climate indicators 
\h it will include indicators to assess minimum dietary Diversity for Women 
\i selected value chains 
\j 31% gratuity paid 
 10 
Republic of the Kenya Kenya Livestock Commercialization Programme (KeLCoP) Table 3. Project management and coordination Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostTotals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)ExpenditureOther AccountsUnit202120222023202420252026Total(US$)202120222023202420252026TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Project Management & Coordination Unit Support 1. Knowledge Management and Learning Support to KM Strategy per year1-----15,0006,1-----6,1TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Knowledge Mangement Studies per year--111145,000--6,46,56,66,826,3TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Website Development per year1-----15,0006,1-----6,1TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Development of KM Products per year11111166,0007,47,57,77,88,08,146,4TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )SSTC Exchange Meetings lumpsum192,5-----192,5TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Knowledge Management TA /a month111111618,00022,122,523,023,423,924,4139,2TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Knowledge Management and Learning 234,230,037,037,738,539,3416,62. Start Up Activities, Workshops, Training & Studies Faster Implementation of Project Start-Up /b lumpsum1-----1470,000576,2-----576,2TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Website Development per year1-----15,0006,1-----6,1TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Exchange Meetings per year11111162,0002,52,52,62,62,72,715,5TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Start Up and SECAP training and  workshops /c workshop10-----1014,000171,6-----171,6TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Consolidated Start-Up Workshop /d workshop1-----115,00018,4-----18,4TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Annual Work Plan and Budget Planning workshops101010101010605,00061,362,563,865,066,367,7386,7TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget Planning workshops111111610,00012,312,512,813,013,313,577,3TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Annual Review and environmental safeguards workshops workshops101010101010605,00061,362,563,865,066,367,7386,7TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Consolidated Annual Review Workshops workshops11111161,0001,21,31,31,31,31,47,7TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Miscellaneous Workshops and Meetings workshops133331145,0006,118,819,119,519,96,890,2TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )HR Recruitment Consultancy workshops1-----120,00024,5-----24,5TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Socio economic and environmental Baseline Survey /e survey1-----1130,000159,4-----159,4TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Socio economic and environmental Mid-term Survey /f survey--1---1130,000--165,8---165,8TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Socio economic and environmental Impact Assessment /g assessment-----11150,000-----203,0203,0TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Project Completion Report (PCR) /h unit-----1160,000-----81,281,2TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Pro-WEIA Assessment (Baseline,Completion) survey1----12100,000122,6----135,4257,9TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Beneficiary Feedback Survey survey-----10105,000-----67,767,7TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Start Up Activities, Workshops, Training & Studies 1.223,5160,1329,1166,5169,9647,02.696,03. Equipments & Vehicles Motorcycles 175 cc motorbikes50-50---1004,000245,2-255,1---500,3EG&V_EAIFAD ( 100% )Accounting Software unit1-----1100,000122,6-----122,6EG&V_EAIFAD ( 100% )Motor Vehicles Double Cab vehicles2-4---645,000110,3-229,6---339,9EG&V_EAIFAD ( 100% )Computers unit3-----31,0003,7-----3,7EG&V_EAIFAD ( 100% )Computers Server unit1-----16,0007,4-----7,4EG&V_EAIFAD ( 100% )Laptops unit16-----161,50029,4-----29,4EG&V_EAIFAD ( 100% )Photocopier/ printer Machine (heavy duty) unit1-----110,00012,3-----12,3EG&V_EAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Equipments & Vehicles 530,8-484,7---1.015,5Subtotal Project Management & Coordination Unit Support 1.988,5190,1850,7204,3208,3686,24.128,1B. Policy and institutional support to national Government 1. Policy and Institutional Support to National Government Livestock Master Plan lumpsum1-----1500,000613,0-----613,0TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Development of Regulations for Livestock Bill /i lumpsum1-----1200,000245,2-----245,2TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )County Level Livestock Strategies lumpsum1-----1100,000122,6-----122,6TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Developing Standards and Certification Regime for Honey Production lumpsum1-----1100,000122,6-----122,6TA_EAIFAD ( 100% )Subtotal Policy and Institutional Support to National Government 1.103,3-----1.103,3Total Investment Costs 3.091,8190,1850,7204,3208,3686,25.231,5II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 1. PMCU Staff Project Coordinator month121212121218786,00074,275,777,278,780,3122,8508,8SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Financial Controller month121212121218785,00061,863,064,365,666,9102,4424,0SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Finance Assistant month121212121212724,50055,656,757,959,060,261,4350,9SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Procurement Specialist month121212121212724,50055,656,757,959,060,261,4350,9SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )M&E Specialist month121212121218784,50055,656,757,959,060,292,1381,6SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Data Programmer month121212121212723,00037,137,838,639,440,140,9234,0SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Financial Assistant month121212121212723,00037,137,838,639,440,140,9234,0SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Administrative General month121212121218782,00024,725,225,726,226,840,9169,6SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Procurement Assistant month121212121212723,00037,137,838,639,440,140,9234,0SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Secretaries month2424242424241441,50037,137,838,639,440,140,9234,0SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Support Staff month24242424242414480019,820,220,621,021,421,8124,8SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Drivers month7272727272724321,00074,275,777,278,780,381,9467,9SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Project Steering Committee Expenses month444444241,8007,47,67,77,98,08,246,8SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )County Programme Coordination Meetings month444444241,0004,14,24,34,44,54,526,0SAL&ALL_EAIFAD ( 100% )Gratuity paid to PMCU Staff /j p.a.1111116225,184232,0236,6241,4246,2251,1256,11.463,4SAL&ALL_EAGOK_CASH ( 100% )Subtotal PMCU Staff 813,4829,7846,3863,2880,51.017,55.250,6B. Operational Costs Operational Costs at PMU Level month1212121212187818,000264,8270,1275,5281,0286,6438,51.816,6OPERATION_EAIFAD ( 100% )Operational Cost at County Level (6) month7272727272724322,000176,5180,1183,7187,3191,1194,91.113,6OPERATION_EAIFAD ( 100% )Operational Cost at County Level (4-ASAL) month4848484848482883,500206,0210,1214,3218,6222,9227,41.299,2OPERATION_EAIFAD ( 100% )Office Equipment lumpsum1-----135,00042,9-----42,9OPERATION_EAIFAD ( 100% )O&M for Vehicles p.y.226666286,00014,715,045,946,847,848,7219,0OPERATION_EAIFAD ( 100% )Officer Rent p.y.121212121212721,50018,518,919,319,720,120,5117,0OPERATION_EAGOK ( 100% )Subtotal Operational Costs 723,5694,2738,7753,4768,5930,04.608,2Total Recurrent Costs 1.536,91.523,91.584,91.616,61.649,01.947,69.858,9Total 4.628,71.713,92.435,71.820,91.857,32.633,815.090,3 
 11 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis  
1. 
About 110 000 direct households, equivalent to 495 000 beneficiaries will receive 
project services. In total, project aim is to target approx. 50 per cent women and 30 per 
cent youth. 
2. 
The expected benefits include: i) At least 60 per cent of the households reporting 
increase in income and 60 per cent reporting increase in the production volume; ii) at least 
50  per  cent  of  the  targeted  women  reaching  the  minimally adequate diet  diversity 
(measured by MDD-W indicator) ii) approximately 60 per cent of the targeted households 
reporting  adoption  on  environmentally  sustainable  and  climate  resilient  water 
infrastructure and practices; iii) access to 6,000 packages for vulnerable households iv) 
300 grants distributed for smallholder commercial producers activities v) 500 grants and 
training of Young Entrepreneurs; vi) 140 grants to youth for the innovative start-ups ; vii) 
2,000  households  benefitting  from  access  to  commercial  credit  for  production  and  255 
credits for marketing viii) 400 groups trained to outreach farmers/ elite breeders farmers 
and improved breeds ( small ruminants for meat and dairy) ( i.e. up to 8 000 beneficiaries 
20 individuals per group); ix) 200 apprenticeship for young men and women breeders ; x) 
100 groups (i.e. 2 000 HH in total – 20 members per group) will be supported through 
feed storage infrastructure; xi) 200 certificate training for youth agrovet and Para vets for 
the  purpose  of  the  animal  health  improvement  ;  xii)  100  smart  devices  distributed  for 
agrovets  for  tracking  and  monitoring  diseases;  xiii)  20  000  individuals  trained  under 
Behavioural Change Communication Campaign (BCCC); xiv) 100 groups supported (i.e. 2 
000 HH for the upscaling production of grass seeds and feed storage infrastructure); xv) 
up to 20 000 humans benefitting and 304 000 livestock equivalent to 50 702 livestock unit 
from  the  Climate  Resilient  Water  Infrastructure  (  i.e.  boreholes  with  solar  panels,  sub-
surface  dams,  rock-catchment,  water  pans,  shallow  wells  etc.);  xvi)  6,000  individuals 
trained  under  GALS  and  business  skills;  xvii)  an  estimated  15,000  individuals  who  will 
benefit from an e-marketing incremental margin due to the ICT e-marketing support (i.e. 
1,500  individuals  per  county,  assuming  10  markets  per  county,  each  consisting  of  300 
potential sellers). The is based on the assumption that 50 per cent of the overall sellers 
will  adopt  ICT  e-marketing  support,  which  will  reduce  the  transaction  costs  due  to  the 
increase of transparent up to date information floor, specifications, demand, supply, price 
and availability of trading data. The incremental revenue per individual is estimated at 60 
per cent more of total small ruminants’ turnover; xvii) 5 000 individuals supported through 
e-finance voucher mechanism focused on the financing start up activities and continually 
supporting successful implementers; and xviii) employment needed for implementation of 
water  infrastructure  is  equivalent  to  54  person  one  year  full  time  employment;  ixx)  at 
least 50 000 rural producers accessing production inputs and/or technological packages; 
xx)  around  7,255  households  accessing  financial  services;  xxi)  around  22,000  women 
owning productive assets; xxii) US$ 9.4 million of credit advanced to project beneficiaries 
by the financial institutions; and xxiii) 30,000 individuals would benefit from upgrading 20 
market infrastructure. 
The Net present value (NPV) of the project is positive (US$ 91.3 Million; KES 10.1 
3. 
Billion). The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is estimated at the value of 29.1 
per cent, which demonstrates the project’s profitability . The economic analysis suggests 
that KeLCoP is feasible.  
4. 
For the purpose of the financial and economic analysis, eight financial models have 
been developed for the production window: (i) dairy goat; (ii) meat goat; (iii) improved 
indigenous  chicken  (iv)  annual  grass/hay;  (v)  beekeeping  ;(vi)  150  layers;  vii)  chicks 
incubators  with  solar  panel  for  youth  and  viii)  water  infrastructure.  Most  models  are 
expected  to  provide  farmers  with  physical  outputs  and  attractive  financial  returns  in 
relation  to  their  extra  labour  and  other  inputs  and  financial  investment.  The  project  is 
expected  to  provide  farmers  with  financial  resources  needed  to  cover  production  costs 
(operational  or  working  capital),  training,  capacity  building and  administrative  support. 
The  project  intervention  is  expected  to  increase  the  yield,  quality  and  distribution  of 
products.  
5. 
Individual production models (smallholder farmers) and group youth and women 
models have been used to calculate the value of production net of inputs and labour costs. 
The Project is targeting 110,000 direct households (consisting of 495,000 beneficiaries), 
and  the  adoption  rate  has  been  estimated  at  80  per  cent.  Targeted  groups  are  mostly 
women and youth, accounting for approximately 50 per cent and 30 per cent, respectively.  
Model  1  Dairy  goat.  The  model  is  generating  revenue  for  the  selling  goat  milk, 
6. 
manure  and  selling  meat  goat.  The  investment  costs  housing  structure,  in  kid  doe, 
establishing forage production unit etc. while operational costs are feed concentrate and 
supplements, and veterinary service and drugs. The WoP scenario assumes current income 
of  KES  12,600  per  average  household  for  non-defined  occupational  activities.  The 
production and investment costs without labour are KES 52 400. The average revenue is 
KES  99  275  and  average  incremental  income  is  KES  40  971.  The  Benefit  cost  ratio 
estimated is 1:1.6 showing that for 100 KES spent in the model will generate a KES 160 
of benefits, which is in favour of the model. The NPV is estimated at KES 238 497. 
7. 
Model 2 Meat Goat: The model is related to 4 ASAL counties (i.e. Baringo, Samburu, 
Marsabit and Elgeyo Marakwet). The WoP scenario assumes current income of KES 12,600 
per  average  household  for  non  defined  and  very  diversified  occupational  activities.  The 
model includes purchasing breed buck and generates revenue from the selling meat goat. 
On average there are 10 goats with the increase over the time up to  15 goats and the 
revenues arriving from selling meat. The production and investment costs excluding labour 
are KES 4 165. The average revenue is KES 46 725 and average incremental income is 
KES 23 409. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 1:2 showing that for 100 KES spent in the 
model will generate a KES 200 of benefits, which is in favour  of the  model. The NPV is 
estimated at KES 166 418.  
8. 
Model  3  Improved  indigenous  chicken:  The  production  and  investment  costs 
excluding family labour are KES 27,809. The WoP scenario assumes current income of KES 
12,600 per average household for non defined and very diversified occupational activities. 
The model assumes purchase of 10 chicks and rooster and three batches per year, totalling 
30  birds  per  year  before  mortality  and  own  consumption.  The  own  consumption  is  7 
chicken per year, and mortality rate is between 15 to 10 per cent. The revenues arrive 
from selling eggs, chicken meat and manure. The main investments are roosters, housing 
structure shed, small equipment’s (drinker, feeders etc.), poultry eggs laying cages etc. 
The  operating  costs  are  chicken  feed  which  accounts  for  the  highest  operational  costs, 
veterinary care and drugs, transport, water, electricity and any other miscellaneous costs. 
The average revenue is KES 132 878 and average incremental income is KES 106 420. 
The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 1:2.7 showing that for 100 KES spent in the model will 
generate a KES 270 of benefits, which is in favour of the model. The NPV is estimated at 
KES 691 356.  
9. 
Model  4  Layers/150  eggs:  The  model  assumes  purchase  of  150  chicks  and  2 
batches  per  year  (each  6  months).  The  WoP  scenario  assumes  current  income  of  KES 
196.657 per year with 70 chicks and 2 batches per year (every 6 months). The highest 
cost is related to the feeding activities. The estimate mortality rate is 5 per cent and the 
revenues  arrives  from  selling  eggs,  meat  and  revenue.  The  total  eggs  production  after 
mortality rate and own consumption is estimated at 25 650, which means on average 180 
eggs per chicken yearly. The main investment costs are roosters, housing structure shed, 
small equipment’s (drinker, feeders) etc. The operating costs are feed which accounts for 
the  biggest  cost  share,  veterinary  costs,  drugs,  home  rations  additional  proteins 
ingredients, transport and miscellaneous costs. The average revenue is KES 423 thousand 
and average incremental income is KES 176 thousand. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 
1:1.4 showing that for 100 KES spent in the model will generate a KES 140 of benefits.  
The NPV is estimated at KES 1.2 million over 20 years period.  
  2 
Model 5 Annual grass/hay: The WoP scenario assumes 1 acre of production of 9.8 
10. 
t with gross income of KES 12.617. In the WP scenario the average yield is 1.5 tonnes/acre 
compared  to  the  WoP  scenario  of  0.8  ton/acre.  The  production  and  investment  costs 
including labour are KES 20 400, which includes investment, operational and labour cost 
such  as  certified  seeds,  ploughing  and  harrowing  (up  to  every  5th  year),  transportation 
etc. The average revenue is KES 35 thousand and average incremental income is KES 5 
363. The benefit cost ratio estimated is 1:2.3 showing that for 100 KES spent in the model 
will generate a KES 230 of benefits. The NPV is estimated at KES 35 367. 
Model 6 Incubators chicks/ Youth group model: The WoP scenario assumes current 
11. 
income for 5 households of KES 126.750 and net benefits of KES 51.226 for the activities 
related to the production of eggs (each HH contain 20 chickens(. The highest cost is related 
to the feed formulation food. IN the WP scenario, the model assumes 5 households. The 
investment  costs  are  incubators  with  solar  panel  (i.e.1000  eggs  capacity)  and  up  to  17 
cycles per year. This model assumes modest 9 cycles per year, 20 chickens per family, 
therefore 100 chicken for the group model, assuming 5 HHs. Total chicks production per 
year is estimated at 9 000, and the revenues arrives from selling one day old chicks and 
selling  one-month  old  chicks.  The  main  investments  and  operating  costs  are  feeds, 
veterinary  costs  and  drugs,  roosters,  housing  structure,  chicken  nest  box,  feeders, 
drinkers,  transport  costs,  miscellaneous  cost  etc.  The  production  and  investment  costs 
including labour are KES 551 thousand, which includes investment, operational and labour 
cost. The average revenue is KES 1.1 million and average incremental income is KES 641 
thousand.  This  model  demonstrates  highest  profitability  considering  benefit  cost  ratio 
estimated is 1: 3.1 showing that for 100 KES spent in the model will generate a KES 310 
of benefits. The NPV is estimated at KES 4.6 million over 20 years period. 
Model 7 Beekeeping / youth group model: The WoP scenario assumes total gross 
12. 
margin after labour costs of KES 36.363 and total operating revenues of KES 54.363. The 
highest  costs  are  buckets/containers  and  wax  straining  bags.  In  the  WP  scenario,  the 
model  assumes  additional  Kenyan  top  bar  10  beehives  and  purchase  of  manual  semi 
processing equipment. The main investment and operating costs are beehives, hive tool, 
protective  kits,  bee  brush,  feeder  box,  frames,  catcher  box,  jars,  containers,  sufurias, 
straining  nets,  honey  mini  drums,  wax  straining  bag,  extractor  etc.  The  WoP  scenario 
refers to existing traditional and modern 10 beehives. The WP scenario assumes additional 
purchase of beehives and the revenues are arriving from processing honey and producing 
candles from the beeswax. The honey production potentiality is 20kg per beehive/harvest, 
however our model assumes modest 15 kg per beehives/harvest. The beeswax production 
is  1  kg  per  beehives,  and it  can  produce  10  candles  as  additional income.  The  average 
number harvesting per year is 2, and 3 kg per beehives is excluded as the honey losses. 
It is increase in yield compared to the traditional beehives (log) where yield achieved is 
up  to  10  kg  maximum.  The  average  production  capacity  is  between  400  and  650  kg 
compared to the WoP scenario of 145 kg after own honey consumption and losses. The 
production and investment costs including labour are KES 249 thousand, which includes 
investment,  operational  and  labour  cost.  The  average  incremental  income  is  KES  203 
thousand. The benefit cost ratio estimated is 1:2.6 showing that for 100 KES spent in the 
model will generate a KES 260 of benefits. The NPV is estimated at KES 1.3 million over 
20 years period.  
13. 
Model  8  Climate  resilient  Water  Infrastructure:  The  model  doesn’t  have  WoP 
scenario  because  all  infrastructure  activities  are  focused  on  new  benefits  rather  than 
improved, so all benefits are incremental benefits. The models is based on the constructing 
or rehabilitating 40 boreholes with solar panels, 20 water pans and 30 sub surfaces dams 
and or rock-catchments in the ASAL area. The number of usages per year for the boreholes 
was estimated at 210 days, water pans for 120 days and sub-surface dams approx. 90 
days.  The  boreholes  daily  capacity  has  been  assumed  at  60  thousand  litres/day  with 
overall up to 7 months operations, water pans with 40 000 lit/day and sub-surface dams 
with 16 thousand lit/day. The overall total water capacity production is estimated at 971 
million  per  year.  The  human  consumption/yearly  has  been  estimated  323  million  and 
  3 
livestock consumption /yearly at 647 million. Total number of HHs covered is estimated at 
approx.  20  000  and  304  000  of  livestock  (livestock  unit:  50  702).  The  benefits  cover 
requirement of 7.1 per cent of the rural population area coverage in 4 targeted counties 
and 4.4 per cent of the livestock water requirements. The NPV has been estimated at the 
KES 848 million over 20 years of the project based on the value of the water production. 
Total  investment  costs  are  estimated  at  the  KES  1,1  billion  and  the  operations  and 
maintenance  costs  has  been  taken  into  consideration.  The  benefit  cost  ratio  is  1:  1.1 
showing that for 100 KES spent it generates 110 KES of benefits.  
The financial aspects of models are presented at the table 1 demonstrating 
14. 
production and investment costs including labour and excluding labour costs, the 
average production and investment costs, average revenue, average incremental 
revenue and incremental income at the 5th year.  
Table 1: Financial analysis ( 2020) 
Production 
& 
investment 
cost, 
including 
labour 
(year 1) 
KES 
Production 
& 
investment 
cost, 
before 
labour 
(average) 
KES 
Average 
Production 
& 
investment 
cost, 
including 
labour KES 
52.440  
4.165  
27.089  
119.292  
20.400  
34.049  
4.731  
13.858  
145.815  
11.920  
58.304  
23.316  
47.878  
294.495  
17.020  
Average 
Revenue per 
year KES 
Average 
Incremental 
income 
KES 
Incremental 
income, 
(year 5) 
KES 
99.275  
46.725  
132.878  
422.919  
35.000  
40.971  
23.409  
106.420  
176.305  
5.363  
46.890  
23.728  
115.559  
173.107  
4.783  
551.088  
359.801  
439.645  
1.131.540  
640.669  
6.838  
248.730  
103.958  
125.468  
334.157  
203.227  
214.673  
Model  
Dairy Goat 
Meat Goat 
Improved ind.chicken 
Layers/ 150 eggs 
Annual Grass / Hay 
 Incubators chicks / Youth 
Group Model a/  
 Beekeping + Candles / 
Youth Group Model a/  
/a 5 HH 
All  these  eight  models  (including  water  infrastructure)  present  a  higher  financial 
15. 
efficiency in terms of financial Net Present Value (NPV) and the financial benefits-cost ratio 
(BCR).  For  instance,  NPV  is  positive  for  the  all  models  (KES  238  thousand  for  model  1 
(dairy goat), KES 166 thousand for model 2 (meat goat), KES 691 thousand for model 3 
(improved indigenous . chicken), KES 1,2 million for model 4 (150 layers/eggs), KES 35 
thousand for model 5 (annual grass/ hay/acre), KES 4,9 million for model 6 (incubators 
chicks  100  eggs  capacity/  group  model  assuming  5  HHs),  KES  1,3  million  for  model  7 
(beekeeping + candles production/youth group model) and KES 848 million for the water 
infrastructure over 20 years period. Changes in financial indicators illustrate the predicted 
transformation  in  livestock  practices  in  the  project  area.  Analyses  of  the  livestock  and 
youth group models confirm that the impact of the project at the farmers level is financially 
attractive for family households and net farmers’ incomes are expected to increase. For 
more details, refer to table 2.  
16. 
The  BCR  has  been  the  highest  for  incubators  with  solar  panel  chicks  production 
estimated at 3.1, followed by improved indigenous. Chicken (2.7), beekeeping +candles 
(2.6), annual grass/hay /acre (2.2), meat goat (2), dairy goat (1.6), and layers/150 eggs 
(1.4). The return to family labour per day is  among KES 819  and KES 50, the smallest 
value is for annual grass/hay production and the highest for layers/ 150 eggs. For more 
details please refer to the table 2 below.  
 Table 2: Financial profitability indicators (2020) 
Model  
Net present value / KES 
B/C Ratio  Return to family labour (KES/day) 
Dairy Goat 
Meat Goat 
Improved ind.chicken 
Layers/ 150 eggs 
Annual Grass / Hay 
 Incubators chicks / Youth Group Model a/  
1,6 
2,0 
2,7 
1,4 
2,2 
3,1 
200 
118 
356 
819 
50 
246 
238.497 
166.418 
691.356 
1.164.566 
35.367 
4.601.105 
  4 
 Beekeping + Candles / Youth Group Model a/  
a/ 5 HH 
1.313.078 
2,6 
647 
17. 
The Net present value (NPV) of the project is positive (US$ 91 Million; KES 10.1 
Billion). The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is estimated at the value of 29.1 per 
cent, which demonstrates profitability of the project. The economic analysis suggests that 
the  KeLCoP  project  is  feasible.  All  these  worthiness  indicators  establish  the  economic 
feasibility of the project.  
Sensitivity Analysis. The sensitivity tests of the project suggest that the project 
18. 
is robust and worthwhile, especially considering the conservative assumptions made in the 
computation of the benefits. The project promotes the inclusion of the poor households 
and has a positive impact on household welfare. The project has low sensitivity on small 
changes in decrease of revenues and increase of costs. 
19. 
The primary objective of the financial analysis is to determine the financial viability 
and incentives of the target group (smallholder farmers, youth and group models etc.) for 
engaging  in  the  project  activities,  by  examining  the  impact  of  project  interventions  on 
family labour, cash flow and net incomes.  
20. 
The estimated incremental production of the farm and off farm models is expecting 
improvement in productivity due to the project interventions. The analysis has been taken 
by taking into consideration the average January 2020 prices assuming similar condition 
in area region. A cash-flow analysis is finally carried out to present the “with” and “without” 
project analysis. 
21. 
For the purpose of the financial and economic analysis, it has been developed eight 
financial models for the production window: (i) dairy goat; (ii) meat goat; (iii) improved 
ind.  Chicken;  (iv)annual  grass/hay;  (v)  150  layers  eggs;  (vi)  beekeeping  +candles 
production; (vii) chicks incubators and (viii) water infrastructure.  
Most models are expected to provide farmers with physical outputs and financial 
22. 
returns that are attractive in relation to their extra labour and other inputs and financial 
investment. The project is supposed to provide farmers with financial resources needed to 
cover  production  costs  (operational  or  working  capital),  training,  capacity  building  and 
administrative support. Due to the project intervention the increase in yield, quality and 
distribution of products.  
23. 
Demand for labour provides opportunities for the poorest to gain employment. The 
cost  of rural farm labour set at going market rate varies and it is estimated to be from 
KES 350/day to KES 1500/day depending on the activity and region. Returns to labour as 
well as net farm income within different models increases by a rate that is substantial and 
much higher than the prevalent wage rate for inexperienced labour in the area. 
Table 3. Financial Analysis of the Models 
Models incremental income (KES) 
 Dairy Goat  
 Meat Goat  
-29.207 
4.607 
46.890 
46.890 
46.890 
46.890 
46.890 
46.890 
46.890 
46.890 
238.497 
2.357,2 
19.985 
21.103 
23.728 
23.728 
23.728 
23.728 
23.728 
23.728 
23.728 
23.728 
166.418 
1.644,8 
 Improved 
indigenous 
chicken  
623 
67.506 
115.559 
115.559 
115.559 
109.959 
115.559 
115.559 
115.559 
115.559 
691.356 
6.832,9 
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
A
N
A
L
Y
S
I
S
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
PY7 
PY8 
PY9 
PY10 
 NPV (KES)  
 NPV (USD)  
 Annual 
Grass/hay  
1.983 
6.783 
6.783 
483 
4.783 
6.783 
6.783 
483 
4.783 
6.783 
35.367 
349,5 
  5 
PRODUCTION 
Youth and Women Group model's incremental 
benefits 
(KES) 
Water 
Infrastructure 
 Beekeping + 
candles 
production  
-15.643 
102.963 
231.978 
232.873 
214.673 
240.373 
232.323 
230.773 
235.173 
159.873 
1.313.078 
12.977,6 
 150 Layers  
 Chick 
Incubators  
 Water 
infrastructure  
-23.435 
169.057 
194.057 
194.057 
173.107 
194.057 
194.057 
194.057 
194.057 
173.107 
1.164.566 
11.509,8 
449.382 
686.842 
686.842 
636.842 
683.842 
686.842 
636.842 
686.842 
686.842 
633.842 
4.601.105 
45.474,5 
-888.386.000 
140.108.700 
140.108.700 
140.108.700 
140.108.700 
140.108.700 
140.108.700 
140.108.700 
140.108.700 
140.108.700 
848.144.681 
8.382.532,9 
 B/C Ratio  
1,6 
2,0 
2,7 
2,2 
2,6 
1,4 
3,1 
1,1 
Table 4 provides overall project costs by components and beneficiaries. The total 
24. 
project costs have been estimated at US$ 93.3 million over 6-year project 
implementation period. The cost per beneficiary has been estimated at modest US$ 189 
and cost per household has been estimated at US$ 848. Adoption rate of the project is 
80% and up to 110 000 of direct households has been estimated to be impacted by the 
project implementation (equivalent to 495 thousand beneficiaries).  
  6 
Table 4. Project costs and logframe targets 
PROJECT COSTS AND INDICATORS FOR LOGFRAME 
TOTAL PROJECT COSTS (in million US$) 
 93.331  
Beneficiaries 
 495.000  
people 
4,5 
Households 
110.000 
Cost per beneficiary 
 189  
 USD x person 
 848  
US$ x HH 
Adoption rates 
80% 
Components and Cost (US$ million) 
A. Climate-Smart Production enhancement for small livestock 
B. Support to Livestock Market Development 
C. Project Management and Coordination Unit (PMCU) 
 55.3 
 23.14 
15.1  
59.1% 
24.7% 
16.2% 
Economic Analysis 
25. 
The  objectives  of  the  economic  analysis  are:  (i)  to  assess  the  overall  project 
viability; and (ii) to estimate the project impact by calculating the economic rate of return. 
The computation of economic costs is derived from financial project costs, by  excluding 
transfers such as duties, taxes, and price contingencies. Production inputs and outputs, 
labour,  and  other  items  have  been  shadowed  priced  to  stand  for  market  imperfections. 
Economic costs in border prices for major agricultural inputs and products were computed 
using  the  associated  conversion  factors  to  adjust  the  local  content  of  costs  and  goods 
assumed to be non-traded. Prices requiring a different conversion factor are introduced. 
The  related labour  financial price is adjusted  downward by using a standard conversion 
factor of 0.83; 0.93 for imported agricultural products and 1.06 for exported agricultural 
products. Shadow conversion factor is 1.09 which changes shadow exchange rate to value 
of KES 110.4 for 1 US$. The financial discount rate has been adjusted according to data 
available on Central Bank of Kenya commercial banks weighted average rates (12.51%) 
and social rate was adjusted to Govt. bonds (5 years duration  - 9.8% source Central Bank 
of Kenya).More details can be found in table 5.  
Table 5. Main assumptions and shadow prices 
Dairy Goat 
Meat Goat 
Goat milk (lt) 
Improved ind. chicken 
Local chicken 
 Rooster  
Output  
 7.500  
 5.000  
 50  
 650  
 350  
 700  
MAIN ASSUMPTIONS & SHADOW PRICES 
Price (in LC) 
 Input Prices 
Price (in LC) 
Eggs 
One-day old chick  
6 weeks old chick 
Crude Honey (kg) 
Semi-processed honey  
Hay/annual grass (kg) 
Candle (unit) 
 15  
 250  
 250  
 500  
 500  
 23  
 50  
Chicken feed (kg) 
Vaccines (per bird) 
Incubators with solar panel  
Beehive 
Rural wage 
In kid doe 
Housing structure (shed) 
 52  
 3  
 60.000  
 5.000  
 350  
 25.000  
 15.000  
Official Exchange rate (OER) 
Shadow Exchange rate (SER) 
Standard Conversion Factor  
Labour Conversion factor 
101,18 
110,40 
1,09 
0,83 
Discount rate (opportunity cost of capital) 
Social Discount rate 
Output conversion factor 
Input Conversion factor 
12,5% 
9,8% 
1,06 
0,93 
FINANCIAL 
ECONOMIC 
Project  economic  costs  and  benefits.  The  economic  analyses  include  the 
26. 
investment  and  incremental  recurrent  costs  of  the  project  components.  The  project 
financial costs have been converted to economic values by removal of price contingencies, 
taxes and duties. In order to avoid double counting, the final aggregation considered only 
those costs that were not included in the financial models. Costs of replacing/maintaining 
of some specific small equipment are considered. 
  7 
Benefits  estimation:  Incremental  production  was  calculated  by  calibrating  the 
27. 
incremental benefits by the standard conversion factors and then aggregating them, based 
on  the  phasing  of  household  and  enterprises  uptake  during  the  project  implementation 
period. 
Based on the expected farmers’ responsiveness to the project, the assumption on 
28. 
farmers’ participation is smooth the first years, and increases from project activities such 
as  extension,  market  development,  technical  assistance,  training  and  awareness. 
Incremental aggregated financial and economic budgets, production and inputs including 
labour,  financial  and  economic  efficiency  measures,  and  other  technical  and  economic 
indicators were then calculated. The phasing of beneficiaries’ participation to the Project 
activities was based on the rate at which beneficiaries are projected to contribute to Project 
output.  
Table 6. Beneficiaries, adoption rates and phasing 
Adoption rates 
80% 
BENEFICIARIES, ADOPTION RATES AND PHASING 
PY1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
PY2 
300 
240 
3725 
2980 
4800 
3840 
750 
600 
23 
18 
6900 
5520 
3 
2 
PY3 
700 
560 
8691 
6952 
11200 
8960 
1750 
1400 
53 
42 
16100 
12880 
7 
6 
PY4 
600 
480 
7449 
5959 
9600 
7680 
1500 
1200 
45 
36 
13800 
11040 
6 
5 
PY5 
200 
160 
2483 
1986 
3200 
2560 
500 
400 
15 
12 
4600 
3680 
2 
2 
PY6 
200 
160 
2483 
1986 
3200 
2560 
500 
400 
15 
12 
4600 
3680 
2 
2 
Beekeping + candles /Youth 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Dairy Goat 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Meat Goat 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Improved ind. Chicken 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
150 Layers 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Annual Grass/ Hay 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Incubators chicks /Youth  
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Nr of Targeted HH 
Adopting HH 
Total 
2000 
1600 
24830 
19864 
32000 
25600 
5000 
4000 
150 
120 
46000 
36800 
20 
16 
110.000 
88.000 
Table 7. Incremental net economic benefit at the project level (KES) 
E
C
O
N
O
M
I
C
A
N
A
L
Y
S
I
S
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
PY7 
PY8 
PY9 
P10..PY15 
Dairy Goat 
Meat Goat 
0 
-1.283.808 
41.700.169 
155.872.689 
269.368.436 
310.228.595 
333.690.070 
334.982.490 
336.700.969 
331.442.863 
0 
-83.242.151 
-174.832.611 
25.914.323 
473.750.442 
742.153.248 
895.737.427 
980.894.124 
980.894.124 
980.894.124 
NPV@ 9,8% ('000 KES) 
NPV@ 9,8% ('000 USD) 
EIRR 
Improved 
indigenous 
chicken 
0 
419.904 
41.581.260 
165.063.992 
313.107.527 
397.946.985 
440.631.974 
455.409.241 
456.529.241 
461.009.241 
10.077.920 
91.289 
29,1% 
200 Layers 
Annual 
Grass/Hay 
NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITS 
Beekeping + 
candle 
production 
0 
-1.283.808 
41.700.169 
155.872.689 
269.368.436 
310.228.595 
333.690.070 
334.982.490 
336.700.969 
331.442.863 
0 
11.667.477 
65.387.589 
150.546.543 
176.540.861 
144.575.179 
159.111.179 
209.159.179 
189.103.179 
154.879.179 
0 
-159.719 
3.421.191 
12.326.790 
20.127.484 
22.279.629 
24.412.553 
24.538.253 
25.041.053 
25.041.053 
Chick 
Incubators 
0 
1.104.688 
4.241.456 
7.755.544 
9.490.328 
10.432.362 
10.835.537 
10.877.937 
10.727.537 
10.847.537 
Boreholes 
with solar 
panel 
0 
-106.438.320 
-231.375.036 
-156.273.160 
19.606.688 
30.927.384 
113.206.960 
113.206.960 
113.206.960 
113.206.960 
Total Benefits 
('000 LC) 
0 
-179.215.737 
-208.175.812 
517.079.409 
1.551.360.201 
1.968.771.977 
2.311.315.769 
2.464.050.674 
2.448.904.031 
2.408.763.820 
Net 
Incremental 
benefit ('000 
LC) a/ 
-824.078.826 
-1.464.020.230 
-2.041.597.955 
-985.843.248 
864.318.995 
2.121.322.588 
2.783.668.545 
2.994.809.880 
2.998.000.758 
2.997.342.653 
Cash Flow 
('000 LC) 
824.078.826 
1.284.804.493 
1.833.422.143 
1.502.922.657 
687.041.206 
-152.550.611 
-472.352.776 
-530.759.205 
-549.096.727 
-588.578.832 
Incremental crop production will either be consumed by the households in the 
29. 
Project area or sold to local and external traders in the primary, secondary and terminal 
markets. Sales are made both for consumption in large cities. 
  8 
Graph 1. Cash flow of incremental benefits, costs and net cash flow 
EIRR 
29.1%,NPV=10.077.920KES 
PY1
PY2
PY3
PY4
PY5
PY6
PY7
PY8
PY9
P10..PY15
 Total Benefits ('000 LC)
Net Incremental benefit ('000 LC) a/
Cash Flow ('000 LC)
EIRR 29.1%   NPV=10.077.920 KES
30. 
Assumptions: Economic pricing has been based on the following assumptions: (i) 
the  conversion  of  financial  project  costs  into  economic  costs  have  been  undertaken  by 
multiplying the domestic value added by the standard conversion factor (SCF), and adding-
in the foreign exchange costs to convert financial values to economic values; (ii) A SCF 
equal to 1,09 has been applied when converting financial prices into economic prices and 
the opportunity cost of labour was 83% which represents a conversion factor from financial 
to economic costs; (iii) the exchange rate used in the economic analysis is fixed at US$ 1 
equal to KES 110.4 computed exchange rate prevailing in January 2020 with taking into 
consideration  standard  conversion  factor  of  1.09;  and  (iv)  an  economic  life  time  of  20 
years  have  been  taken  to  assess  the  improvement  in  capacity  building,  trainings  and 
awareness. Please refer to the more details in table 5.  
The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) on the investments in the Project area 
31. 
over 20 years is estimated at 29.1 per cent and the Net present value (NPV) of the project 
is positive (US$ 91.3 Million; KES 10,1 Billion). The economic analysis suggests that the 
KeLCoP Project is feasible. All these worthiness indicators establish the economic feasibility 
of the project.  
32. 
Sensitivity  Analysis:  In  order  to  include  risk  factors,  a  sensitivity  analysis  in 
terms  of  “variable  by  variable”  and  “scenario”  analysis  was  done  to  test  changes  in 
economic  indicators  in  conjunction  with  aggregate  costs,  benefits,  and  delays  in  the 
realization of project costs and benefits. The EIRR drops to 27.2 per cent with an increase 
in costs of 10 per cent. With an increase of costs by 20 per cent, the project is still worthy 
(EIRR of 25.5 per cent). With an increase of the aggregate costs by 50 per cent, the EIRR 
with 21.2 per cent, still above economic cost of capital. A decrease of benefits by 10 per 
cent  to  20  per  cent  still  yields  an  EIRR  greater  than  the  24.7  per  cent.  Project  benefit 
decrease of 50 per cent result in low but still positive NPV and EIRR that is greater than 
the economic cost of capital.  
  9 
Table 8. Sensitivity analysis 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (SA) 
Link with the risk matrix 
Combination of risks affecting output prices, yields and adoption rates 
Increase of labour costs and input non labour costs ( i.e. feed formulation) 
Risks affecting adoption rates and low implementation capacity 
IRR 
29,1% 
27,0% 
24,7% 
16,1% 
27,2% 
25,5% 
21,2% 
24,6% 
21,7% 
NPV (LC) 
 10.077.919.833  
 8.547.416.395  
 7.016.912.956  
 2.425.402.641  
 9.555.208.378  
 9.032.496.923  
 7.464.362.557  
 8.266.365.839  
 6.821.210.201  
∆% 
-10% 
-20% 
-50% 
10% 
20% 
50% 
Base scenario 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project costs 
Project costs 
Project costs 
1 year lag in ben. 
2 years lag in ben. 
 10 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
Review Note 
1. Introduction  
This SECAP Review Note assesses environment, social, and climate risks that are likely to 
affect the project or emanate from the project, and provides mitigation actions. The SECAP 
note has been developed in line with IFAD’s SECAP guidelines and Government of Kenya 
laws.  The  review  note  integrates  IFAD's  mainstreaming  themes  such  as  gender,  youth, 
nutrition,  and  indigenous  peoples,  as  well  as  evaluates  associated  risks  and  provides 
mitigation  actions.  It  also  undertakes  a  policy,  legislation  and  institutional  analysis  of 
supportive national frameworks and provides guidance on assessments and studies that 
are required to mitigate negative impacts and enhance positive ones. 
During the project design, data and information were obtained from relevant stakeholders, 
field visits, potential partners and collaborators, and literature  review. The design team 
engaged  several  stakeholders  including  farmer  cooperatives,  women  and  youth  groups 
engaged  in  small  livestock  value  chains,  county  governments,  the  National  Drought 
Management Authority (NDMA), donor funded projects and the private sector players in 
the poultry and small ruminants value chains, among others. 
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts  
2.1 Socio-economic and nutritional assessment  
Overall  poverty  situation  -  Although  Kenya  attained  Lower  Middle-Income  Country 
(LMIC) status in 2014, an estimated 36.1% is living below the poverty line. The incidence 
of poverty dropped from 52% in 1997 to 36.1% in 2016, and the percentage of people 
experiencing  extreme  poverty  fell  from  19.5%  to  8.6%1.  Food  insecurity  remains  high 
with approximately 14.5 million still characterised as food poor. The latest SMART survey 
and sentinel site data collected in July 2019 indicates that food insecurity has significantly 
worsened as about 2.6 million people are currently experiencing Crisis (IPC Phase 3) or 
worse outcomes, including some households that are likely in Emergency (IPC Phase 4) 
in Turkana, Marsabit, Isiolo, Mandera, Tana River, Garissa, Wajir, and Baringo2. Poverty 
is more widespread in rural areas where over 71.7% of the population living below the 
poverty line. The incidence of poverty in rural areas is estimated at 40.1% compared to 
29.4% in the urban areas.  Poverty disproportionately affects  women and youth, and is 
more pronounced in arid counties. The project will cover 10 counties (out of the total 47 
counties),  four  (4)  in  the  western  region,  four  (4)  in  Rift  Valley  region  and  (2)  in  the 
Northern Region. The population is rural, and depend on livestock and crop production for 
their  livelihood.  Poverty  levels  are  higher  in  the  (2)  Northern  Counties.  There  are  also 
pockets of deep poverty in the other counties. In the Western and Rift Valley regions small 
scale  farmers  practice  mixed  farming,  with  poor  segments  of  the  population  growing 
crops, keeping small ruminants, poultry and engage in honey production. In the North, 
they are predominantly pastoralists raising camels, beef cattle, goats and sheep for meat. 
Demographic details on the target counties is illustrated in Table below 1. 
Table 1: Demographic details on the target counties 
% of rural 
Population 
Population 
Density 
#  County 
Area 
km2 
% of 
Total 
Population 
Siaya 
Busia 
2,530  0.4 
1 
2 
1,695  0.3 
3  Bungoma  3,032  0.5 
4  Kakamega  3,051  0.5 
5  Trans Nzoia  2,496  0.4 
993,183 
893,681 
1,670,570 
1,867,579 
990,341 
% of 
Total 
Pop. 
2.1 
1.9 
3.5 
3.9 
2.1 
6 
Elgeyo 
Marakwet 
3,029  0.5 
454,480 
1.0 
Baringo  11,015  1.9 
7 
8 
7,499  1.3 
Nakuru 
9  Marsabit  70,961  12.2 
10  Samburu  21,022  3.6 
* Basic Report on Wellbeing in Kenya, World Bank, UNICEF 
666,763 
2,162,202 
459,785 
310,327 
1.4 
4.5 
1.0 
0.6 
89 
84 
78 
85 
80 
86 
89 
54 
78 
83 
393 
527 
551 
612 
397 
150 
61 
288 
6 
15 
Total 
Chickens 
Total 
Sheep/ 
Goats 
473,464  1,115,347 
133,838  1,017,045 
249,157  2,493,848 
256,457  3,193,849 
836,820 
155,490 
Poverty 
Index* 
33.8 
69.3 
35.7 
35.8 
34 
660,600 
531,960 
43.4 
1,267,182  1,016,911 
878,059  2,176,865 
4,357,786  93,855 
1,255,658  318,530 
39.6 
29.1 
63.7 
75.8 
Although  the  absolute  number  of  people  living  in  poverty  is  higher  in  the  central  and 
western regions of Kenya, the prevalence of poverty is higher in the ASALs where about 
36% of Kenya’s population resides. Population increase in high agricultural potential areas 
has resulted in shrinking land parcels, pushing farmers who rely on rain-fed agriculture 
systems into drier, more marginal areas that are increasingly vulnerable to drought. 
Gender. Approximately 50.3% of the Kenyan population are women (FAO, 2018). With 
the introduction of the progressive rights-based Constitution of Kenya (2010), the permit 
of basic rights for women, children and other marginalized groups have been prioritized 
and safeguarded by succeeding policy and legal frameworks. However, women continue 
to face barriers in accessing economic and socio-political resources and opportunities (UN 
Women,  2019).  Moreover,  incidents  of  gender  based  violence,  sexual  harassment  and 
certain cultural practices such  as  female genital mutilation and early  marriages further 
exacerbate the situation. Kenya is ranked 109 out of the 153 countries that were rated 
on their progress towards gender parity in 2019 and has a Gender Inequality Index (GII) 
of  0.549.  The  Global  Gender  Gap  Report  2017  ranks  Kenya  76  out  144  globally  with 
significant  inequalities  between  males  and  females  in  education  attainment,  health 
outcomes, representation in parliament and participation in the labour market. Women 
are underrepresented in decision-making, especially in rural areas and are not adequately 
represented either at the county government level or at the national level.  
According  to  World  Bank  modeled  estimates  (ILO),  women  account  for  about  64% 
participation in the labour force, and the percentage of women salaried workers (23%) 
are  starkly  lower  than  men  (53.2)1.  Women  and  girls  living  in  rural  areas  spend  long 
hours  collecting  water  and  firewood  and  this  and  other  household  chores  limit  school 
attendance  and  work  options.  Women  have  less  access  to  land  tenure,  education,  and 
employment  opportunities.2  While  over  80%  of  Kenyan  women  are  engaged  in 
smallholder  farming,  only  1%  own  land  in  their  own  right,  access  less  than  10%  of 
available credit, and less than 1% of agriculture credit. The main obstacles to women’s 
full  participation  in  production  and  value-addition  are  cultural  norms  of  access  to  and 
control  over  primary  resources,  affordable  credit,  and  knowledge,  information,  and 
agriculture inputs. 
Some of the most generic gender based constraints faced by women in the different nodes 
of the livestock value chain include, at the production node limited access to and control 
over land; ownership and control over livestock assets; access to livestock training and 
extension  and  finance  services;  access  to  livestock  inputs,  technology  and  services. 
Women often suffer from excessive workload and are marginalized in producer groups-in 
1 http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/kenya  
2 https://www.usaid.gov/kenya/gender-equality-and-womens-empowerment-kenya 
terms of membership and leadership positions. At the marketing and processing node in 
the  value  chains,  women  are  disproportionately  constrained  by;  poverty,  that  affects 
mobility to access markets for livestock and products; low volumes of marketable surplus 
they produce or control; loss of control over livestock enterprises when they become more 
commercialized and lucrative; limited entrepreneurial capacity; and stringent regulatory 
rules that seek to formalize processing and marketing of livestock products3. 
Youth. In 2018, it was estimated that approximately 42.4% of the population was under 
the age of 15, while approximately one third of the country comprised of youth (15-24) 
(CIA Fact book, 2018). Youth account for 35.4% of the Kenyan population and offer a 
dynamic  workforce  that  is  highly  adaptable,  with  a  high  uptake  of  technological 
innovations.  In  2017,  22%  of  youth  (15-24)  were  unemployed,  while  the  national 
unemployment rate was 11% (FAO, 2018). According to a  study  conducted by UNDP, 
80% of the unemployed are between 15-34 years old (UNDP, 2015). With approximately 
1,000,000 youth entering the labour market of Kenya annually (Kenya Country Report 
on Youth Employment, 2014), youth unemployment continues to become a significant 
concern.  Therefore,  the  agriculture  sector,  which  directly  contributes  to  24%  of  the 
annual  national  GDP  and  27%  in  indirect  contributions,  offers  multiple  livelihood  and 
employment opportunities to youth (Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy, 2017-2021).  
The  challenges  faced  by  rural  youth  face  include  lack  of  access  to  entrepreneurial 
opportunities, finance, acquiring relevant skills and job qualifications. The key challenges 
for  the  participation  of  youth  in  agriculture  outlined  in  the  KYAS  (2017-2021)  include 
negative  perception  and  attitude  to  agri-business  among  youth,  inadequate  skills, 
knowledge and information; limited agricultural innovation, limited access to finance and 
resources such as land as well as inadequate policies to support youth in agri-preneurship. 
The  livestock  sector  still  faces  low  levels  of  youth  engagement.  Nevertheless,  young 
women and men are engaged at critical points of the livestock value chains. Young men 
are  animal  walkers,  small  traders,  transporters  of  livestock,  and  manual  labourers  at 
markets. Young women are more visible as producers and sellers of honey and in groups 
that are formed around poultry and small-ruminants. Young men and women’s ability to 
engage in the livestock value chain is limited by their lack of  capital, limited access to 
finance and limited knowledge of the opportunities for investment. 
Indigenous  peoples.  Indigenous  people  are  considered  those  segments  of  the 
population who have continued to abide by their traditional customs and belief systems 
and way of life and are marginalized. They include hunter gatherers and pastoralists. It 
is estimated that pastoralists comprise 25% of the national population, while the largest 
individual hunter-gatherer community amount to approximately 79,000. The pastoralists, 
mainly occupy the arid and semi-arid lands of  northern Kenya and towards the border 
between Kenya and Tanzania in the south. The hunter-gatherers include the Sengwer, 
Ogieks,  Yiaku,  Waata  and  Aweer  (Boni),  while  the  pastoralists  include  the  Turkana, 
Rendille, Borana, Maasai, Samburu, Ilchamus, Somali, Gabra, Pokot, Endorois and others. 
With  increasing  competition  for  resources  due  to  population  growth,  the  indigenous 
peoples  of  Kenya  face  insecurity  in  the  possession  of  land  and  resources,  poor  service 
provision,  low  political  representation,  and  marginalisaton.  The  constitution  of  Kenya, 
2010, recognises the rights of minorities and marginalised and guarantees their rights to 
their land. In spite of this, indigenous communities continue to face challenges related to 
access to land and natural resources management. 
Marginalised  groups.  Kenya  does  not  identify  with  the  term  indigenous,  rather 
considers those segments of the population who have continued to live by their traditional 
customs and belief systems and way of life, as marginalized. Therefore, Kenya does not 
have  specific  legislation  on  indigenous  peoples.  The  country  has  not  yet  adopted  the 
United  Nations  Declaration  on  the  Rights  of  Indigenous  Peoples  and  has  yet  to  ratify 
3 Draft Livestock Policy, Kenya (2019). 
Convention 169 of the International Labor Organization. Chapter Four of the Constitution 
of  Kenya  contains  a  progressive  Bill  of  Rights  that  makes  international  law  a  key 
component  of  the  laws  of  Kenya  and  guarantees  the  protection  of  minorities  and 
marginalized groups. The hunter-gatherers include the Ogiek, Sengwer, Yiaku, Waata and 
Aweer  (Boni),  while  the  pastoralists  include  the  Turkana,  Rendille,  Borana,  Maasai, 
Samburu, Ilchamus, Somali, Gabra, Pokot, Endorois and others. The marginalized peoples 
of Kenya face insecurity in the possession of land and resources, poor service provision, 
low  political  representation,  discrimination  and  exclusion.  These  communities  face 
scarcity  and  insecurity  of  land  and  resources,  poor  services  and  discrimination.  The 
situation of indigenous peoples seems to worsen each year, with increasing competition 
for resources on their land.4  
Nutrition. Kenya continues to face severe food insecurity with 3.4 million people in 2017 
suffering from acute food insecurity.5 Even though Kenya has made substantive strides 
in reducing the prevalence of stunting nationally, falling from 35 percent in 2008 to 26 
percent  in  20146  and  it  is  on  course  to  meeting  the  global  targets  for  reducing 
malnutrition7,  Kenya  still  experiences  a  malnutrition  burden  among  its  under-five 
population.  Stunting  is  most  prevalent  among  children  18–23  months,  indicating  that 
poor  infant  and  young  child  feeding  practices  and  inadequate  hygiene  and  sanitation 
practices  are  likely  contributors  to  stunting  in  that  age  group.  In  addition,  poor 
complementary feeding, traditional dietary practices particularly in pastoral communities 
and recurrent  infections  or  chronic  or  diseases which  cause  poor  nutrient  intake, 
absorption or utilization are also contributing to high rates of malnutrition in the country.  
While  acute  malnutrition  (wasting)  among  children  under  5  years  is  relatively  low 
nationally (4 percent), it reaches almost 14 percent in North Eastern region. Children of 
mothers who did not complete primary school or who have no education are more likely 
to be stunted than children of mothers with a secondary or higher education at 17 percent. 
Disparities  are  also  apparent  among  wealth  quintiles.  Vitamin  A  deficiency  is  relatively 
low at 9 percent in children under 5 years, whereas, maternal and child anemia are widely 
prevalent in Kenya, with 36 percent of children under 5 years and 42 percent of pregnant 
women  suffering  from  anemia.  Adolescent  girls  15–19  years  in  Kenya  are  the  most 
malnourished group among women of reproductive age. Although undernutrition is still 
an issue in Kenya, overweight and obesity are also becoming a concern, with 33 percent 
of women overweight or obese. Although the total fertility rate has reduced in the past 
20 years, the adolescent fertility rate increased between the 2008–09 DHS and the 2014 
DHS, from 36 to 40 percent. The high prevalence of adolescent pregnancy has serious 
consequences because, relative to older mothers, adolescent girls are more likely to be 
malnourished  and  have  a  low  birth  weight  baby  who  is  more  likely  to  become 
malnourished. 
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications 
The Kenyan economy relies heavily on natural resources to support people’s livelihoods 
and to contribute to national income. Kenya’s main natural resource base, are forests, 
wetlands, dryland, aquatic and marine resources. Different communities based on their 
social-economic needs and cultural practices and determined by, among others, weather 
patterns, soil fertility, ecology and level of social development, practice various forms of 
land used. 
Forests. Kenya's forest ecosystems include savannah woodlands, montane rainforests, 
dry  forests,  mangroves  and  coastal  forests.  The  country's  forest  cover  is  estimated  at 
4 https://www.iwgia.org/en/kenya 
5 https://www.wfp.org/countries/kenya 
6 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2010 and 2014. 
7 UNICEF global database in Infant and Young Child Feeding, UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Group: Joint child malnutrition 
estimates, UNICEF/WHO Low birthweight estimates, NCD Risk Factor Collaboration, WHO Global Health Observatory. Notes: 
Data on adult indicators are based on modelled estimates 
7.4%, against the recommended global and national minimum of 10%. The forest sector 
is critical for Kenya's economic, social and environmental wellbeing, as well as climate 
resilience. Kenya has experienced a rapid depletion of its forest  resources, at a rate of 
5000ha annually, resulting in reduced water availability and economic losses, currently 
estimated to be 19M USD annually. The  key  challenges facing the forestry  sector are: 
illegal logging; deforestation and degradation; and forest fires (Ministry of Environment 
and Forestry, 2018). 
Water.  Kenya  is  endowed  with  several  water  resources  such  as  lakes,  rivers,  dams, 
ocean,  streams,  springs,  ground  water  resources  among  other  sources.  However,  the 
country  is  still  considered  a  water-stressed  country  because  its  renewable  water 
resources are estimated at 650M3 per annum (a country is classified as 'water-scarce' if 
the renewable fresh water generated per annum is below 1000M3). Kenya's water scarcity 
is  exacerbated  by  variable  and  unreliable  rainfall  patterns,  as  well  as  climate  change. 
Coupled with an increasing population, the demand for water already outstrips supply. 
The effects of water scarcity are much more pronounced in the ASALs, which receive very 
low rainfall. Water resources in Kenya face several challenges such as over abstraction 
in some catchments; inappropriate land use; destruction of riparian land; soil erosion; 
water resource use conflicts; and effluent discharge into water bodies. 
Land.  Land  in  Kenya  is  either  national/public  land,  communal  land  or  privately  owned. 
Only 17% of the country's total land cover is arable, and suitable for rainfall dependent 
agriculture,  while  the  rest  is  semi-arid  and  arid  land  (ASALs).  Although  the  irrigation 
potential is high, it is still underdeveloped and only 10% of the total land cover is under 
irrigation to date. Additionally,  some parts of  Kenya still face land tenure issues that in 
some  cases  result  in  violent  community  conflicts  or  inability  to  access  and  productively 
utilize land resources, especially among women and the youth, and indigenous peoples. 
The pace of land reforms in the country, to address recurrent land use conflicts has been 
slow  with  very  limited  results  to  date.  Vast  land  in  the  country  faces  high  risks  of  land 
degradation,  particularly  in  the  arid  and  semi-arid  regions.  Land  degradation  is  mostly 
human induced and mainly manifests in the form of: soil erosion; rangeland degradation; 
salinity; deforestation; desertification; salinization, soil nutrient loss; sedimentation 
Protected  areas/ramsar  sites/water  towers.  About  8%  of  Kenya’s  land  mass  is 
considered protected areas. Protected areas are over 70 in number and include national 
parks and reserves, straddling ecosystems such as forests, wetlands, savannahs, marine 
and semi-arid areas8.The project will cut across 10 counties and cover several protected 
areas. These include: Samburu Game Reserve, Lake Nakuru National Park, and Marsabit 
8 KWS (2020). Overview of protected areas. http://www.kws.go.ke/content/overview-0 
National  Park.  Map  1  shows  the  protected  areas  and  water  towers  across  the  country9. 
The project will also be implemented in counties that host three of Kenya’s major water 
towers, namely, the Cherangany Hills, The Mau Complex, and Embobut forest. These water 
towers are facing severe deforestation and encroachment for settlement and grazing. The 
project  will  collaborate  with  the  GEF  funded  Eldoret-Iten  Water  Fund  project  (EIWF), 
managed by IFAD, that will cut across these three water towers, to ensure that there are 
synergies in the implementation of biodiversity conservation, sustainable land and water 
management and climate resilience measures geared towards protecting the catchments 
and Ramsar Sites that depend on the catchments. These Ramsar sites include Lake Nakuru 
and  Lake  Baringo.  The  water  fund  is  a  public  private  partnership  between  farmers, 
government/counties  and  private  sector  with  water  users  downstream.  An  endowment 
fund  will  be  established  and  resourced  by  the  private  and  public  sector  to  ensure 
sustainable land and water management interventions are financed upstream and around 
water towers in the long term. 
Land degradation. “The most critical causes of land degradation in Kenya include poor 
land  management  (mostly  destruction  of  natural  vegetation  in  the  catchment  areas 
through  activities  such  as  farming,  encroachment  and  illegal  logging  of  forests). 
Deforestation in the past was also caused by forest excision for farm settlement and illegal 
tree felling for fuel use and timber. This caused increased runoff, flash flooding, reduced 
infiltration,  soil  erosion,  and  siltation  in  the  dams  and  other  water  reservoirs.  Land 
degradation is related to poverty and vice versa, posing challenges to the prediction and 
mitigation of both phenomena, especially at national levels. The causes of land degradation 
in Kenya are both natural and human induced. They include biophysical (natural) factors 
related to climatic conditions and extreme weather events such as droughts and floods, 
and catchment factors such as steep slopes and highly erodible soils. However, it is the 
human  activities  that  pose  greatest  threat,  and  these  include  unsustainable  land 
management practices.  
Studies reveal that majority of the land in the country faces high risks of land degradation, 
particularly in the arid and semi-arid regions. Land degradation is mostly human induced 
and  mainly  manifests  in  the  form  of:  soil  erosion;  rangeland  degradation;  salinity; 
9 KWTA (2020) Water towers in Kenya. http://kenya.restorationatlas.org/ 
deforestation;  desertification;  salinization,  soil  nutrient  loss;  sedimentation10.”  Land 
degradation  in  the  project  counties  manifests  itself  through  unsustainable  land 
management practices such as overstocking, overgrazing, deforestation, sedimentation of 
water bodies, and rangeland degradation. Some of the SLM interventions being promoted 
include  rangeland  governance  and  rehabilitation  reforestation,  and  soil  and  water 
conservation measures, such as soil erosion control, and forage establishment. 
Human-Livestock-wildlife conflicts. Game reserves, parks and conservancies close to 
pastoral  and  mixed  farming  settlements  pose  the  challenge  of  human–livestock  wildlife 
conflicts. Diseases can be transmitted from wildlife to livestock. There is also competition 
for  natural  resources  such  as  pasture  and  water  between  wildlife  and  livestock11.  The 
expansion of population has forced people to infringe on wildlife habitats and convert land 
to other uses incompatible with wildlife. Human-wildlife conflicts negatively impact on the 
humans, livestock and wildlife alike.The wildlife may sometime causes injury or death to 
livestock and humans, leading to huge losses. The loss of lives and livestock exacerbates 
poverty, especially in ASAL regions, which already struggle with high incidences of poverty. 
ASAL  counties  such  as  Marsabit  and  Samburu  have  seen  an  increase  in  human  wildlife 
conflicts over the past decade. In February 2019, Kenya Wildlife Services (KWS) issued a 
notice  to  the  public  that  the  dry  spell  that  was  being  experienced  in  most  parts  of  the 
country  was  displacing  wildlife  from  their  traditional  habitats  in  search  of  pasture  and 
water.  This  had  increased  conflict  as  the  wildlife  came  into  contact  with  the  public  and 
human  activities.  They  said  that  as  the  dry  spell  progressed,  the  risk  of  human  wildlife 
conflict was expected to increase until the country received the long rains.12 The project 
counties  host  several  national  parks  and  game  reserves,  including  the  Lake  Nakuru 
National Park, Samburu National Reserve and Marsabit National Park among others. 
2.3. Climate trends and impacts 
enya  has  been  negatively  affected  by  climate  change  in  most  sectors  of  its  economy 
including  crop  and  livestock  production,  tourism,  transport  among  others.  Climate 
variability  and  climate  change  is  increasingly  felt  across  the  country  and  the  duration 
between  climate  hazards  such  as  droughts  and  floods  has  become  shorter,  with  wide 
reaching impacts and losses. Kenya's mean annual temperature is expected to increase 
by 1.00C to 2.80C by 2060, while rainfall is expected to increase by up to 49mm per month. 
More  hotter  days  are  being  experienced  in  Kenya,  particularly  during  the  long  rainy 
seasons, when most farmers are planting. Figure 1 below provide an indication of historical 
trends in temperature and precipitation (WB, 2019). 
In  the  last  60  years  studies  show  that  temperature  has  increased  by  1.5-  3oC  [9]  and 
increased rainfall variability. Much of the variability may be explained from the Kenya El 
nino and La Nina events for the last 65 years as presented in Figure 2. 
10 KAPP (2016). Land degradation assessment in Kenya. http://www.environment.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/LADA-
Land-Degradation-Assessment-in-Kenya-March-2016.pdf 
11 State Department of Livestock (2019). Draft National Livestock Policy for Kenya. http://www.kilimo.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2019/02/Draft-reviewed-National-Livestock-Policy-February-2019.pdf 
12 KWS (2019).www.kws.go.ke 
Kenya El nino and La Nina Events (1950 – 2015);  Source: 
http://www.climas.arizona.edu/sites/default/files/oni.jpg 
Partly due to El Niño and La Niña episodes, Kenya is prone to cyclical prolonged droughts 
and serious floods, with climate change increasing the intensity and frequency of these 
events. Shorter intervals between droughts and prolonged droughts in the county have 
contributed to food insecurity due to loss of crops and livestock, loss of biodiversity, land 
degradation etc. Floods experienced after drought periods have wreaked havoc in many 
parts of the country, through damage to crop and livestock systems, infrastructure and 
loss of lives among others. Future climate models reveal that there will be more severe 
droughts and intense floods by 2100. Figure 3 highlights how floods and droughts have 
impacted Kenya agricultural growth rate in the last 40 years.  
Figure 3. Agricultural growth index and major extreme events in Kenya  
(Source GoK 2015. Economic Survey Annual Report 2015. Government of Kenya)  
“In  the  ASALs,  about  2  million  people  are  permanently  on  famine  relief,  with  the 
number rising up to 5 million during severe droughts. Northern Kenya’s arid and semiarid 
lands  (ASALs)  are  food-  and  water-insecure  regions  dependent  on  limited  and  highly 
variable  rainfall.  Rising  temperatures,  heat  waves,  changes  in  seasonal  rainfall  and 
extreme  rainfall  events  intensify  risks  to  livestock  and  crop  production,  and  to  human 
health  through  heat  and  water  stress,  disease,  damage  to  crop  and  grazing  lands  and 
diminished water quality. The recurrent drought events of recent years (i.e., 2009, 2011 
and 2017) have affected millions, increasing food insecurity and reliance  on emergency 
food  aid  among  the  ASAL  region’s  pastoralists  and  agro-pastoralists.  Floods  caused  by 
heavy  rainfall,  such  as  those  in  2018,  have  also  led  to  extensive  displacement,  loss  of 
livestock  and  crops  and  periodic  health  impacts  such  as  cholera  outbreaks.  Rising 
temperatures  have  implications  for  heat  stress,  rangeland  productivity  and  disease 
outbreaks  (see  box  below).  Heat  stress  in  livestock  can  reduce  feed  consumption, 
reproduction  and  growth  rates,  longevity,  milk  production  and  disease  resistance.  At 
temperatures more than 30°C, cattle, sheep and goats reduce their feed intake by three 
to five percent for each 1°C increase”13. 
Mean annual temperature, for the period 1999-2018, for KeLCoP sub-counties ranged from 
about 15°C for the mountainous areas in the Western part of the country to above 26°C 
for the Northernmost sub-counties of Marsabit. Altitude combined with higher latitude are 
the main drivers of these differences across sub-counties (Figure 4). 
Observed mean annual temperature (Figure 4) for the sub-counties of KeLCoP project. By 
the 2040s (2036-2045), when the capitalization period of the project is projected to end, 
temperatures  in  the  sub-counties  will  have  increased  from  1.5°C  to  1.9°C  on  average 
compared  to  the  mean  temperature  in  the  reference  period  (here  1986-2005).  The 
analysis however separates warming in the dry season and in the wet season.  
On  average  and  across  most  of  the  sub-countries,  the  dry  season  is  projected  to 
experience a faster warming than the wet season. The sub-counties of Nakuru could be 
exposed  to  the  fastest  warming.  The  Northernmost  county  of  Marsabit  is  projected  to 
experience a slower warming compared to the other counties – however, on average, the 
mean  temperature  of  the  Marsabit  sub-counties  will  remain  the  highest  of  the  KeLCoP 
counties by the 2040s. 
Findings  from  the  indepth  climate  risks  analysis    show  that  the  high  climate  risks  in 
different  KeLCoP  sub-counties  emanating  from  increased  drought  and  heat  stress  have 
noticeably different effects on the selected value chains. For instance, sheep and poultry 
13 USAID (2018). Climate risks in food for peace geographies. USAID 
are  particularly  more  stressed  especially  in  the  northern  counties,  showing  decreased 
suitability which may lead to reduced productivity and mortality. Goats and bees are less 
affected  and  should  therefore  be  prioritized  for  adoption  in  regions  where  sheep  and 
poultry  are  less  suitable.  Figure  5  below  shows  thatthe  sheep  value  chain  is  likely  to 
experience  high  thermal  humidity  stress  in  Marsabit  and  Busia  counties,  with  Baringo 
coming in at moderate/severe stress. 
Further,  it  is  reported  that  average  precipitation  will  remain  at  today’s  level  but  with  a 
massive  change  in  the  distribution  within  the  dry  and  especially  wet  seasons.  More 
extreme  wet  events  that  could  lead  to  flash  floods  and  landslides  are  projected  in  the 
Northern counties, in line with the current change in climate. Temperature will increase on 
average of between 1.5 and 1.9 degrees with the Southern regions warming faster than 
the Northern ones. There is need to invest in a climate and weather information system in 
order to relay information on extreme weather events to farmers and pastoralist, as well 
investing  in  climate  proofing  water  infrastructure,  and  climate  smart  livestock 
interventions  such  as  hay  making,  efficient  feed  management,  sustainable  pasture 
management, and sustainable land and water management practices such as reforestation 
and agroforestry, and livestock insurance. 
2.4.  Climate  change  mitigation.  The  project  focuses  on  climate  adaptation  largely, 
although  some  adaptation  activities  may  have  beneficial  impacts  on  mitigation.  The 
livestock  sector  in  Kenya  contributes  significantly  (90%)  to  GHG  emissions  (specifically 
Methane gas), and is  expected to account for  an increase  of 30% in GHG  emissions by 
2030.  KELCOP  focuses  on  small  ruminants  which  have  a  low  contribution  to  GHGs  in 
comparison  with  cattle/dairy  value  chain.  IFAD  and  the  GoK  are  developing  a  livestock 
sector nationally appropriate management action (NAMA) project that will help mitigate 
the impacts of climate change on the dairy cattle and general livestock sector in Kenya. 
The  project  is  seeking  financing  from  the  Green  Climate  Fund,  and  will  complement 
KELCOP by addressing mitigation aspects of the project. Calculations of the baseline and 
projected emission reductions will be done at the proposal development stage. 
2.5 Target group profiles  
The  primary  target  groups  will  comprise  (i)  the  very  vulnerable,  ultra-poor,  mostly 
women headed, pastoralist and agro-pastoralist households (ii) the smallholder men and 
women commercially orientated pastoralist and agro-pastoralist households (iii) young 
women and men involved in production and entrepreneurial activity at critical points in 
the  value  chain.  Indigenous  people  are  also  a  critical  target  group.  The  project  has  a 
strong focus on the inclusion of women and youth, marginalized tribes and persons with 
disabilities. In addition, the project will engage with value chain drivers such as farmers 
who have the resources to function as breeders of livestock, and traders, private sector 
companies,  transporters,  private  agro-vets  and  input  suppliers  who  will  comprise  the 
members of multi-stakeholder forums. The project seeks to be nutrition sensitive, gender 
transformation, climate focused and youth sensitive. Measures have been put in place in 
the PDR and PIM to address mainstreaming themes. 
3. Policy, Legal and Institutional analysis  
The  GoK  has  put  in  place  several  policies,  legislations  and  institutional  frameworks  to 
regulate  and  address  environmental,  climate  and  social  inclusion  thematic  areas  as 
illustrated in Table 2 below.  
Thematic 
Area 
Policies/Legislations/Guidelines/Strategies/ 
Action Plans 
Key Institutions 
Gender 
Kenya National Policy on Gender and Development, 2000; 
National Plan of Action for the Elimination of Female 
Genital Mutilation in Kenya (1999-2019); Sexual Violence: 
Setting the Research Agenda for Kenya (2009); National 
Guidelines on Management of Sexual Violence in Kenya, 
2nd Edition (2009) 
Youth 
Kenya Youth Policy (2006); Kenya Youth Agribusiness 
Strategy (2017-2021); Kenya Youth Development Policy 
(2018) 
Nutrition 
Climate 
Change 
Environment 
and Natural 
Resources 
Management 
Indigenous 
Peoples 
National Comprehensive School Health policy (2007); 
National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (2011); 
National School Health Strategy Implementation Plan 
(2011), National Nutrition Action Plan (2012); The Breast 
Milk Substitutes (Regulation and Control) Act Number 34 
(2012); Kenya National Strategy for the Prevention and 
Control of Non-Communicable Diseases (2015-2020) 
Climate Change Act, 2016; The National Climate Change 
Response Strategy, 2010; Kenya Nationally Determined 
Contributions, 2015; Meteorology Policy, 2019; National 
Policy on Climate Finance, 2016; Climate Finance Bill, 
2018; Green bonds Guidelines, 2019; National Climate 
Change Action Plan (NCCAP) 2018-2022; National 
Adaptation Plan (NAP 2015- 2030); Kenya Climate Smart 
Agriculture Strategy (2017-2026); Climate Risk 
Management Framework (2017); National Climate Change 
Policy (2018); National Climate Finance policy (2018); and 
Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation 
Framework (2018-2027) 
The Environmental Management and Coordination Act 
1999 and the amendment Act 2015; Wildlife Conservation 
and Management Act 2013; Forest Conservation and 
Management Act, 2016, Natural Resources Act, 2016; 
Water Act 2016, National Solid Waste Management 
Strategy, 2015; Forest Conservation and Management Act, 
2016; Fisheries Act 2016; Natural Resources (Benefit 
Sharing) Bill, 2018; Environmental Management and 
Coordination (Water Quality) Regulations (2006); 
Environmental Management and Coordination (Wetlands, 
River Banks, Lake Shores and Sea Shore Management) 
Regulations (2009); Irrigation Policy (2011); Water Act 
(CAP 372) No. 8 (2002) (Revised 2012, 2016); Land Act 
(2012); National Environment Policy, 2013, Constitution of 
Kenya, 2010, Lands Act, 2012 
Kenya Constitution, 2010, Bill of Rights; Kenya Community 
Land Act (2016); Kenya Agricultural and Livestock 
Research Act (2013); National Cohesion and Integration 
Act (2008) 
National Gender and Equality 
Commission (NGEC), Women 
Enterprise Fund, Ministry of Labour, 
Social Security and Services, 
Ministry of Public Service, Gender 
and Youth Affairs, National Council 
for People with Disabilities, National 
Council for Children Services 
Youth Enterprise Development 
Fund in Kenya, Ministry of Labour, 
Social Security and Services, 
Ministry of Public Service, Gender 
and Youth Affairs 
Ministry of Health, Ministry of 
Education, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries 
Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry, Ministry of Water and 
Irrigation, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Kenya Meteorological Department. 
Water Resources Management 
Authority, National Disaster 
Management Authority 
Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry, National Environment 
Management Authority, Kenya Forest 
Service, Ministry of Water and 
Irrigation, Water Resources 
Management Authority, National 
Environment Trust Fund, Kenya 
Water Towers Agency, Kenya Wildlife 
Services 
Ministry of Sports, Culture and Arts 
3.1. Key National Policies on Thematic Areas 
Gender.  “The  Kenya  National  Policy  on  Gender  and  Development  (2000)  made  some 
achievements  including  the  requirement  for  gender  representation  and  mainstreaming 
gender considerations across all sectors. However, the pace of achieving these milestones 
was  slower  than  expected.  The  2010  Kenya  constitution  created  a  platform  for  gender 
equality and non-discrimination. Article 10 of  the Constitution is on the National Values 
and Principles of governance highlights such principles as equality, equity, inclusiveness 
and  non-discrimination.  These  principles  support  gender  equality.  Nevertheless,  the 
patriarchal  social  order  supported  by  statutory,  religious  and  customary  laws  and 
practices;  and  the  administrative  and  procedural  mechanisms  for  accessing  rights  have 
continued to hamper the goal of attaining gender  equality and women’s empowerment. 
Progressive provisions in law have not delivered gender equality. 
The National Policy on Gender and Development (2019) is geared towards ensuring gender 
equality and women empowerment in the social, economic, political and cultural spheres 
as  envisaged  in  the  Constitution.  The  framework  will  endeavour  to  establish  and 
strengthen  Affirmative  Action  efforts  aimed  at  reducing  gender  inequalities  and 
geographical disparities in the distribution of natural resources and access to productive 
resources such as land, labour, finances, information and technology. The development of 
this policy is influenced by international and national instruments for GEWE that emphasize 
gender  mainstreaming  as  the  key  strategy  for  the  achieving  development.  It  is  also 
informed  by  the  constitutional  dispensation  and  transformation,  the  socio-economic 
environment and other national orientations”14. 
Youth.  The  draft  Kenya  Youth  Development  Policy  (2018)  seeks  to  scale  up  youth 
empowerment  programmes  and  to  ensure  valuable  contributions  of  the  youth  to  the 
Country's development. The thematic areas of the policy are: Youth, Health and Nutrition; 
Patriotism  and  Volunteerism;  Leadership,  Participation  and  Representation;  Skills 
Development and Employment, and Entrepreneurship Development; Creativity and Talent 
Development; ICT Development; Agriculture; Environment and Sustainable Development; 
curbing  Drugs  and  Substance  Abuse;  Crime,  Security  and  Peace  Building;  Youth 
Mainstreaming; and eradicating Radicalization and Violent Extremism. 
Environment and Natural Resources Management. The Environmental Management 
and Coordination Act, 1999 and the 2015 amendment provides an institutional framework 
for environmental management in Kenya, and entitles every citizen to a clean and healthy 
environment.  The  ACT  operates  on  the  following  principles:  polluter  pays;  public 
participation;  international  cooperation,  cultural  and  social  principles;  inter  and  intra-
generational equity; and the precautionary principle. The ACT also establishes the National 
Environment Management Authority and provides regulations and guidelines for mitigation 
of environmental risks through the EIA guidelines. 
Climate Change. The Kenya Climate Change Act (2016) provides a regulatory framework 
for  an  enhanced  response  to  climate  change,  provides  mechanisms  and  measures  to 
improve resilience to climate change and promotes low carbon development. The act seeks 
to  mainstream  climate  resilience  in  all  development  plans,  and  encourages  the  use  of 
climate  proof/clean/green  technologies.  Furthermore,  the  National  Climate  Change 
Response  Strategy  involves  comprehensive  strategies  developed  to  respond  to  climate 
variability and climate change. It proposes activities and actions to adapt, mitigate, and 
cope with climate change management. The National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) 
2018-2022  facilitates  mainstreaming  of  climate  action  to  Kenya’s  Big  Four  Agenda. 
Moreover,  Counties  are  required  by  law  to  prepare  and  implement  County  Integration 
Development Plans which mainstream climate change adaptation and mitigation actions 
to sectoral actions and strategies. 
14 National Policy on Gender and Development (2019). http://psyg.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/NATIONAL-POLICY-ON-
GENDER-AND-DEVELOPMENT.pdf 
Nationally  Determined  Contributions.  Kenya  is  a  signatory  to  the  UNFCCC  and  the 
Paris Agreement, and has committed to climate mitigation and adaptation actions under 
its NDCs. The mitigation contribution intends to abate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
by 30% by 2030. The key mitigation priorities are: renewable energy (geothermal, solar, 
wind, biogas etc.) and energy efficiency; afforestation and reforestation (10% tree cover); 
climate  smart  agriculture;  low  carbon  and  efficient  transport  systems;  and  sustainable 
waste  management.  The  adaptation  actions  include:  increasing  the  resilience  of  energy 
systems;  promoting  climate  smart  technologies;  climate  proofing  infrastructure; 
awareness  creation,  training  and  education  on  climate  change  across  all  sectors; 
enhancing climate information services; strengthening the adaptive capacity of vulnerable 
groups  and  communities  through  safety  nets  and  insurance;  climate  smart  agriculture, 
fisheries and livestock development; mainstream climate change into CIDPs15. 
Nutrition. The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (2011) seeks to ensure that all 
Kenyans enjoy safe food, in sufficient quantity and quality, to satisfy their nutritional needs 
for optimal health, at all times and throughout their life cycle. The Policy seeks to address 
associated  issues  of  chronic,  poverty-based  food  insecurity  and  malnutrition,  as  well  as 
the  perpetuity  of  acute  food  insecurity  and  malnutrition  associated  with  frequent  and 
recurring emergencies, and the critical linkages thereof". This includes: food availability 
and  access:  food  safety,  standards  and  quality  control;  nutrition  improvement;  school 
nutrition and nutrition awareness; food security and nutrition information; early warning 
and emergency management; institutional and legal framework and financing; and policy 
implementation and monitoring. 
Indigenous Peoples. Kenya has no specific law on Indigenous Peoples but has ratified 
the: i) International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 
(ICERD); ii) the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW); 
and iii) the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). Within Kenya Constitution's Bill 
the  protection  of  minorities  and  marginalized 
of  Rights,  Kenya  guarantees 
communities/groups.  The  Constitution  obliges 
to  ensure  adequate 
representation of marginalized and Indigenous peoples in all levels of government, and to 
promote the freedom to exercise culture and indigenous languages. To date, Kenya is yet 
to ratify the ILO convention on Indigenous and tribal peoples16 
the  State 
4. Environmental and social category 
KeLCoP’s environment and social risk categorisation is B. The project will have moderate 
environmental  and  social  impacts,  which  are  reversible  or  can  be  mitigated  through 
proposed  interventions.  The  main  environmental  risks  that  were  identified  during  the 
design period were related to: overgrazing and overstocking leading to soil erosion and 
sedimentation, pastureland degradation, effluence discharge from slaughter houses into 
water sources, resource use conflicts, deforestation, trampling along water sources, pests 
and disease outbreaks e.g. rift valley fever, pollution of water sources/bodies by animal 
manure; potential human health risks as a result of eating contaminated meat or using 
polluted  water  sources;  continuous  depletion  of  indigenous  livestock  genetic  resources, 
insufficient or poor quality feed/forage and inadequate fodder storage. Social risks include, 
lack of appropriate poverty indicators and community bias that may lead to selection of 
better-off  households  for  graduation  packages,  elite  capture  of  grants  by  groups 
experienced  in  capitalizing  on  donor  interventions,  risks  of  men  taking  over  women’s 
economic activities with increase in value or profitability and patriarchal norms that may 
prevent women from participating and benefitting from project activities, among others.  
The project will invest in interventions that will address identified environment and social 
risks.  Environmental  risks  will  be  mitigated  through  investment  in  rangeland  and  water 
resources  governance  systems,  water  harvesting  technologies,  improved  fodder  and 
15 GoK (2015). Nationally Determined Contributions. Ministry of Environment and Forestry. 
16 SWEEDO (2018). Kenya's new Constitution Benefits Indigenous Peoples. Samburu Women for Education & Environment 
Development Organization. 
forage  species,  animal  breeding  to  strengthen  genetic  abilities,  hay  and  silage  making, 
awareness creation and sensitisation on pollution prevention, manure promotion in farms, 
afforestation  and  agroforestry,  soil  erosion  control  measures,  establishment  of  carrying 
capacity and stock size management, better surveillance, monitoring and control of animal 
diseases and pests, and sensitisation of the public on health and safe animal products. The 
small ruminant systems promoted by the project will stimulate and increase the efficiency 
of  small  livestock  production  through  better  feeding,  health  and  genetic  resources 
management. Small ruminants emit less enteric methane (CH4) than all other domestic 
ruminant animals per unit body weight, are more water-efficient than large ruminants and 
better  suited  to  integrated  small  farming  systems  (e.g.  manure  application  for  kitchen 
garden production). 
4.1 Social risks 
Social  risks  are  likely  to  result  from  resource  use  conflicts,  elite  capture  or  takeover  of 
women’s  economic  activities  by  men.  The  project  will  mitigate  these  risks  through 
elimination of community bias in selection of ultra-poor households. One approach is that 
the  project  will  incorporate  community  wealth  ranking  to  capture  area-specific  poverty 
attributes,  complimented  by  the  household  validation  by  the  service  provider.  The  elite 
capture will be minimized through vetting the governance and group dynamics, monthly 
visits by group mentors to monitor group governance and dynamics and forming of new 
groups of interested smallholder farmers and rural poor. Men takeover of women activities 
will be addressed through ensuring group ownership of assets, close contact between the 
mentors and the beneficiaries to monitor use of assets and economic activities. Although 
not observed during the design, the project will monitor other potential social risks such 
as child labour, gender based violence and sexual harassment, early marriages, and FGM. 
The project will sensitise project management and implementation units and coordinate 
with the relevant agencies tasked to deal with such issues on the ground. 
4.2 Environment and social assessment studies 
In line with IFAD’s social, environmental and climate assessment procedures (SECAP), the 
project  has  developed  a  draft  Environment  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF) 
and its Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP) since the actual project sites are 
yet  to  be  fully  determined.  The  ESMF  identifies  sub-projects  that  require  site  specific 
environmental impact assessments (EIAs) and their ESMPs and also develops screening 
criteria to ensure the project remains a category B. The ESMF also identifies environmental 
and  social  risks  and  proposes  appropriate  mitigation  actions.  Kenya  has  existing 
environment  and  social  safeguards  regulations  and  guidelines,  as  articulated  in  the 
Environmental Management and Coordination Act (1999) and in the Amendment of 2015. 
The  Act  provides  guidelines  for  Environmental  Impact  Assessments  (EIAs)  through  the 
revised  schedule  2.  As  such,  the  National  Environment  Management  Authority  will  be 
engaged  in  the  process  of  approving  EIA  reports,  licensing,  and  monitoring  activities 
periodically.  The  overall  ESMP  will  be  embedded  into  the  PIM  and  the  PMCU  trained  on 
implementation and monitoring. An integrated pesticides management plan has also been 
developed and attached as an appendix of the ESMF. The project will further develop the 
draft  ESMF  into  a  detailed  one  integrating  the  findings  of  field  visits  and  stakeholder 
engagements.  The  final  ESMF  will  also  elaborate  risks  associated  with  the  various  sub-
projects  and  develop  their  ESMPs.  The  detailed  ESMF  will  be  finalised  at  the  pre-
implementation stage or as soon as the Covid 19 situation eases off.  
The project area is home to various indigenous peoples, mainly hunters and gatherers and 
pastoralists,  such  as  the  Sengwers,  Ogieks,  Gabra,  Watta,  Boranas,  Rendille  etc. 
Indigenous  communities  possess  immense  knowledge  on  sustainable  natural  resources 
utilization and management, and have strong cultural heritages. The project will tap into 
this  knowledge  and  work  closely  with  them  in  conservation  efforts,  climate  resilience 
building, while also co-identifying livelihood improvement opportunities. This will be done 
through undertaking a Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) and the development of 
an  Indigenous  Peoples  Action  Plan.  This  will  be  done  comprehensively  at  the  pre-
implementation  stage  or  once  the  Covid  19  movement  restrictions  are  eased  and 
stakeholder engagements and consent can be obtained from the communities. It is also 
important that the indigenous peoples action plan is developed with full participation of 
the community. For now, the project has prepared and submitted an indigenous peoples 
planning framework and an indigenous peoples plan.  
A  draft  grievance  redress  mechanism  has  been  developed  to  address  resource  use  and 
other social conflicts in the project area. The grievance redress mechanism will be finalised 
after  field  visits  and  stakeholder  participation  at  the  pre-implementation  stage  or  once 
Covid  19  restrictions  ease  off.  The  PIM  has  attached  ToRs  (environment  and  social 
safeguards  consultants)  that  indicate  the  staggering  of  these  assignments  and  pending 
work. 
5. Climate risk category  
KELCoP’s climate risk classification is high. Some of the project counties are exposed to 
extreme  weather  events,  mainly  frequent  and  prolonged  droughts  as  well  as  drought 
Droughts in ASAL counties (such as Marsabit, Samburu and Baringo) have continued to 
livelihoods  of  pastoralists/agro-
affect 
pastoralists. 
livestock  production/productivity  and  the 
Temperatures in Kenya have increased moderately over the years (by 0.25-0.5oC). The 
decrease in rainfall combined with the moderate increase in temperature has resulted in 
reduced length of the seasons as well as an increase in heat stress. Drought frequencies 
have increased to every 1-3 years which has in some instances resulted in losses of up to 
60% of livestock in recent years in Marsabit County.17 During the drought, livestock are 
emaciated and their value drops drastically. Prolonged droughts also result in long-term 
environmental  changes  such  as  deforestation,  drying  up  of  rivers  and  shallow  wells, 
increased incidences of new pests, weeds and diseases, land degradation and amplified 
wildlife-human  conflicts.  The  climate  related  risks  could  lead  to  emergence  or  re-
emergence of climate related diseases, such as the Rift Valley Fever or anthrax, which re-
emerges,  periodically  in  ASAL  areas  after  occasional  heavy  rains  and  flooding.  The 
strengthening  of  epidemio-surveillance  systems  will  mitigate  such  risks  and  the  project 
will concurrently enable rapid and adequate response during outbreak of climate sensitive 
diseases through contingency planning and responses.  
The western counties (Trans Nzoia, Kakamega, Bungoma, Siaya and Busia) are relatively 
cooler, wetter and the mean annual temperatures are lower. In various climate projection 
scenarios,  western  regions  will  more  likely  experience  extreme  events  related  to  floods 
and landslides (caused by a combination of deforestation, intensive rainfall, soil erosion 
and  agricultural  activities  on  hilltops.  Farmers  in  this  region  have  also  noted  changing 
seasonality, i.e., delayed onset of rains, unreliability and variability of rains, reduced or 
increased amounts of rainfall, and higher temperatures during the dry season. All these 
present major risks to crop production and livelihoods.  
Green  House  Gases  (GHGs)  emission  intensities  for  small  livestock  are  relatively  lower 
than  for  that  of  dairy  cows  or  beef  production  systems.  The  project  will  promote  and 
increase the efficiency of small livestock production (through better feeding, health and 
genetic  management).  Small  ruminants  are  more  water-efficient  than  large  ruminants, 
versatile and readily adapt to a changing climate (and are more suited to integrated small 
farming systems (e.g. manure for kitchen garden production), emit less enteric methane 
(CH4) than all other domestic ruminant animals per unit body weight and are recognized 
as an affordable asset which can be easily relocated in case of climate vagaries.  
The  potential  increase  in  pressure  on  natural  resources  and  biodiversity  due  to  the 
expected growth in small ruminants under the project will be mitigated through promotion 
17 https://www.wfp.org/sites/default/files/Marsabit%20CGNA%20-%2028062016_V2.pdf  
of, (i) stall feeding systems coupled with intensified fodder production combining the use 
of drought tolerant forage varieties and diversified feed and fodder resources, as well as 
better  rangeland  governance  and  (ii)  a  more  effective  marketing  system  with  the 
establishment of organized aggregation points for traders to collect animals, including the 
application of a digitized market information system.  
The key activities being promoted to enhance climate resilience include: reforestation and 
agroforestry, sustainable land management practices such as soil erosion control, water 
harvesting,  small-scale  irrigation,  renewable  energy,  weather  and  climate  information 
services  and  diversification  of  livestock  production  systems,  among  others.  Given  that 
some KelCoP’s activities have a high climate risk rating, an in-depth climate risk analysis 
will  be  undertaken  to  comprehensively  analyse  climate  risks  and  propose  appropriate 
adaptation and mitigation measures.  
5.1 In-depth climate risk and vulnerability analysis 
In consistence with a high climate risk classification, an in-depth climate risk analysis has 
been  undertaken  and  a  detailed  report  submitted.  The  report  identifies  climate  risks  at 
county  level  and  assesse  the  impacts  of  climate  change  or  variability  on  the  four  value 
chains proposed by the project. The study also shows the suitability of the various value 
chains to prevailing and projected climatic conditions in the  It also proposes appropriate 
mitigation and adaptation actions, which will be integrated in the PIM and into the AWPB. 
6. Recommendations for project design and implementation 
The project has budgeted for the recruitment of an environment, climate, and safeguards 
officer  as  well  as  a  social  inclusion  and  mobilisation  specialist.  At  county  level,  these 
officers  will  work  with  their  county  counterparts  (environment  and  NRM  officer  and 
gender/social  inclusion  officers)  to  drive  the  mainstreaming  agenda  and  to  ensure 
safeguards are adhered to within the project. The key recommendations with regards to 
mainstreaming are: 
6.1 Value chain(s) and geographical targeting 
The project has selected the three value-chains that have the highest potential for social 
inclusion,  improving  nutrition  of  poor  households  and  commercialization  i.e  small 
ruminants  (for  ASAL  counties),  poultry  and  honey.  In 
line  with  the  CSPE 
recommendations, the project’s target areas will include two Semi-Arid counties (Elgeyo 
Marakwet and Baringo) and two arid counties (Marsabit and Samburu). The selection of 
the  counties  was  based  on  scoring  along  specific  criteria,  such  as,  incidence  and 
prevalence  of  rural  poverty,  aridity  of  the  geographical  area,  potential 
for 
commercialization  of  selected  commodities,  population  of  targeted  livestock,  priority 
given  to  the  value  chain  by  the  county  in  its  strategic  plans,  potential  to  build  on  and 
collaborate  with  existing  development  interventions  and  security.  In  the  selected 
counties,  the  project  activities  will  focus  on  value-chains  with  high  potential  in  that 
county.  
Within counties, the same criteria that has been used for selecting counties will be used 
to select a focal area for the project intervention. The focus of project activities in terms 
of  support  to  producers  and  value  chain  actors  will  be  limited  to  between  two  to  four 
contiguous wards depending on area and population of wards in the county, which are 
preferably contiguous. A value chain driver serving the population of the selected wards 
could still be supported even if located in a different ward.  
Targeting  approach.  The  project  will  use  a  variety  of  targeting  mechanisms  to 
implement  activities in a  manner  sensitive  to  the  needs  and  constraints  of  smallholder 
women  and  men  farmers,  as  well  as  youth  and  vulnerable  groups.  This  will include,  i) 
geographic  targeting  to  identify  areas  where  smallholder  producers  of  selected  value 
chains are located and where there is potential for developing the value chain. For social 
inclusion  of  women,  youth  and  vulnerable  groups,  direct  targeting  will  be  used.  Close 
attention  will  be  paid  to  procedural  matters  such  as  duration,  timings  and  location  of 
training etc. to ensure that target groups self-select themselves for project activities.  
The  targeting  approach  also  aims  to  ensure  geographic  concentration  of  project 
interventions in contiguous areas to increase impact, effectiveness, and efficiency. Close 
supervision  and  monitoring  through  mentors,  beneficiary  feedback  and  a  grievance 
redress system will used to ensure that the risk of elite capture in minimized. The project 
will address the strategic interests of women, youth and marginalized tribes by promoting 
their  visibility  in  the  livestock  strategies,  ensuring  the  inclusion  of  County  officials 
responsible for women and youth on the steering committees. Peer to peer learning will 
be  used  to  promote  learning,  best  practice  and  innovations.  It  will  promote  citizen 
engagement  by  building  linkages  between  smallholder  famers  and  County  Livestock 
departments as well as ensuring that the voice of the project’s target group is included in 
policy formulation.  
The  project  will  help  the  County  Governments  to  develop gender-sensitive  and  youth 
sensitive  livestock  strategies.  The  roles  that  rural  women  and  men  play  in  different 
livestock  sub-sectors  vary  by  region,  country,  and  community,  reflecting  different 
economic,  social  and  cultural  contexts.  They  are  also  influenced  by  the  particular 
dynamics  that  characterize  specific  livestock  sub-sectors.  The  county  strategies  will 
capture the county and value-chain specific roles. 
Women’s  strategic  interests  will  be  addressed  by  promoting  their  visibility  through 
recognizing the critical role that they play in the livestock sector and their involvement at 
different stages of the livestock value chain as producers, traders, butchers, processors 
etc. The livestock strategies will also will identify the main constraints faced by women 
and  men  in  accessing,  controlling  and  managing  livestock  and  address  the  challenges 
faced by women and men in access to, control over and management of livestock while 
highlighting the additional and specific challenges faced by women and specific strategies 
to address challenges faced by women. The strategies will also identify the role of young 
women and men in livestock value-chain, their specific constraints and opportunities and 
strategies for their meaningful involvement. 
Entry points for mainstreaming issues. the primary target group will comprise (i) the 
very  vulnerable,  ultra-poor,  mostly  women  headed,  pastoralist  and  agro-pastoralist 
households (ii) the smallholder men and women commercially orientated pastoralist and 
agro-pastoralist  households  (iii)  young  women  and  men  involved  in  production  and 
entrepreneurial activity at critical points in the value chain. The project has a strong focus 
on the inclusion of women and youth, marginalized tribes and persons with disabilities. 
In addition, the project will engage with value chain drivers such as farmers who have 
the resources to function as breeders of livestock, and traders, private sector companies, 
transporters,  private  agro-vets  and  input  suppliers  who  will  comprise  the  members  of 
multi-stakeholder forums.  
Targeting ultra-poor and food insecure households  
Small  livestock  are  important  for  economic  opportunities  especially  to  the  poorest 
households. These households can be landless or have very little land around their dwelling 
and few, if any livestock assets. A significant proportion of these households are likely to 
be women-headed households. These households depend for their livelihoods  on casual 
labour,  trading  vegetables,  forest  produce,  charcoal,  firewood,  tooth  sticks,  gums  and 
resins, traditional medicines, mira (khat) and other natural products and handicrafts. Their 
earning  can  range  from  200  KES  to  400  KES.  Coping  mechanism  include  reliance  on 
traditional  safety  nets  such  as  kalakshime  /dabare,  cash  transfers  from  national 
programmes  and  NGOs  and  food  packages  from  government’s  relief  efforts  during 
droughts, ‘merry go rounds’ – each person contributes a part of their daily earnings and 
each  day  a  different  person  receives  the  sum  collected.  The  project  will  directly  target 
4000 ultra-poor households combining the graduation approach with GALS. 20 percent of 
these will include highly vulnerable persons such as those belonging to marginalized tribes, 
persons with disabilities, persons with HIV. An additional 3000 households will be targeted 
with GALS, a household methodology for gender equality and economic empowerment.  
The project has a clear strategy for the inclusion of women, youth, ultra-poor households 
and  highly  vulnerable  persons.  Women  comprise  52  percent  of  beneficiaries,  youth 
comprise 30 percent and a minimum of 5% of beneficiaries will be from vulnerable groups 
(marginalized tribes, persons with disabilities and persons with HIV). The project will (i) 
develop gender sensitive livestock strategies reflecting the strategic interests of women, 
(ii) Use GALS methodology to address gender issues including distribution of work, control 
over income and GBV, (iii) prioritization of ultra-poor women for graduation packages (iv) 
equal  access  to  knowledge  on  animal  husbandry  training,  business  skills  training, 
entrepreneurship  training,  access  to  ICT4D  through  e-vouchers  for  inputs,  e-extension 
platforms  (iv)  promotion  of  women’s  leadership  and  collective  agency  through  working 
with  women’s  groups  and  representation  in  decision-making  bodies,  coordination  and 
steering committees created by the project (v) exposure through peer exchange visits (vi) 
well-being through nutrition training 
Generating employment and economic opportunities for youths  
Similarly, a strong focus will be placed on youth in activities such as, (i) capacity building, 
apprenticeship,  entrepreneurship  training,  business  skills  and  formal  courses  in  animal 
husbandry (ii) access to capital through matching grants, (iii) voice through representation 
on decision-making and coordination bodies such as multi-stakeholder forums and Project. 
Marginalized  tribes  and  vulnerable  groups  will  benefit  from  the  project  interventions 
described  above  through  quotas  and  delivery  mechanisms  sensitive  to  their  needs  and 
aspirations. 
6.2  Recommendations  for  mainstreaming  environmental  management  and 
climate change adaptation and mitigation 
Under  component  1,  the  project  will  promote  several  activities  for  mainstreaming 
environmental management, climate change adaptation and mitigation against negative 
outcomes  of  small  livestock  production  intensification.  These  activities  will  include,  i) 
enhanced  feed  efficiency  through  promotion  of  stall  feeding  systems,  intensified  fodder 
production of drought tolerant forage varieties and diversified feed and fodder resources, 
ii)  more  effective  marketing  system  with  the  establishment  of  organized  aggregation 
points  for  traders  to  collect  animals  and  digitized  market  information  systems,  iii) 
poultry/dairy goat manure management through adoption of composting, (iii) improved 
water efficiency through rainwater harvesting facilities in rangelands and (iv) promotion 
of  solar  energy  use  for  water  pumping  in  small  ruminants  and  incubators  in  poultry 
production  and  v)  support  to  rangeland  governance  through  institutional  strengthening 
and  county  specific  interventions  required  for  improved  rangeland  governance  and 
management. 
7. Further studies neededAt the pre-implementation stage, the project will finalise and 
submit  final  reports  of  the  ESMF,  ESMPs  of  the  various  sub-projects,  FPIC  report  and 
Indigenous  Peoples  Action  Plan.  The  grievance  redress  mechanism  will  also  be  finalised 
and  contextualised  through  consultations  with  communities  and  relevant  stakehiolders. 
The integrated pesticides management plan will also be  elaborated. These studies have 
been submitted in draft form due to current movement restrictions occasioned by Covid 
19. 
8. Monitoring and evaluation  
The ESMPs will be the core monitoring tools in ensuring that the project complies with the 
recommended  safeguards  measures.  The  ESMP  identifies  some  indicators  that  can 
embedded  into  the  project’s  operational  M&E  framework  in  order  to  ensure  that  the 
implementation of safeguards is regularly monitored. IFAD will monitor implementation of 
the ESMP during its annual supervision missions, MTR and project completion. The NEMA 
will also be  engaged periodically in the monitoring of implementation of the safeguards 
measures. The Indigenous peoples action plan will be the guiding tool on how to engage 
with indigenous peoples and its key indicators, including the number of IPs reached, will 
be included in the operational M&E framework of the project. 
9. Capacity building, staffing and budgeting 
The project has budgeted to recruit an environment, climate and safeguards officer as well 
as  a  social  inclusion  and  mobilisation  specialist  who  will  be  part  of  the  PMU.  At  county 
level, a budget has been set aside to work closely with GoK counterparts at county level 
at  20-30%  of  their  time.  These  officers  together  will  drive  the  project’s  mainstreaming 
agenda  and  also  ensure  environment  and  social  safeguards  are  implemented  in 
collaboration  with  NEMA.  A  budget  has  been  allocated  towards  the  finalisation  fo  the 
various SECAP studies especially the drafts  – ESMF, FPIC, and the integrated pesticides 
management plan. A budget has also been set aside for training and capacity building on 
SECAP and safeguards for PMU and counties, as well as for annual review workshops and 
baseline studies. A budget for mid-term and end-term surveys has also been set aside in 
the  costabs.  Moreover,  a  budget  has  been  allocated  to  the  implementation  of  proposed 
safeguards actions in the various SECAP studies. 
10. References  
The references are provided as part of the foot notes throughout the SECAP review note. 
Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix 
Environmental/Social 
and climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution In 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
Overgrazing, overstocking 
& pastureland degradation 
from 
Effluent  discharge 
animal 
slaughterhouses, 
manures  and  processing 
units 
and 
disease 
Pests 
outbreaks  from  livestock, 
fall  army  worms,  desert 
locusts, 
Drought 
  Investment in rangeland and 
water resources governance 
systems 
  Right mix of water 
harvesting technologies 
  Improved fodder and forage 
species 
  Participatory water planning 
and site selections and 
capacity determination 
  Continuous awareness 
creation and sensitisation on 
pollution prevention,  
  Manure promotion in farms 
  Working closely with NEMA 
and WRA to ensure relevant 
standards are met 
  Better surveillance, 
monitoring and control of 
animal diseases and pests 
  Sensitisation of the public on 
health and safe animal 
products 
  Training of farmers on 
animal health and husbandry 
  Develop an integrated 
pesticides management plan 
  Investments in water 
harvesting technologies, 
rangeland planning and 
remote sensing to assess 
the conditions of the 
rangelands and help the 
county governments develop 
investment plans for their 
regeneration, afforestation 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, SDL 
Geo mapping, field 
observations, pictures 
Annual , mid 
term, end line 
PMCU, Water 
Resources Authority 
and NEMA 
Random inspections, 
supervision missions and 
reports 
Quarterly  
MALFC, Veterinary 
departments at 
county level, PMCU 
Inspection  
Training and sensitisation 
records 
Integrated pesticides 
management plan produced 
and implemented  
Quarterly  
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, NDMA, 
meteorological 
department 
Number of functioning 
investments 
Quarterly  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs 
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Environmental/Social 
and climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution In 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
Floods  
Deforestation  
Human-livestock-wildlife 
conflicts 
and agroforestry; promotion 
of drought resistant 
varieties; hay and silage 
making 
  Liaising with the Kenya Met 
to provide downscaled 
drought advisories to 
farmers and pastoralists 
  Liaising with the Kenya Met 
to provide downscaled flood 
advisories to farmers and 
pastoralists 
  Identifying high ground for 
investments especially in 
infrastructure 
  Proposing standards to 
enable flood proof 
infrastructure development 
  Reforestation and promotion 
of agroforestry and pasture 
re-establishment 
  Sensitisation and training of 
communities on 
conservation 
  Liaising with the KWS and 
agencies managing wildlife 
at county level to coordinate 
community conservation 
efforts and ensure 
compensation for injuries or 
loss by stray wildlife 
  Investments in sustainable 
pasture and rangeland 
management as well as in 
water infrastructure 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, Meteorological 
department 
Record of meetings and 
advisories 
Bi-weekly or 
monthly  
PMCU, KFS, KWTA, 
county governments 
Inspection, visual 
observations, pictures, geo 
mapping 
Quarterly  
PMCU, KWS, KFS 
Inspection, visual 
observations. 
Continuous  
Reports of conflict, poaching  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs   
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Environmental/Social 
and climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution In 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
Land degradation 
  Sustainable land, pasture 
and water management 
technologies 
  Investments in fodder, 
pasture and rangeland 
management 
  Investment in water 
infrastructure such as 
boreholes, dams 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Exploitation  of  protected 
areas and Ramsar sites 
  Sensitisation of communities 
on conservation of protected 
areas 
  Liaising with relevant 
agencies at county level to 
share information and to 
enhance resource use 
synergies 
  Ensure project inteventions 
are not located within a 
radius of 5km from where 
protected sites or Ramsar 
sites are 
  Ensure water users obtain 
water abstraction permits 
from WRA 
  Selection process 
incorporates community 
wealth ranking by targeted 
communities to capture 
area-specific poverty 
characteristics/criteria 
  Service provider will validate 
identification of ultra-poor 
with household visit 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Large water abstractions 
Ultra-poor  households  not 
in 
accurately 
graduation packages 
targeted 
PMCU, SDL, WRA, 
KWTA, KFS 
geo maps, observation, 
pictures, inspection 
Quarterly  
PMCU, KWS, counties 
Observation, inspection, 
pictures, geo mapss 
Continous 
WRA, PMCU 
Inspection, reports of 
abstraction, field visits 
Quarterly  
PMCU 
Minutes of discussions, 
meetings and engagements 
When 
required 
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Environmental/Social 
and climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution In 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
Patriarchal  norms  prevent 
women  from  participating 
and 
from 
benefitting 
project activities 
Capacity 
women  and  youth 
engage 
selected value-chains. 
constraints  of 
to 
in 
profitably 
  Extensive use of GALS 
methodology to empower 
women and make women’s 
roles, needs and aspirations 
visible; and sensitizing 
smallholder farmers, 
women, men and youth to 
the need of gender justice to 
increase well-being 
  Increasing women’s self-
efficacy, access to 
knowledge, skills, ICT, 
capital through training, 
grants, exposure visits and 
GALS fairs 
  Increasing women’s visibility 
as actors in the value chain 
in the Master Plan for 
Livestock and County 
Livestock strategies and 
Behaviour Change 
Communication Campaign 
  Use of GALS tools to build 
confidence, agency and 
vision. 
  Entrepreneurship training, 
technical training in the 
selected value chains 
(poultry, small ruminants, 
bee-keeping)  
  Youth specific grants and 
training Quotas for women 
and youth in all project 
activities 
  Representation of women 
and youth on decision 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, gender units at 
county levels 
Training records, consultation 
meetings  
As required 
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, service 
providers, partners, 
counties 
Record of training 
Numbers of beneficiaries 
using GALS 
Quarterly  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Environmental/Social 
and climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution In 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
making and coordination 
bodies such as Multi-
Stakeholder Platforms, 
County Coordination 
Committee 
  Use e-platforms and media 
such as Whatsapp and 
Facebook through social 
media training (as part of 
the business training 
exercise) for online 
marketing 
  Group ownership of assets is 
one strategy for protecting 
women’s assets. Male 
members of any one 
household cannot 
appropriate the asset.  
  Mentors will be in close 
contact with beneficiaries to 
monitor use of asset and 
economic activity 
  Beneficiaries will be 
informed about the 
Grievance Redress system 
  Social Mobilization Provider 
will be responsible for 
ensuring that groups 
comprise of active producers 
in the selected value chain 
  KelCop does not require 
working with existing groups 
so new groups of interested 
smallholder farmers and 
rural poor can be formed. 
Risk of men taking over of 
economically 
viable 
economic 
women’s 
activities and assets 
Elite  capture  of  grants  by 
in 
groups 
capitalizing 
donor 
interventions 
experienced 
on 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, service 
providers, partners, 
counties 
Focus group discussions, field 
visits and discussions with 
farmers 
quarterly and 
during 
supervision 
missions 
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, service 
providers, partners, 
counties 
Records of groups, including 
group characteristics, 
ensuring the project 
targeting approaches are 
adhered to  
Quarterly 
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Environmental/Social 
and climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution In 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
policies 
the 
priorities 
and 
Livestock 
strategies  not  adequately 
role, 
acknowledge 
needs, 
and 
interests  of  smallholder 
farmers,  women,  youth 
and 
marginalized 
communities in agriculture 
  SMSP will be responsible for 
vetting the governance and 
group dynamics of any 
existing group included in 
the project 
  Group mentors will visit 
groups monthly and monitor 
group governance and 
dynamics 
  The project will facilitate the 
National Governments and 
the County Governments to 
develop inclusive livestock 
strategies. The strategic 
interests of smallholder 
pastoralist and agro-
pastoralist farmers, rural 
women, youth and 
marginalized traditional 
tribes will be addressed by 
promoting their visibility 
through recognizing the 
critical role that they play in 
the livestock value chains 
and addressing their needs 
and priorities 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Surveys  
PMCU, SDL, partners, 
counties 
Ensure alignment with 
existing policy 
Annual  
Support for policy 
engagement 
Resource use conflicts 
  Liaise with established 
Indigenous  peoples  not 
adequately involved 
interagency security units 
  Invest in community based 
grievance redress 
mechanisms 
  Develop an FPIC 
Develop an indigenous peoples 
action plan 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, partners, 
counties, relevant 
security agencies 
PMCU, indigenous 
community leaders, 
counties, KFS, SDL, 
KWTA 
Reports of conflicts, 
observation 
Quarterly  
FPIC documentation 
IPs action plan implemented  
Quarterly  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Environmental/Social 
and climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution In 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
Child labour 
Gender based violence 
Early marriages 
Female genital mutilation 
  Awareness creation among 
PMCU and implementing 
partners 
  Liaising and sharing 
information with relevant 
authorities at county level 
whenever issues arise 
  Awareness creation among 
PMCU and implementing 
partners 
  Liaising and sharing 
information with relevant 
authorities at county level 
whenever issues arise 
  GALS mentorship 
  Awareness creation among 
PMCU and implementing 
partners 
  Liaising and sharing 
information with relevant 
authorities at county level 
whenever issues arise 
  Awareness creation among 
PMCU and implementing 
partners 
  Liaising and sharing 
information with relevant 
authorities at county level 
whenever issues arise 
Stunting and malnutrition 
  Nutrition education and 
campaigns, mobilisation and 
mentorship, gardens 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
PMCU, counties and 
relevant departments, 
partners 
Reports of child labour 
Continuous  
PMCU, counties and 
relevant departments, 
partners 
Reports of GBV, evidence of 
GALS training and 
mentorship  
Continuous  
Reports of early marriages 
Continuous  
PMCU, counties and 
relevant departments, 
partners 
Reports of FGM 
Continuous  
PMCU, counties and 
relevant departments, 
partners 
Campaign records, 
attendance of training, 
surveys 
Annual  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
Environmental/Social 
and climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution In 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
Cost 
Estimate 
Poor  engagement  of  the 
youth 
  Establishment of a youth 
participation quota 
Risks to Community health 
including COVID 19 
Poor focus of Rural finance 
investments 
on 
environment and social and 
safeguards 
Poor 
and 
environment 
social safeguards measures 
in Procurement  
  Training of youth in value 
chain related enterprises 
  Provision of grants and 
start-up funds 
  GALS mentorship 
  Awareness 
creation/sensitisation on 
diseases or possible injuries 
  Protective gear and 
equipment 
  Social distancing, wearing 
masks, washing hands with 
soap regularly 
  Ensure that rural finance 
also embeds environmental 
and social sustainability and 
resilience in promoted 
investments through 
awareness creation and 
activities promoted 
  Ensure procurement by the 
PMU, counties and 
contractors done in 
accordance to IFAD’s SECAP 
environment and social 
safeguards 
  Create awareness during 
MSPs or project related 
meetings 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
Stakeholder 
engagements 
during 
meetings and 
field visits 
PMCU, counties and 
relevant departments, 
partners 
Records of youth 
participation and activities  
Quarterly  
PMCU, partners, 
counties 
Records of awareness 
creation activities 
Quarterly  
Meetings 
PMCU, MFIS, 
Meetings 
PMCU, IFAD 
Training/awareness creation 
records 
No. of rural finance activities 
that embed environment, 
climate and social safeguards 
Bi-annual 
Record of awareness creation 
activities 
No. of procurement activities 
embedding environment and 
social safeguards 
Annual 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
Provided for 
within 
project 
interventions 
or costabs  
 29 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
IFAD  
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
PF
Is 
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
1. Climate Smaet Production Enhancement for Small Livestock  
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
Subcomponent 1.1. " Integrating Vulnerable HHs into 
Value Chains" 
1. Social Mobilization and Mentoring 
of Smallholder Farmers /b 
TA_EA 
Socio-Economic Assessment /c 
study 
 10,00  
TA_EA 
Regional Managers /d 
TA_EA 
Senior Supervisor of Mentors /e 
TA_EA 
Group Mentors 
TA_EA 
Graduation Champion 
TA_EA 
Business skills training 
TA_EA 
Nutrition training 
TA_EA 
Service Provider Overhead costs 
2. GALS Training 
TA_EA 
GALS TOT workshops Basic tools /f 
TA_EA 
GALS TOT Advanced tools /g 
TA_EA 
GALS workshops with SHG groups /h 
TA_EA 
GALS champions-basic tool 
TA_EA 
GALS champions /i 
TA_EA 
Supervision monitoring and 
documentation 
TA_EA 
GALS Fair 
TA_EA 
Management fee for service provider 
person-
year 
person-
year 
person-
year 
person-
year 
worksh
op 
worksh
op 
lumpsu
m 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
ToT 
stipend 
lumpsu
m 
event 
lumpsu
m 
122,5
9  
86,43  
150,0
5  
120,0
4  
262,6
0  
 1,50  
 10,00  
 10,00  
 50,00  
 5,00  
14,26  
 5,00  
 3,75  
 0,50  
634,0
0  
 5,00  
 5,00  
62,52  
62,52  
 11,00  
 8,25  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
257,4
5  
 -  
267,9
9  
TA_EA 
Nutrition training for manual 
development  
training 
manual 
 5,00  
18,76  
  1 
122,5
9  
 86,43  
150,0
5  
120,0
4  
262,6
0  
 14,26  
 3,75  
634,0
0  
56,27 
6,25 
56,27 
6,25 
7,43 
0,83 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
231,7
0 
25,7
4 
0,00 
0,00 
241,1
9 
26,8
0 
16,88 
1,88 
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
3. Graduation Package 
EG&V_EA 
Procurement and Transport Costs 
GRANTS&SUB_
EA 
Graduation package 
TA_EA 
Nutrition training and mentoring 
TA_EA 
Homestead Food production for 
Dietary Diversity 
GRANTS&SUB_
EA 
8. Grants to Youth Innovative Start-
Ups 
lumpsu
m 
packag
e  
 unit  
 unit  
individ
ual 
 1,00  
750,0
0  
500,0
0  
500,0
0  
 10,00  
EG&V_EA 
C. Vehicles Double Cab 
vehicle 
 8,00  
EG&V_EA 
D. Vehicles 
vehicle 
 2,00  
Total for Subcomponent 1.1. " Integrating Vulnerable 
HHs into Value Chains" 
Subcomponent 1.2. "Breed Improvement" 
E. Breed Improvement 
1. Strenghtening County Breed 
Multiplication Centers /n 
CW_EA 
Infrastructure 
Centers 
 -  
EG&V_EA 
Equipments 
Centers 
 -  
EG&V_EA 
Improved Breeds 
Centers 
 -  
TA_EA 
Technical Assistance 
Centers 
 -  
TA_EA 
EG&V_EA 
TA_EA 
2. Community Breed Improvement 
Programme 
Training to Outreach farmers/elite 
breeders farmers by Technical Staff /o 
individ
uals 
175,0
0  
Improved Breeds (small ruminants for 
meat & dairy) /p 
groups 
 50,00  
Apprenticeship for young men and 
women breeders /q 
individ
uals 
100,0
0  
Total for Subcomponent 1.2. "Breed Improvement" 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
IFAD  
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
PF
Is 
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
1.054
,31  
731,5
2  
36,58  
125,0
5  
115,5
9  
441,3
4  
147,1
1  
187,5
7  
125,0
5  
125,0
5  
234,6
4  
56,26  
100,0
4  
61,91  
  2 
442,8
1 
365,7
6 
104,0
3 
441,3
4 
147,1
1 
3504,
52 
611,50 
219,46 
146,30 
36,58 
125,05 
11,56 
67,7
5 
0,00 
0,00 
231,01 
919,42 
0,0
0 
93,78 
93,78 
62,52 
62,52 
62,52 
117,3
2 
62,52 
117,3
2 
53,45 
281% 
50,02 
55,72 
495,3
3 
50,02 
6,19 
0,00 
338,9
7 
50,02 
6,19 
0,00 
0,0
0 
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
IFAD  
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
PF
Is 
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
Subcomponent 1.3. "Climate Resilient Production 
Systems" 
F. Climate Resilient Production 
Systems 
1. Climate Resillient Water 
Infrastructure 
TA_EA 
County Livestock Feed Strategy /r 
lumpsu
m 
 0,50  
44,70  
CW_EA 
Boreholes with solar power /s 
unit 
 2,50  
CW_EA 
Sub-surface dams or rock-catchment /t 
unit 
 2,50  
CW_EA 
Water pans and shallow wells with 
solar panels /u 
unit 
 2,50  
EG&V_EA 
Upscaling production of grass seeds /v 
groups 
 15,00  
EG&V_EA 
Feed storage infrastructure /w 
groups 
 15,00  
TA_EA 
Rangeland Governance System /x 
study 
 2,00  
TA_EA 
Rangeland Plans and GIS Maps 
TA_EA 
Support to GIS Laboratory 
TA_EA 
Rangeland Policy Support /y 
plans 
laborat
ories 
regulati
on 
 -  
 -  
 -  
625,2
3  
312,6
1  
390,7
7  
318,8
7  
281,3
5  
56,27  
 -  
 -  
 -  
TA_EA 
Environmental and Social Safeguards proposed 
actions and capacity building 
umpsum 
1,00    
429,10    
Total for Subcomponent 1.3. "Climate Resilient 
Production Systems" 
Subcomponent 1.4. "Animal Health Improvement" 
G. Animal Health Improvement 
EG&V_EA 
TA_EA 
EG&V_EA 
TA_EA 
TA_EA 
Strengthen the system of disease 
surveillnace and monitoring 
systems 
 5,50  
Certificate Training for agrovet as 
Paravets for young men and women 
para 
vets 
150,0
0  
340,2
0  
370,2
3  
Smart Device for Agrovets for tracking 
and monitoring diseases 
devices 
 15,00  
 3,75  
Behavioral Change Communication 
Campaign (BCCC) for Animal health 
and disease 
Contingencies Plan (for climate related 
emergencies) 
individ
uals 
lumpsu
m 
7.500,
00  
314,7
0  
 1,00  
183,8
9  
  3 
187,57 
93,78 
117,23 
95,66 
84,41 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 578,65  
 -  
 -  
44,70 
437,6
6 
218,8
3 
273,5
4 
223,2
1 
196,9
5 
 56,27  
 -  
 -  
 -  
429,1
0 
1.880,
26  
340,2
0  
370,2
3  
 3,75  
314,7
0  
183,8
9  
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
Total for Subcomponent 1.4. "Animal Health 
Improvement" 
Subcomponent 1.5. "Extensions" 
TA_EA 
 E-Extension System /j 
platfor
m 
 0,40  
576,3
7  
II. Recurrent Costs 
A. O& M Vehicles 
OPERATION_E
A 
Operational costs Vehicle 
p.y. 
 15,00  
CPIT County Project 
Implementation Team 
TA_EA 
County Livestock Production Officer /e 
month 
180 
TA_EA 
County Director of Veterinary Services 
/f 
month 
180 
TA_EA 
Subject Matter Specialist /g 
month 
360 
TA_EA 
County Water Officer /h 
month 
180 
TA_EA 
County Social Services Development 
Officer /i 
month 
180 
TA_EA 
County Revenue Officer /j 
month 
180 
TA_EA 
County M&E Officer /k 
month 
180 
TA_EA 
County Nutritionist /l 
month 
180 
Sub County Project Implementation 
Officer 
TA_EA 
Livestock Production Oficer /m 
month 
360 
TA_EA 
Veterinary Officer /n 
month 
360 
TA_EA 
Animal Health Assistant /o 
month 
360 
TA_EA 
Livestock Health Assistant /p 
month 
360 
PMCU Staff 
TA_EA 
Livestock Production Specialist 
month 
TA_EA 
Livestock Marketing Specialist 
month 
TA_EA 
Social Inclusion and Mobilization 
Specialist 
month 
18 
18 
18 
177,7
1  
44,80  
44,80  
74,67  
28,00  
46,67  
37,33  
39,76  
31,73  
95,20  
95,20  
85,12  
85,12  
84,00  
84,00  
84,00  
  4 
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
PF
Is 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
44,80  
44,80  
74,67  
28,00  
46,67  
37,33  
39,76  
31,73  
 -  
95,20  
95,20  
85,12  
85,12  
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
IFAD  
1.212,
77  
576,3
7 
177,7
1  
 84,00  
 84,00  
 84,00  
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
Total for Subcomponent 1.5. "Extensions" 
Sub-Total of Component 1 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
0,00 
IFAD  
1006,
09 
7.669,
87  
67,7
5  
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
708,4
2 
1.047
,39  
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
PF
Is 
0,0
0 
 50,02  
 815,85  
 919,42  
 -  
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
Component 2. Support to Livestock Market Development  
Subcomponent 2.1. " Market Infrastructure and Capacity 
Development " 
A. Market Infrastructure and 
Capacity Development 
CW_EA 
Upgrading Market Infrastructure /a 
markets 
2,5 
TA_EA 
TA_EA 
TA_EA 
Capacity Building Support to Livestock 
Market Associations (LMAs) 
LMAa 
2,5 
Support to Regulatory Mechanisma for 
Markets 
countie
s 
6 
Investor Forums for private sector 
engagement /b 
forums 
15 
Total for Subcomponent 2.1. " Market Infrastructure and 
Capacity Development " 
Subcomponent 2.2. " Building Inclusive Value Chains " 
B. Building Inclusive Value Chains 
unit 
25 
325,0
0  
14,00  
60,00  
75,00  
537,5
0  
GRANTS&SUB_
EA 
Matching Grants for smallholder 
commercial producers /c 
TA_EA 
Training and peer to peer exchange and 
exposure visits & SSC /d 
TA_EA 
Training of Young Enterpreneurs /e 
individ
uals 
persons 
individ
uals 
0 
0 
250 
 -  
GRANTS&SUB_
EA 
TA_EA 
GRANTS&SUB_
EA 
Grants to Young Enterpreneurs 
MSPs 
20 
County Level multi-stakeholder 
platforms (MSPs) 
Grants to Youth Innovative Start-Ups 
individ
uals 
dashbo
ard 
5 
0 
TA_EA 
Building dashboard for Crowdfunding 
CREDITLINES_
EA 
 E-finance voucher support ( 10/90 
rule) /k 
CREDITLINES_
EA 
E-finance voucher support ( 40/60 rule) 
/l 
CREDITLINES_
EA 
E-finance voucher support ( 100% Ben 
rule) /m 
Total for Subcomponent 2.2. " Building Inclusive Value 
Chains " 
Subcomponent 2.3. " Value Chain Management 
Information Systems " 
persons 
persons 
persons 
250,0
0  
 -  
 -  
50,00  
 -  
 -  
20,00  
100,0
0  
 -  
86,69  
 -  
 -  
  5 
243,7
5 
12,60 
60,00 
75,00 
391,3
5 
376,2
5 
0,00 
50,00 
0,00 
0,00 
20,00 
100,0
0 
78,02 
0,00 
624,2
7 
65,00 
16,25 
1,40 
0,00 
65,00 
0,00 
17,65 
0,00 
0,0
0 
161,25 
8,67 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
8,67 
161,25 
0,00 
0,0
0 
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
IFAD  
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
PF
Is 
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
C. Value Chain Management 
Information Systems 
TA_EA 
ICT for Market Livestock System 
platfor
m 
0,25 
TA_EA 
Livestock Marketing Specialist 
month 
18 
155,0
0  
81,00  
Total for Subcomponent 2.3. " Value Chain Management 
Information Systems " 
Total of Component 2 
A. Investment Cost 
Subcomponent 1.3.. "A. Policy and Pm Unit " 
TA&WO_EA 
Livestock Master Plan 
CW&EQM_EA 
Development of Regulations for 
Livestock Bill /a 
TA&WO_EA 
County Level Livestock Strategies 
lumpsu
m 
lumpsu
m 
lumpsu
m 
TA&WO_EA 
Developing Standards and Certification 
Regime for Honey Production 
lumpsu
m 
 1,00  
 1,00  
 1,00  
 1,00  
613,0
0  
245,2
0  
122,6
0  
122,6
0  
Total for Subcomponent 3.1. "A. Policy and Pm Unit" 
Subcomponent 1.3.. "A. PM and Coordination Unit " 
TA_EA 
1. Knowledge Management and 
Learning 
TA_EA 
Support to KM Strategy 
TA_EA 
Knowledge Mangement Studies 
TA_EA 
Website Development 
TA_EA 
Development of KM Products 
TA_EA 
SSTC Exchange Meetings 
per 
year 
per 
year 
per 
year 
per 
year 
lumpsu
m 
TA_EA 
Knowledge Management TA /a 
month 
TA_EA 
2. Start Up Activities, Workshops, 
Training & Studies 
Faster Implementation of Project Start-
Up (including finalisation 
of the ESMP, FPIC,IPMP, and IPAPs) 
lumpsu
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
 6,13  
 -  
 6,13  
11,11  
192,4
7  
33,32  
612,9
7  
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
 -  
65,00  
 8,67  
 178,90  
 -  
0,0
0 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
155,0
0 
81,00 
236,0
0 
1.251,
62  
613,0
0  
245,2
0  
122,6
0  
122,6
0  
1.103,
40  
 6,13  
 -  
 6,13  
 11,11  
192,4
7  
 33,32  
 -  
612,9
7  
3. Project management and Coordination Unit (PMCU) 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
0
% 
0
% 
0
% 
0
% 
0
% 
0
% 
0
% 
0
% 
  6 
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
TA_EA 
Website Development 
TA_EA 
Exchange Meetings 
TA_EA 
Start Up Workshops and SECAP  
training /b 
TA_EA 
Consolidated Start-Up Workshop /c 
TA_EA 
TA_EA 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Planning 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and 
Budget Planning 
TA_EA 
Annual Review Workshops 
TA_EA 
TA_EA 
Consolidated Annual Review 
Workshops 
Miscellaneous Workshops and 
Meetings 
TA_EA 
HR Recruitment Consultancy 
TA_EA 
TA_EA 
TA_EA 
Baseline Survey (social economic and 
Environmental) 
Mid-term Survey (socio-economic and 
environmental) 
Impact Assessment (socio-economic 
and environmental) 
TA_EA 
Project Completion Report (PCR) 
TA_EA 
Pro-WEIA Assessment 
(Baseline,Completion) 
per 
year 
per 
year 
worksh
op 
worksh
op 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
worksh
ops 
survey 
survey 
assess
ment 
unit 
survey 
TA_EA 
Beneficiary Feedback Survey 
survey 
3. Equipments & Vehicles 
1 
 6,13  
1,5 
 3,70  
10 
1 
15 
1,5 
15 
98,08  
18,39  
92,56  
18,51  
92,56  
1,5 
 1,85  
2,5 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
EG&V_EA 
Motorcycles 175 cc 
motorbi
kes 
50 
EG&V_EA 
Accounting Software 
EG&V_EA 
Motor Vehicles Double Cab 
EG&V_EA 
Computers 
EG&V_EA 
Computers Server 
EG&V_EA 
Laptops 
EG&V_EA 
Photocopier/ printer Machine (heavy 
duty) 
unit 
vehicle
s 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
1 
2 
3 
1 
16 
1 
15,51  
24,52  
159,3
7  
 -  
 -  
 -  
122,5
9  
 -  
245,1
9  
122,5
9  
110,3
3  
 3,68  
 7,36  
29,42  
12,26  
  7 
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
PF
Is 
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
IFAD  
 6,13  
 3,70  
 98,08  
 18,39  
 92,56  
 18,51  
 92,56  
 1,85  
 15,51  
 24,52  
159,3
7  
 -  
 -  
 -  
122,5
9  
 -  
 -  
245,1
9  
122,5
9  
110,3
3  
 3,68  
 7,36  
 29,42  
 12,26  
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
II. Recurrent Costs 
A. Salaries and Allowances 
1. PMCU Staff 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Project Coordinator 
month 
18 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Financial Controller 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Internal Audit Officer 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Procurement Specialist 
SAL&ALL_EA 
M&E Specialist 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Data Programmer 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Financial Assistant 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Administrative General 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Procurement Assistant 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Secretaries 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Support Staff 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
month 
18 
18 
18 
18 
18 
18 
18 
18 
36 
36 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Drivers 
month 
108 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Project Steering Committee Expenses 
month 
SAL&ALL_EA 
County Programme Coordination 
Meetings 
month 
6 
6 
SAL&ALL_EA 
Gratuity paid to PMCU Staff /d 
p.a. 
1,5 
B. Operational Costs 
OPERATION_E
A 
OPERATION_E
A 
Operational Costs at PMCU Level 
month 
18 
Operational Cost at County Level (6) 
month 
108 
OPERATION_E
A 
Operational Cost at County Level (4-
ASAL) 
OPERATION_E
A 
OPERATION_E
A 
Office Equipment 
O&M for Vehicles 
month 
72 
lumpsu
m 
p.y. 
1 
3 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
IFAD  
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
PF
Is 
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
 -  
 -  
 -  
112,0
0  
 93,34  
 84,00  
 84,00  
 84,00  
 56,00  
 56,00  
 37,33  
 56,00  
 56,00  
 29,87  
112,0
0  
 11,20  
 6,22  
399,8
5  
266,5
7  
311,0
0  
 42,91  
 22,21  
350,
30  
112,0
0  
93,34  
84,00  
84,00  
84,00  
56,00  
56,00  
37,33  
56,00  
56,00  
29,87  
112,0
0  
11,20  
 6,22  
350,3
0  
399,8
5  
266,5
7  
311,0
0  
42,91  
22,21  
  8 
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quan
tity 
Cumulative 
Expenditure  
 ( 000'USD)  
2021 
Planned 
Expendi
tures  
Plan 
Act
ual 
% 
(000'US
D) 
Quan
tity 
for 
2021  
OPERATION_E
A 
Officer Rent 
p.y. 
18 
28,00  
Total for Subcomponent 3.2. "PM and Coordination Unit" 
Total of Component 3 
GRAND TOTAL OF THE PROJECT 
The expected results of the project for 
2021 
Expenditure by financing source for 2021 
(000'USD) 
#/ha/km 
HH/ppl 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Pl
an 
Act
ual 
% 
Go
K ( 
cas
h) 
350,
30  
350,
30 
418,
05  
IFAD  
3.967,
25  
5070,
65 
13.99
2,14  
GoK 
( in-
kind) 
Benefici
aries ( 
cash) 
Benefici
aries ( 
in-kind) 
Heifer 
Internati
onal  
PF
Is 
28,00  
28,00  
 -  
 -  
 -  
28,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
 -  
0,0
0 
1.140
,39  
 58,69  
 994,75  
 919,42  
 -  
Narrat
ive on 
status, 
rationa
le, 
challen
ges, 
solutio
ns 
  9 
 10 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7: Procurement Plan 
Procurement Plan SUMMARY 
Country: 
Project Name: 
Project ID: 
Version 
Version Date 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
Kenya 
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KeLCoP) 
TBD 
1.0 
13-Feb-20 
Procurement 
Category 
Currency 
Goods 
Works 
Consulting Services 
TOTAL 
Prior Review 
Thresholds 
Plan 
USD 
 4 654 284.00  
 2 822 877.00  
 15 019 417.00  
 22 496 578.00  
 -  
LCU 
Actual 
USD 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
LCU 
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
Thresholds 
Goods 
Works 
Non-Consulting  
Services 
Firms - 
Consulting 
Services 
Individuals - Consulting Services 
Prior Review 
All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are Prior Review (in alignment with IFAD Procurement Handbook). 
Procurement Method Thresholds 
> US$ 100000.00 
> US$ 50000.00 
> US$ 50000.00 
> US$ 30000.00  > US$ 5000.00 
Goods 
Works  
Non-Consulting 
Services 
Shopping 
< US$ 50000.00 
< US$ 145000.00 
< US$ 50000.00 
ICS/CQS 
Individuals 
< US$ 20000.00 
Firms 
< US$ 50000.00 
NCB 
> US$ 50000.00 to < 
US$ 150000.00 
> US$ 145000.00 to < 
US$ 500000.00 
> US$ 50000.00 to < 
US$ 150000.00 
LCS 
> US$ 0.00 to < US$ 
0.00 
> US$ 0.00 to < US$ 
0.00 
ICB 
> US$ 150000.00 
> US$ 500000.00 
> US$ 150000.00 
QCBS 
> US$ 0.00 
> US$ 50000.00 
ICS is to be used for all selection for individual consultants, regardless of value. 
  1 
Contents` 
I. Assessment of Procurement Systems  
A. Country Procurement Systems Assessment 
B. Project Specific Assessment 
II. KeLCoP Procurement Arrangements 
A. General Considerations 
B. Procurement Risk Assessment 
C. Institutional Arrangements 
D. Applicable Procurement Rules and Regulations 
E. Procurement Planning 
F. Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
G.  Definition  of  the  applicable  Procurement  methods  for 
Goods, Works and Non-consulting Services 
H. IFAD Prior Review Thresholds 
3 
3 
5 
7 
7 
9 
10 
10 
11 
13 
14 
15 
2 
KeLCoP Procurement Manual 
I.  Assessment of Procurement Systems 
A.  Country Procurement Systems Assessment 
a.  The Act permits a procuring entity to negotiate with bidders in order to stay within the budget. 
In addition, this particular alteration gives a procuring entity a potentially wide opening to 
negotiate with bidders in circumstances that would require termination of the bid under  good 
international practice generally. The Act should not allow negotiation when price deviation 
causes an increase in excess of the pre-agreed  
b.  Regulations explicitly permit applying direct contracting method for procurement from 
government-owned enterprises without limitations except the appropriateness of the price.  
c.  The Act should prohibit the use of point system evaluation (except in the case of consulting 
services), and specify that criteria not evaluated in monetary terms should be evaluated on a 
pass/fail basis.  
d.  Excessive thresholds for domestic preference: The PPDA prescribes the use of preferences 
and reservations. One of the more remarkable elements of this provision is the excessive 
3 
threshold of 500 million KES (approx. USD 5,000,00) for procurement of goods, services and 
works, below which exclusive preference shall be given to citizens of Kenya.  
e.  The Public Procurement Regulations should be issued immediately to avoid any 
misinterpreting for the new Act. 
f.  The General Procurement Manual was issued in 2009, and has not been updated since. the 
Procurement Manual should be reviewed to ensure consistency with the legislative 
framework, and should not be used to introduce deviations from or exceptions to the 
legislative requirements. As a general administrative matter, legislative and supporting 
materials should be reviewed to ensure that cross-references are to the appropriate 
documents and correct versions thereof. 
B.  Project Specific Assessment 
a.  The procurement planning was typically limited to a list of contracts and estimated budgets. In 
general, little or no consideration was given to timing, contract packaging, procurement 
methods.  
b.  Spending units sometimes do not receive funds until the end of the fiscal year in May-June. 
The funds must then be disbursed quickly, which strains adherence to procedures. Choices in 
procurement method are limited because of the insufficient time for open tendering. If more 
restricted procedures are not approved (shortage of time being the weak justification), 
financial resources go unused. 
a.  Advertisement for open tenders is mandated in at least one daily newspapers of wide national 
circulation and in the Electronic Procurements portal. 
4 
b.  The minimum period provided by the current Executive Regulations for the preparation of 
national open tenders. However, the permissible time (14 days) could be insufficient for 
complex assignments. 
c.  Ensure that the place or site where tenders shall be submitted is open and accessible and 
provided with a secured tender box. However, secure tender box does not exist in many 
cases. 
d.  Carry out public opining immediately after the closing date and time. 
II.  KeLCoP Procurement Arrangements 
A.  General Considerations 
5 
6 
7 
a.  Maintain and enhance the reputation of the borrower/recipient country by: 
  Maintaining the highest standards of honesty and integrity in all professional 
relationships; 
  Developing the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
  Maximizing the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are 
responsible for the purposes for which these funds and resources were provided to 
the borrower/recipient country; and 
  Complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
  The financing agreement; 
  The laws and regulations of the borrower/recipient country; 
  Accepted professional ethics; and 
  Contractual obligations. 
b.  Declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed by others 
to affect, impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of interest). In a 
situation of this nature, the official concerned should not participate in any way in the 
procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; and 
c.  Respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not use such 
information for personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, supplier or contractor. 
Information given in the course of their duties shall be true, fair and not designed to 
mislead. 
8 
a.  Available for full inspection by the Fund of all bid documentation and related records; 
b.  Maintained for ten years after the project completion date; and  
c. 
IFAD may also require that the Project cooperate with agents or representatives of the Fund 
carrying out an audit or investigation into procurement issues. 
a.  Contract packaging;  
b.  Applicable procedures and procurement methods;  
c.  Bidding documentation; 
d.  Composition of bid evaluation committees; 
e.  Bid evaluations and award recommendations; and 
f.  Draft contracts and contract amendments. 
9 
B.  Procurement Risk Assessment 
C. 
Institutional Arrangements.  
10 
D.  Applicable Procurement Rules and Regulations 
Overriding principles 
As provided in Section 7.05 of the General Conditions, procurement of goods, works and services shall 
be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Borrower/Recipient’s procurement regulations, 
to the extent such are consistent with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines and by observing the following 
specific principles:  
  Procurement will be carried out in accordance with Financing Agreement and any duly agreed 
amendments thereto;  
  Procurement will be conducted within the  Project implementation period, except as provided 
under Article 4.10(a)(ii) of IFAD General Conditions;  
  The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated funds as per the 
Financing Agreement;  
  Procurement is to be consistent with the duly approved annual work plan and budget (AWP/B) 
including  a  procurement  plan  (for  the  first  time,  the  procurement  plan  will  cover  the  first  18 
months of the Project implementation period);  
  Procurement is to result in the best value of money and fit for purpose.  
  All goods, works and services procured will be exempt from duties and taxes. 
E.  Procurement Planning 
Procurement plan should be divided into goods, works and services and as a minimum, the 
procurement plan must contain the following information: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period or the 
plan; 
The estimated value of each activity; 
The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity 
The method of review IFAD will undertake for each activity; 
In addition to the minimum information above, it is considered good practice for the 
procurement plan to capture additional information such as: 
  Planned timing of the procurement activities; 
  Procurement by Project component; 
  Dates for IFAD prior review; 
The procurement plan shall be prepared in excel sheets in accordance with IFAD Procurement Plan 
Template and each procurement category (goods/works/consulting services/non-consulting services) 
in separate excel sheets as follows: - 
For goods, Works and Nom-Consulting Services 
-  Project title: 
-  Financiers: 
-  Period: 
-  Type of procurement: goods/works/services 
-  Code as per AWPB 
11 
-  Component/unit 
-  Procurement tender number 
- 
Item description 
-  Plan vs Actual with two rows: 
  planned  
  actual  
-  Contract type: Lumpsum or exact /BQS 
-  Total amount in USD 
-  Procurement method 
-  Prior or post review 
-  Preparation of tendering process 
  bid document preparation and submission to IFAD 
 
IFAD No objection  
-  Bidding process 
  Publication/invitation/advertisement 
  Closing/opening 
-  Evaluation process 
  Technical and financial evaluation and submission of report to IFAD  
 
IFAD No Objection to award 
-  Contract 
  Award and notification of award 
  Signing of the contract 
  Contract period 
  Contract completion date 
  Comments  
For services 
-  Project title: 
-  Financiers: 
-  Period: 
-  Code AWPB 
-  Component/unit 
-  Procurement tender number 
- 
Item description 
-  Plan vs Actual with two rows: 
  planned  
  actual  
-  Contract type: Lumpsum or time based 
-  Total amount in USD 
-  Selection method 
-  Prior or post review 
-  Preparation of tendering process (terms of reference) 
  Preparation date 
 
IFAD No objection  
12 
-  Bidding process/Request for Expression of Interest  
  Dated of invitation 
  Closing/opening 
-  Shortlist  
  Date proposed for submission of shortlist to IFAD 
  Date of IFAD No Objection 
-  Request for Proposal 
  Date prepared and submitted to IFAD 
  Date of IFAD No Objection 
 
Invitation date 
  Date of opening 
-  Evaluation process: 
  Technical evaluation 
 
IFAD No Objection to technical evaluation report 
  Date of opening financial proposals 
  Date of submission of combined evaluation report 
  Date of IFAD No Objection to the report and award 
-  Contract 
  Award and notification of award 
  Signing of the contract 
  Contract period 
  Contract completion date 
  Comments 
F.  Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
13 
G.  Definition of the applicable Procurement methods for Goods, Works and 
Non-consulting Services 
  Contract amounts are small; 
  There is only a limited number of suppliers or contractors; or 
  Other exceptional reasons exist that may justify departure from full ICB procedures. 
  Contract values are small; 
  Works are scattered geographically or spread out over time; 
  Works are labor-intensive; or 
  The goods or works are available locally at prices below those on the international market. 
14 
  An existing contract for goods or works awarded in accordance with procedures acceptable to 
IFAD, may be extended for additional goods or works of a similar nature to a maximum of 25 
per cent (%) of the original contract value, with the prior approval of IFAD, provided that no 
advantage could be obtained by further competition and that the prices on the extended 
contract are reasonable. Provision for such an extension, if considered likely in advance, is to 
be included in the original contract; 
  Standardization of vehicles, equipment or spare parts to ensure compatibility with existing 
vehicles, equipment or machinery may justify additional purchases from the original supplier. 
For such purchases to be justified, the original vehicles, equipment or machinery should be 
suitable; the number of new items should generally be less than the existing number; the 
price should be reasonable; and the advantages of another make or source of equipment are 
to have been considered and rejected on grounds acceptable to IFAD; 
  The required equipment is proprietary and obtainable only from one source; 
  The contractor responsible for a process design requires the purchase of critical items from a 
particular supplier as a condition of a performance guarantee; and  
  Purchases from the original supplier may also be justified in exceptional cases and 
emergencies, such as in response to a natural disaster, conflict and post conflict, or in 
countries where there are restrictions to free markets and enterprises. 
The IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing require that Borrower/recipients 
retain documents and records for review by IFAD at any time within a period of three (3) years after 
completion of the bid or contract. The following table shows what procurement files, folders or dossiers 
should contain: 
15 
Document 
i.  A copy of the published advertisement or shortlist (if applicable) * 
ii.  A copy of the published pre-qualification and invitation documents and any 
amendments, extensions or clarifications that were requested and issued* 
iii.  A record of tender opening signed by all present 
iv.  A full copy of each bid received and evaluated, plus clarifications requested and 
responses received 
v.  A copy of the evaluation report* 
vi.  Signed minutes of all meetings relating to the procurement, including pre-bid and 
negotiation meetings where these were held 
vii.  A contract award notice* 
viii.  Any letter of tender acceptance to the supplier, contractor or consultant* 
ix. 
x.  Any contract amendments* 
xi.  All contractual correspondence between the procuring entity and a supplier, 
The signed contract document and contract acceptance* 
contractor or consultant 
xii.  Post-contract documents relating to the fulfillment of contract obligations, in 
particular photocopies of bank guarantees or payment guarantees 
xiii.  Signed minutes of any meetings related to contract management, including 
contract progress or review meetings 
xiv.  Signed delivery documents evidencing delivery of supplies or signed completion 
certificates in relation to a contract for services or works under the contract, 
including any contract delivery records 
xv.  A copy of all invoices for works, services or supplies, including work papers 
verifying the accuracy of payments claimed and details of the actual payment 
authorized 
xvi.  A copy of cumulative payment worksheets/records evidencing management of all 
payments made 
xvii.  A copy of all submissions to and all decisions of the appropriate approval authority 
related to the procurement, including the approval of the invitation documents, 
approval of the evaluation report(s), contract award, approval of contract 
documents and contract amendments and any decision to suspend or cancel 
procurement proceedings 
xviii.  A copy of any claims made by the procuring entity with respect to any warranty, 
non-warranty, short supply, damage and other claims upon the provider or upon 
the procuring entity 
In the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and correspondence in relation 
to the seeking of IFAD’s no-objection 
any other communications relating to the procurement in questions, including 
internal entity correspondence 
xix. 
xx. 
Preferred format 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
*Ideally, drafts of these published documents and reports should also be retained for completeness and to provide a full picture 
of  how  the  published  document  evolved.  It  is,  however,  accepted  that  where  issues  of  space  exist  this  may  not  always  be 
possible in practice. 
16 
 17 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual 
Table of Contents 
1  INTRODUCTION 
1.1  OVERVIEW 
2  TARGETING STRATEGY 
2.1  GEOGRAPHICAL TARGETING AND PROJECT INTERVENTION AREA 
2.2  VALUE CHAINS 
2.3  PROJECT TARGET GROUP 
2.4  TARGETING APPROACH 
2.5  SOCIAL INCLUSION STRATEGY 
3  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
3.1  PROJECT DURATION 
3.2  THE COMPONENTS AND ACTIVITIES OF KELCOP 
3.3  PROJECT STRUCTURE 
4  INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
4.1  ALIGNMENT AND OWNERSHIP 
4.2  PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
4.3  PROJECT OVERSIGHT AND STRATEGIC GUIDANCE 
4.4  PROJECT COORDINATION 
4.5  PARTNERSHIPS 
4.6  PLANNING AND BUDGET DEVELOPMENT 
4.7  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
4.8  MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
Annexes 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
6 
8 
9 
15 
15 
15 
15 
51 
51 
56 
57 
58 
58 
67 
68 
77 
DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE OF KEY PROJECT STAFF 
DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE OF SERVICE PROVIDERS 
DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARDS CONSULTANT 
DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS CONSULTANT 
1 
1  Introduction 
1.1  Overview 
1. 
This  draft  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  provides  guidelines  for  the 
implementation of the IFAD funded interventions under the Kenya Livestock Commercialisation 
Project (KeLCoP). The PIM elaborates the procedures and processes that are to be followed in 
the implementation of the IFAD funded interventions and activities in KeLCoP. The PIM is an 
annex of the Project Design Report (PDR) and thus processes and procedures presented in this 
document are to be read in conjunction with the relevant sections of the main PDR. 
2. 
The  processes  presented  here  are  a  framework  that  is  meant  to  assist  the  KeLCoP 
implementation staff including those at the County level in implementing the processes for the 
different  sub-components.  It is proposed that at startup, the recruited staff be  facilitated to 
review the activities and processes presented herein. The review would clarify, update, refine 
and confirm the activities and processes that will be used during implementation. The value in 
undertaking such a review would be that through the process, the implementing staff would 
“own”  the  PIM  and  share  a  common  understanding  which  would  facilitate  implementation. 
However, it is to be emphasized that the PIM is a living document and lessons from experiences 
will be incorporated in it on a periodic basis and submitted to the Project Steering Committee 
and IFAD for approval. 
2  Targeting strategy 
2.1  Geographical targeting and project intervention area 
3. 
Project Area: The project will cover 10 counties (out of the total 47 counties), four (4) in 
the western region, four (4) in Rift Valley region and (2) in the Northern Region. The population 
is rural, and depend  on livestock and crop production for their livelihood. Poverty levels are 
highest  in  the  2  Northern  Counties,  Samburu  and  Marsabit  and  in  Bungoma  in  the  Western 
Counties. There are also pockets of deep poverty in the other counties. In the Western and Rift 
Valley  regions,  small  scale  farmers  practice  mixed  farming,  with  poor  segments  of  the 
population growing crops, keeping small ruminants, poultry and engage in honey production. 
In the North, they are predominantly pastoralists raising camels, beef cattle, goats and sheep 
for meat. Demographic details on the target counties are provided in Table 1 below. 
Table 1: Demographic details on the target counties 
% of rural 
Population 
Population 
Density 
No  County 
1  Siaya 
2  Busia 
3  Bungoma 
4  Kakamega 
5  Trans Nzoia 
Elgeyo 
Marakwet 
6 
7  Baringo 
8  Nakuru 
9  Marsabit 
10  Samburu 
Area 
km2 
% of 
Total 
2,530 
1,695 
3,032 
3,051 
2,496 
3,029 
11,015 
7,499 
70,961 
21,022 
0.4 
0.3 
0.5 
0.5 
0.4 
0.5 
1.9 
1.3 
12.2 
3.6 
Population 
% of 
Total 
Pop. 
993,183  2.1 
893,681  1.9 
1,670,570  3.5 
1,867,579  3.9 
990,341  2.1 
454,480  1.0 
666,763  1.4 
2,162,202  4.5 
459,785  1.0 
310,327  0.6 
89 
84 
78 
85 
80 
86 
89 
54 
78 
83 
Total 
Sheep/ 
Goats 
473,464 
133,838 
249,157 
256,457 
155,490 
Total 
Chickens 
Poverty 
Index* 
1,115,347  33.8 
1,017,045  69.3 
2,493,848  35.7 
3,193,849  35.8 
34 
836,820 
393 
527 
551 
612 
397 
150 
660,600 
531,960  43.4 
288 
61  1,267,182 
878,059 
6  4,357,786 
15  1,255,658 
1,016,911  39.6 
2,176,865  29.1 
93,855  63.7 
318,530  75.8 
* Basic Report on Wellbeing in Kenya, World Bank, UNICEF. 
In  line  with  the  Kenya  Country  Strategy  and  Programme  Evaluation  (CSPE) 
4. 
recommendations, KeLCoP’s target areas will include 2 Semi-Arid counties (Elgeyo Marakwet 
and Baringo) and 2 Arid counties (Marsabit and Samburu). The selection of the counties was 
made  by  scoring  counties  on  the  following  criteria:  (i)  incidence  and  prevalence  of  rural 
poverty;  (ii)  aridity  of  the  geographical  area;  (ii)  potential  for  commercialization  of  selected 
commodities; (iii) population of targeted livestock; (iv) priority given to the value chain by the 
county in its strategic plans; (vi) potential to build on and collaborate with existing development 
interventions; and (vii) security. In the selected counties, project activities will focus on the 
2 
value-chains with high potential in that county. The same criteria will be used to select  the 
focal areas for the project intervention within the county. Annex 14 presents the score sheet 
for the selection of the participating counties. (In addition, Wards in which marginalized tribes 
are found will be prioritized. The focus of project activities in terms of support to producers and 
value chain actors will be limited to between two to four contiguous wards depending on area 
and population of wards in the county which are preferably contiguous. A value chain driver 
serving  the  population  of  the  selected  wards  could  still  be  supported  even  if  located  in  a 
different ward. 
2.2  Value chains 
5. 
The project has selected the three value-chains that have the highest potential for social 
inclusion, improving nutrition of poor households and commercialization. The focus will be on 
poultry and dairy goats in Siaya, Busia, Kakamega, Bungoma, Trans Nzoia and Nakuru; meat 
goats and dairy goats in Baringo, Elgeyo-Marakwet, Samburu and Marsabit; and honey value 
chain in Baringo, Samburu, Siaya and Bungoma. The project has developed an indepth climate 
risk  and  vulnerability  analysis  report  that  among  others,  advises  on  the  suitability  of  the 
proposd value chains to various counties and sub-counties. In the selection of the value chains 
at implementation stage, the team should ensure that this report and its recommendations are 
taken into consideration.  
3 
Table 1: Project Beneficiaries 
Direct Benefciaries 
Direct and Indirect Beneficiaries 
Total 
Women 
Youth 
Households 
Total peoplea 
Femaleb 
Youthc 
Nutrition 
Households 
Nutrition 
Beneficaries 
1.2: Integrating Vulnerable HHs into Value 
Chains 
Graduation Package  
 6,000  
 6,000  
 1,800  
 6,000  
 27,000  
Nutrition Package 
Training in GALS  
 1,000  
 1,000  
 500  
 1,000  
 4,500  
 6,000  
 3,000  
 1,800  
 6,000  
 27,000  
Outreach by GALS Champions  
 4,500  
 2,250  
 1,134  
 4,500  
 20,250  
E-Finance Voucher support 
E-Extension System 
Grants to Young Producers  
5000 
10000 
90 
3000 
5000 
45 
1500 
3000 
90 
5000 
10000 
90 
 22,500  
 45,000  
 405  
 13,500  
 2,250  
 13,500  
 2,250  
 11,250  
 22,500  
 203  
 6,804  
 1,134  
 6,804  
 5,103  
 5,670  
 11,340  
 102  
6,000  
1,000  
           27,000  
            4,500  
4,500  
        20,250  
1,000 
        4,500 
Nutrtion Training & Mentoring 
20000 
16000 
4800 
20000 
 90,000  
 45,000  
 22,680  
20,000  
     90,000  
1.3 Breed Improvement 
Training to Breeders 
Improved Breed distribution (groups) 
Apprenticeship for young breeders 
1.4: Climate Resilient Production Systems 
1.4.2 Climate Resilient Water Infrastructure 
1.4: Animal Health Improvement 
1.4.2 Certificate Training the youth as AHW 
and Paravets 
1.4.4 BCC approach to improve animal 
husbandry practices  
Component 2: Support to livestock 
market development 
400 
6000 
200 
100 
3600 
50 
100 
1800 
200 
400 
6000 
200 
1800 
27000 
900 
900 
13500 
450 
454 
6804 
227 
 20,000  
 10,000  
 5,040.00  
 6,300  
 90,000  
 45,000  
 22,680  
200 
100 
200 
200 
900 
450 
226.8 
20000 
10000 
6000 
 20,000  
 90,000  
 45,000  
 22,680  
2.1.1: Upgrading Market Infrastructure 
 30,000  
 9,000  
 9,000  
 30,000  
 135,000  
 15,000  
 7,560  
2.2: Building Inclusive Value Chains 
2.2.1 Matching grants for smallholder 
commercial producers 
 6,000  
 4,200  
 1,800  
 6,000  
 27,000  
 13,500  
 6,804  
6,000 
      27,000 
4 
Direct Benefciaries 
Direct and Indirect Beneficiaries 
Total 
Women 
Youth 
Households 
Total peoplea 
Femaleb 
Youthc 
Nutrition 
Households 
Nutrition 
Beneficaries 
2.2.2: Training, peer to peer exchange, 
exposure visits and SSC  
2.2.3: Training of Young Entrepreneurs 
2.2.4: Grant to Young Entrepreneurs 
2.4.5: County Level multi-stakeholder 
platforms 
1.3.5: Grants to Youth Innovative Start-ups 
1.3.6 Building dashboard for Crowdfunding  
 3,000  
 1,800  
 900  
 3,000  
 13,500  
500 
 500  
250 
 250  
500 
 500  
 500  
 500  
 2,250  
 2,250  
 4,000  
 1,200  
 1,200  
 4,000  
 18,000  
 50  
 30  
 25  
 15  
 50  
 30  
 50  
 30  
 225  
 135  
 6,750  
 1,125  
 1,125  
 9,000  
 113  
 68  
 3,402  
 567  
 567  
 4,536  
 57  
 34  
Benefitting Housheolds (After adjusting 
for double counting)  
110,000 
 60,000  
33000 
 143,470  
 76,885  
 41,944  
 129,770  
 645,615  
 262,433  
 136,235  
     38,500  
       173,250  
5 
2.3  Project Target Group 
6. 
7. 
Beneficiaries:  The  primary  target  group  will  comprise:  (i)  the  very  vulnerable, 
ultra-poor, mostly women headed, pastoralist and agro-pastoralist households; (ii) 
the market-oriented small-holder men and women pastoralist and agro-pastoralist 
households;  and  (iii)  young  women  and  men  involved  in  production  and 
entrepreneurial activity at critical points in the value chain. The project has a strong 
focus on the inclusion of women and youth, marginalized tribes (including indigenous 
peoples) and persons with disabilities. In addition, the project will engage with value 
chain  drivers  such  as  farmers  who  have  the  resources  to  function  as  breeders  of 
livestock, and traders, private sector companies, transporters, private agro-vets and 
input suppliers who will comprise the members of multi-stakeholder forums.  
The ultra-poor pastoralist/agro-pastoralist households: These households can 
be  landless  or  have  very  little land  around  their  dwelling  and  few,  if  any  livestock 
assets. A significant proportion of these households are likely to be women-headed 
households.  Women  headed  households  are  defined  as  including  women  left 
by/divorced from the husband, women in polygamous households who are no longer 
supported,  widows,  single  women  responsible  for  dependents,  married  women 
whose husband is incapable of functioning as an income earner, married women who 
have been abandoned by their husbands for any reason. The number of dependents 
in  these  ultra-poor  households  may  be  higher  than  average  and  include  members 
who are especially vulnerable, persons with HIV, persons with disabilities, children 
out of school. These households depend for their livelihoods on casual labour, trading 
vegetables,  forest  produce,  charcoal,  firewood,  tooth  sticks,  gums  and  resins, 
traditional  medicines,  miraa  and  other  natural  products  and  handicrafts.  Their 
earning  can  range  from  200  KES  to  400  KES  per  day.  Coping  mechanism  include 
reliance  on  traditional  safety  nets  such  as  kalakshime  /dabare,  which  entail  cash 
transfer from better off members of the clan, national programmes and NGOs,  food 
packages  from  government’s  relief  efforts  during  droughts,  and  ‘merry  go  rounds’ 
(each person contributes a part of their daily/monthly earnings and each day/month 
a different person receives the sum collected.  
8. 
The  project  will  directly  target  10,500  ultra-poor  households  combining  the 
graduation approach with GALS (6000 directly and 4500 through GALS champions). 
Sixty per cent of these will be women-headed and 20 percent of these will include 
highly  vulnerable  persons  such  as  those  belonging  to  marginalized  tribes  (e.g. 
indigenous peoples), persons with disabilities, persons with HIV. 
9.  Market-oriented  Small-holder  Men  and  Women  Pastoralists  in  the  ASAL 
counties rely on livestock as their major source of income. They have herds with a 
mix  of  animals  including  sheep,  goat,  camels  and  donkeys.  There  are  regional 
variations but typically livestock owners with up to 50 small ruminants comprise this 
target  groups.  They  have  viable  herds  that  allow  them  to  derive  food  and  cash 
income from livestock even in absence of external support. They can access natural 
resources like pasture and water by migrating widely and this is fundamental to the 
continuation  of  their  livelihood.  Their  livelihoods  may  be  supported  by  receiving 
remittance  from  a  family  member.  The  constraints  they  face  include  limited 
productivity  of  animals,  lack  of  access  to  improved  breeds,  loss  of  pasturelands, 
limited access to water, limited access to veterinary services and medicines, limited 
access to markets and low prices for livestock and low demand for by-products such 
as  leather  or  wool.  Drought  and  conflict  in  the  northern  counties  have  caused 
significant losses for this group. Women in pastoralist households perform all the 
6 
household tasks. One of the most time-consuming tasks can be collection of water. 
They are also responsible for the care of livestock, especially small ruminants, when 
they are at the homestead. In addition to the constraints faced by men, women are 
limited by patriarchal norms, double burden of work and limited assets. Traditionally, 
women’s ownership of livestock, including small-ruminants was limited to caring for 
them while selling and buying was done mostly by men. However, this is changing, 
the trend of women selling livestock in the ASAL’s themselves is growing. There are 
women who own livestock herds inherited from their fathers in their own right, trade 
animals and are involved in the butchery business. Donor interventions have resulted 
in  a  mushrooming  of  women’s  groups  that  own  small  ruminants  collectively.  The 
small ruminants are bought when they are young and sold after 6 months. This has 
been a successful strategy for protecting assets in a highly patriarchal society that 
gives  men  authority  over  women’s  assets.  In  terms  of  nutrition,  malnutrition  and 
stunting  are  more  exacerbated  for  pastoralists  given  the  limited  variety  of  food 
available.  
10.  Market-oriented  Small-holder  Agro-pastoralist  men  and  women  farmers: 
The agro-pastoralist households have both land on which they cultivate crops and 
own some livestock. They can have up to 3 acres of land in the ASAL counties with 
smaller plots of up to 1 acre in the Western Counties. Their livelihood sources are 
more diversified with cultivation of crops, fodder, vegetables and livestock. They can 
have a small ruminants from 10 to 20, a few cattle as well as poultry up to around 
50 birds. They may also be engaged in honey production with anywhere from 5 to 
20 hives. Additional sources of income can come from trading, remittances and small 
businesses such as village shops, butcheries, cafes. They face similar constraints in 
livestock as the pastoralists. The constraints they face as small ruminant and poultry 
farmers includes limited productivity of animals, lack of access to improved breeds, 
limited access to quality feed, high cost of feed, limited access to veterinary services 
and  medicines,  limited  access  to  markets  and  low  prices  for  livestock  and  low 
demand  for  by-products  such  as  leather  or  wool.  The  challenges  for  bee-keepers 
include limited capital to invest in hives, limited knowledge of apiary management, 
lack  of  processing  equipment  to  improve  quality  of  honey  and  limited  access  to 
markets. Women are actively engaged in farming, livestock and marketing of some 
produce. Poultry constitutes the ‘women’s wallet’. The income from sale of eggs and 
poultry is considered to belong to women. Traditionally, women had a limited role in 
honey production although they were involved in selling honey in the local markets. 
Women’s  role  in  honey  production  is  also  changing  with  the  intervention  of 
development agencies.  
11.  Youth1:  Although  current  engagement  of  youth  in  the  livestock  sector  is  limited, 
young women and men are engaged at critical points in the livestock value chains. 
Some  of  the  more  common  activities  for  young  men  are  animal  walkers,  traders, 
boda-boda transporters of livestock, and manual labourers at markets. Some of the 
young  men  accumulate  capital  required  to  engage  in livestock  production  through 
these entry points. Young women are more visible as producers and sellers of honey 
and in groups that are formed around poultry and small-ruminants. The mission also 
met with some dynamic young men and women entrepreneurs who are innovating 
and establishing modernized agribusinesses in poultry and honey. The mission noted 
that youth are attracted to agri-businesses with quick returns. Youth also expressed 
a strong preference for working as individuals. They maintained that the formation 
of  youth  groups  had  been  driven  by  Government  financing  opportunities, 
1 The Constitution of Kenya (2010) Article 260 defines a youth as a person aged between 18 and 34 years 
7 
predominantly  funding  group-based  activities.  Young  men  and  women’s  ability  to 
engage in the livestock value chain is limited by their lack of capital, limited access 
to finance and limited knowledge of the opportunities for investment. KelCoP aims to 
increase the visibility of youth engaged in the livestock sector by recognizing their 
current  engagement,  aspirations  and  opportunities  in  the  development  of  County 
Livestock  Strategies,  helping  to  identify  opportunities  for  youth  engagement  and 
supporting them with business skills, entrepreneurial skills and matching grants to 
support them in production and marketing activities.  
12.  Young men and women will constitute 30% of total beneficiaries in the project. The 
project  will  target  33,000  young  women  and  men  as  smallholder  farmers, 
entrepreneurs, traders and transporters. 
2.4  Targeting approach 
13.  The project will use a variety of targeting mechanisms to implement the project in a 
manner  sensitive  to  the  needs  and  constraints  of  small-holder  women  and  men 
farmers,  as  well  as  youth  and  vulnerable  groups.  This  will  include  geographic 
targeting to identify areas where small-holder producers of selected value chains are 
located and where there is potential for developing the value chain. Direct targeting 
will  be  used  to  ensure  social  inclusion  of  women,  youth  and  vulnerable  groups 
(marginalized tribes (e.g. indigenous peoples), persons with disabilities, persons with 
HIV).  Close  attention  will  be  paid  to  procedural  matters  such  as  duration,  timings 
and location of training etc. to ensure that target groups self-select themselves for 
project activities.  
14.  The  targeting  approach  also  aims  to  ensure  geographic  concentration  of  project 
interventions in contiguous areas to increase the project’s impact, effectiveness, and 
efficiency. The project will put several measures in place to ensure that the risk of 
elite  capture  in  minimized.  This  will  be  achieved  through  close  supervision  and 
monitoring through mentors, beneficiary feedback and a grievance redress system. 
It is further assumed that the GALS approach which gives individuals and groups a 
strong sense of agency and empowerment will further help to mitigate against this 
risk.  The  project  will  address  the  strategic  interests  of  women,  youth  and 
marginalized tribes by promoting their visibility in the livestock strategies, ensuring 
the  inclusion  of  County  officials  responsible  for  women  and  youth  affairs  on  the 
steering  committees  and  through  GALS  fairs  which  will  bring  together  women 
farmers  and  entrepreneurs  engaged  in  the  selected  value  chains  promoting  their 
visibility  and  voice.  Peer  to  peer  learning  will  be  used  to  promote  learning,  best 
practice  and  innovations  and  provide  exposure  to  women  and  youth.  KeLCoP  will 
promote citizen engagement by building linkages between small-holder famers and 
County Livestock departments as well as ensuring that the voice and interests of the 
project’s target group is included in policy formulation. 
15.  Nutrition Sensitive Strategy: KeLCOP will adopt a nutrition sensitive approach and 
mainstream  nutrition  in  its  various  investments  starting  from  the  policy  level 
(Livestock  Master  Plan),  to  the  institutional  level  (county  Government),  the 
community level (groups formed by the project) and at the household level (GALS 
and mentoring approach). In terms of the investment area which KelCOP has chosen, 
namely  livestock,  there  is  considerable  evidence  which  shows  that production  of 
specific, nutrient-rich produce has more of an effect on improving diet quality than 
simply  emphasizing  overall  production  (Current  Developments  in  Nutrtion  CDN, 
2018). Livestock production has shown to be one asset strongly associated with an 
increased 
frequency  of  milk  and  dairy  consumption  among  children. 
Furthermore, the  KelCOP  approach  is  based  on  the  evidence  that achieving  a 
8 
sustainable  decrease  in  malnutrition  rates  requires  an  integrated  response  (WFP, 
2014).  The  project  is  designed  to  target  on  the  basis  of  nutritional  vulnerability,  it 
seeks  to  engage  women  and  include  interventions  to  protect  and  promote  their 
nutritional  status,  decision  making  and  overall  empowerment  and  incorporate 
nutritional behaviour change communication through the use of  GALS  tools at the 
group  level  and  at  the  household  level  for  the  ultra  -vulnerable  households, 
supported by GALS mentors trained in nutrition. The project has focused on the very 
vulnerable,  ultra-poor,  mostly  women  headed,  pastoralist  and  agro-pastoralist 
households  and  the  small-holder  men  and  women  commercially  orientated 
pastoralist  and  agro-pastoralist  households  being  organized  into  440  groups  for 
targeted  nutrition  support  as  these  are  the  individuals  and  households  who  are 
supported  by  mentors  who  will  be  interacting  with  them  over  a  period  of  time 
sufficient to support behavior change. 
16.  Gender Action Learning System: A stock take by IFAD of the use of the GALS and 
household mentoring approach (IFAD, 2019) shows that many projects are designed 
based  on  the  intuitive  promise  of  the  approach.  In  so  far  as  the  use  of  GALS  for 
women’s empowerment is concerned that in and of itself is a pathway for improved 
nutrition.  Research  on  the  subject  shows  strong  evidence  that  income  and  assets 
controlled by women are used differently than male-controlled income and show that 
female  income  and  asset  ownership  was  associated  with  a  significantly  higher 
probability of consumption of a much more varied diet and that women's involvement 
in  decision  making  was  positively,  significantly  related  to  better-quality  household 
diets (CDN, 2018). In addition, as GALS comprises a set of tools that can be easily 
adapted  for  multiple  purposes,  it  can  be  further  used  to  develop  vision  for  the 
households  nutrition,  analyse  current  challenges  and  identify  strategies  for 
overcoming them. The project is also providing support to the targeted households 
for developing and improving kitchen gardens. The GALS approach which empowers 
women  with  a  range  of  tools,  combined  with  the  intensive  visits  by  mentors who 
have  received  training  in  nutrition,  provides  the  requisite  support  needed  for 
behavior change over a period of time. This intervention is being supplemented by 
the strengthening of kitchen gardens and transfer of livestock assets for increased 
food availability and diversity As the use of GALS for nutrition is in its infancy, and 
evidence  is  not  yet  available  from  projects  that  are  using  it,  this  use  of  GALS  in 
combination with other pathways, can be considered an innovation and documented 
to  provide  evidence  for  future  projects.  The  project  will  target  38,500  households 
with nutrition messages, production support and mentoring. 
2.5  Social Inclusion Strategy 
17.  KeLCoP has a clear strategy for the inclusion of women, youth, ultra-poor households 
and highly vulnerable persons. Women comprise 53 percent of beneficiaries, youth 
comprise 30 percent and a minimum of 5% of beneficiaries will be from vulnerable 
groups (marginalized tribes (e.g. indigenous people), persons  with disabilities and 
persons  with  HIV).  Women’s  intrinsic,  instrumental  and  collective  agency2  will  be 
promoted  by  (i)  Developing  a  gender  sensitive  Livestock  master  plan  and  County 
livestock strategies reflecting the strategic interests of women and youth (ii) Use of 
GALS methodology to address gender issues including distribution of work, control 
over income, assets and GBV (iii) prioritization of ultra-poor women and inclusion of 
2 The Pro-WEIA defines indicators for intrinsic, instrumental and collective agency as follows: intrinsic agency - 
autonomy in income self-efficacy attitudes about intimate partner violence respect among household members; Instrumental 
agency - Input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets access to and decisions on financial services, 
control over use of income, work balance, visiting important locations; collective agency - group membership, membership in 
influential groups 
9 
vulnerable persons such as persons with disability, HIV and marginalized tribes for 
graduation packages (ii) affirmative action for women to access knowledge on animal 
husbandry  training,  business  skills  training,  entrepreneurship  training,  ICT4D 
through e-vouchers for inputs, e-extension and e-marketing platforms (iv) promotion 
of women’s leadership and collective agency through working with women’s groups 
and representation in decision-making bodies, coordination and steering committees 
created  by  the  project  (v)  exposure  through  peer  exchange  visits  (vi)  well-being 
through nutrition training. Similarly, there is a strong focus on providing youth with 
(i)  capacity  building  through  apprenticeship,  entrepreneurship  training,  business 
skills and formal courses in animal husbandry (ii) access to capital through grants 
and matching grants (iii) access to ICT through e-vouchers for inputs, e-extension 
platforms voice through representation on decision-making and coordination bodies 
such as multi-stakeholder forums and Project Committees. Marginalized tribes and 
vulnerable groups will benefit from the project interventions described above through 
quotas  and  delivery  mechanisms  sensitive  to  their  needs  and  aspirations.  The 
Livestock Master plan and County Livestock strategies will acknowledge the role of 
marginalized  communities  in  the  value  chains  and  make  special  provisions  to 
safeguard their interests and the project help them to capitalize on their traditional 
modes of production to capture niche markets.  
18.  The project has developed an indigenous peoples planning framework and plan. The 
framework  provides  guidance  on  how  the  FPIC  process  will  be  conducted  and 
indigenous peoples action plans developed in consultation and with the consent of 
the IPs and their leaders. The action plans will reveal the project interventions the 
IPs would wish to be engaged with and ways in which they would benefit from the 
project. The PMU should then embed these agreed actions into the project delivery 
mechanism  under  the  different  sub-components  under  component  1  and  2  as  is 
relevant.  To  the  best  extent  possible,  their  wishes  should  be  captured  within  the 
confines of the project budget and activities. 
Social Inclusion Strategy by Component 
Component 1: Climate-smart production enhancement for small livestock 
1.1 
Integrating Vulnerable HHs into Value Chains 
19.  Social Mobilization and Mentoring of Smallholder Farmers: The SMSP hired to 
do the social mobilization will have a proven track record in working with women, 
youth and marginalized tribes (such as indigenous peoples). The Regional Managers, 
Senior  Supervisors  and  Group  Mentors  hired  for  social  mobilization  will  be  50% 
women and 50% men. Only women will be recruited as graduation mentors as they 
will be working at the household level with women. The social mobilization staff will 
all  be  sensitized  to  gender  issues,  youth,  IPs,    and  nutrition  issues  through  their 
training  in  GALS  and  through  training  in  Nutrition.  The  socio-economic 
assessment  will  consult  women,  men,  youth  and  marginalized  tribes  (e.g.  IPs) 
during the assessment and identify the specific constraints of these socially excluded 
groups. The teams through which these assessments are conducted will include both 
women and men.  
20.  GALS will be a cornerstone of the work with the smallholder farmers both in groups 
and in ultra-poor households to empower women and men, improve relationships, 
help  households  harness  their  collective  potential,  negotiate  gender  equitable 
decision  making  and  workloads  and  improve  nutrition.  GALS  tools  will  be  used  to 
have smallholder farmers and processors map the value chain in ways which make 
10 
women  and  youth’s  engagement  visible  and  helps  groups  develop  a  common 
inclusive vision. The GALS practitioners selected as GALS champions to train other 
community persons will be 70 per cent women and 30 per cent men. Five percent of 
GALS  champions  as  well  as  the  recipients  of  GALS  training  will  be  persons  from 
marginalized  communities,  persons  with  disability  or  persons  with  HIV.  GALS  fairs 
will be held to provide women with an opportunity to travel and connect with other 
women across counties, dialogue with county officials and have opportunities to learn 
from each and develop a collective voice and vision. 
21.  Women’s  knowledge,  skills  and  access  to  ICT  will  be  promoted  through  business 
skills  training,  e-vouchers  and  access  to  e-extension  platforms.  Women  will 
receive 60 percent of the training in business skills and 60 percent of the support 
through  e-vouchers.  Thirty  percent  of  the  business  skills  training  will  be  given  to 
young  women  and  men.  In  addition,  young  women  and  men  will  be  selected  and 
trained as business coaches from the wards the project is implemented in. Business 
skills training will be delivered to the farmers groups through them. Five percent of 
the  recipients  of  business  skills  training  will  be  persons  from  marginalized 
communities, persons with disability or persons with HIV. 
22.  The women in ultra-poor households will be the focus of the intervention and seventy 
percent  of  these  households  will  be  women-headed.  At  least  5  percent  of  these 
households will be very vulnerable households of persons belonging to marginalized 
tribes, persons with HIV or households with persons with disabilities.  
23.  Grants made  available for 90  young persons who belong to households graduated 
out of poverty and sixty percent of these grants will be for women.  
1.2 Climate Resilient Production Systems  
24.  Young men and women will receive the opportunity to increase their knowledge and 
skills  about  breed  improvement  through  apprenticeships.  The  project  will  give 
women an opportunity to engage in a non-traditional activity. Twenty-five percent of 
apprenticeships will be reserved for women.  
1.2.1 Climate Resilient Production Systems 
25.  The  project  will  identify  opportunities  to  involve  youth  and  women  in  the  fodder 
business.  When  establishing  water  infrastructures,  the  project  will  prioritize  those 
infrastructures  which  can  also  increase  the  supply  of  water  for  household 
consumption.  The  possibility  of  clean  water  for  drinking  with  filtration  will  also  be 
explored  so  there  can  be  a  positive  impact  on  nutrition  and  women’s  workload  in 
collecting water.  
1.2.2 Animal Health Improvement 
26.  The Behaviour Change Communication Approach will be used to promote improved 
animal husbandry and management practices. The formative research will be based 
on  consultations  with  women,  men  youth  and  marginalized  tribes  to  capture  their 
knowledge,  practices,  preferences.  The  strategies  and  channels  used 
for 
communication will be tailored to the needs and preferences of women, men youth 
and marginalized tribes.  
1.2.3 E-Extension Services 
27.  Recognizing  that  the  capacity  of  the  County  Government’s  to  provide  extension 
services using the traditional visit approach is no longer feasible given the shrinking 
manpower  and  operational  budgets  of  County  Governments,  the  project  will 
therefore  implement  an  ICT  based  approach  to  extension  services  by  using  e-
11 
extension based models that are appropriate for the needs and literacy levels of its 
participants.  The  project  will  procure  e-extension  services  on  a  competitive  basis 
from  the  range  of  service  providers  available  in  the  country.  Nutrition  awareness 
messages  and  importance  of  dietary  diversity  and  the  dietary  practices  during 
pregnancy, weaning and early child development will also be integrated into the e-
extension  messages.  In  addition,  the  service  provider  will  develop  modules  which 
allow  farmers  to  access  expert  veterinary  advice  on  call  for  the  diagnosis  and 
treatment of ailments for which local expertise may not be immediately available. 
Customer willingness to pay for the services will be assessed by the service provider 
to enable the establishment of a  sustainable model of e-extension. The ESMF and 
ESMP identify risks such as e-waste disposal, that are associated with the use of ICT. 
The PMCU should ensure that these risks are mitigated during implementation. 
Component 2: Support to Livestock Market Development 
2.1 
Market Infrastructure and Capacity Development 
28.  Upgrading  Market  Infrastructure  The  upgrading  of  the  market  infrastructure 
involves  making  the  markets  more  women  friendly  by  providing  toilets,  seating 
arrangements  and  designated  stalls  inside  the  market,  including  construction  of 
appropriate shelter for vendors of cooked food, raw fruits and raw vegetables who 
are  mostly  women.  There  will  also  be  a  special  effort  made  to  include  improved 
infrastructure  for  poultry  which  is  a  value  chain  women  are  very  active  in.  Where 
poultry  is  traded  in  the  market  or  in  a  nearby  market  that  does  not  include 
ruminants—the project will consider that part of the livestock market and implement 
improvements. One of the criteria that a county government must agree to before 
the project funds market infrastructure is that “special provisions will be made in the 
design  to  encourage  women  producers  and  traders  to  come  to  the  markets  by 
building designated stalls, seating arrangements and toilets for them” 
29.  Capacity  Building  Support  to  Livestock  Marketing  Associations  (LMAs)  & 
County Governments: Under this component, the project will work with 20 LMAs 
and the Kenya Livestock Marketing Council to strengthen the capacity of LMAs and 
ensure that they operating an economically sustainable model which is gender and 
youth sensitive. Training will focus on awareness of KEBS Livestock Market Standards 
and best practices for organization and management of livestock markets will include 
sensitization to needs and priorities of women and youth. Similar training will also 
be made available to County Government officials. 
2.2 
Building Inclusive Value Chains 
30.  Matching  Grants for  Smallholder  Commercial  Producers:  Seventy  percent  of 
these  300  matching  grants  have  been  reserved  for  women  and  thirty  percent  for 
youth, given that both have limited access to capital for investing in their business. 
Five percent of these loans will be for persons from marginalized tribes, persons with 
disability and persons with HIV. 
31.  Training, Peer to Peer Exchange And Exposure Visits: The project will provide 
opportunities  for  training,  peer-to-peer  learning  and  exposure  visits  to  those 
participating  in  the  selected  value  chains.  Sixty  percent  of  these  visits  will  be  for 
women and thirty percent for youth. The project will be sensitive to the specific needs 
for women, ensuring safe places to stay, safe transport and allowing them to travel 
with a child if they need to. 
32.  Training  for  Young  Entrepreneurs:  There  are  many  young  men  and  women  in 
the livestock sector who operate at the fringes of the value chains selected due to 
12 
lack  of  opportunities,  skills  and  capital.  The  project  will  provide  them  with 
opportunities to build their skills and knowledge. Fifty percent of these entrepreneurs 
will be women.  
33.  County  Level  Multi-Stakeholder  Platforms:  The  project  will  ensure  the 
representation  of  women  and  youth  in  the  multi-stakeholder  platforms  created  at 
project level so that they have visibility, voice and exposure to multiple actors in the 
value chain.  
34.  Grants  to  Youth  Innovative  Start-ups:  There  is  an  impressive  array  of  young 
men  and  women  in  the  project  counties  engaged  in  the  selected  value  chains  as 
entrepreneurs linked to a large number of smallholders and providing them with key 
inputs to grow their poultry, apiary, dairy and meat businesses as well as purchase 
their produce in open arrangements or under contractual agreements. These young 
people  are  constrained  by  lack  of  capital  and  access  to  finance.  The  project  has 
therefore  given  these  grants  exclusively  to  the  youth  with  a  50  percent  quota  for 
young women. 
35.  Crowd  Funding:  The  project  will  select  young  men  and  women  who  might  need 
additional financing support through philanthropic crowd-funding opportunities. The 
project will carefully screen and select around 50 profiles of young men and women 
who  are  credible  entrepreneurs  from  among  its  beneficiaries  and  develop  their 
profiles and detail their specific business venture and their opportunities for growth. 
Fifty per cent of these youth will be women and 10% will be from marginalized tribes, 
persons with disability and/or persons with HIV. 
36.  E-marketing: The use of ICT itself encourages the inclusion of youth. In addition, 
through its social mobilization, behavior change campaign and mobilized groups and 
households,  the  project  will  ensure  that  women  are  informed  of  e-marketing 
platforms and encouraged to use them. 
37.  The  ESMF  has  idenitified  social  risks  that  are  likely  to  be  witnessed  in  the  project 
areas.  These  risks  include  among  others  GBV,  FGM,  child  labour,  early  marriages, 
resource  use  conflicts,  including  community  health  issues  such  as  the  COVID  19 
pandemic etc. The project through component 1 offers some remedy for GBV through 
the GALS approach. There is need for the mitigation measures proposed in the ESMP 
to  be  addressed  as  and  when  they  arise,  reported  or  observed  during 
implementation. COVID 19 will be addressed in the project sites by working jointly 
with  county  teams  and  relevant  stakeholders  to  create  awareness  on  social 
distancing, handwashing, mask  wearing and following government guidelines. The 
social  inclusion  specialist  and  the  environment,  climate  and  safeguards  officer, 
working closely with the relevant county based departments would be charged with 
addressing  these  concerns  and  ensuring  safeguards  are  put  in  place  and  that  the 
responsible agencies are kept informed at all times. 
Component 3: Project Management 
3.1 
Policy and Institutional Support to National Government: 
38. 
In the Livestock Master Plan and the County level Livestock Strategies, the project 
will  facilitate  the  National  Governments  and  the  County  Governments  to  develop 
inclusive livestock strategies.  
39.  Smallholder  pastoralist  and  agro-pastoralist  farmers,  rural  women,  youth  and 
marginalized  traditional  tribes  strategic  interests  will  be  addressed  by  promoting 
their  visibility  through  recognizing  the  critical  role  that  they  play  in  the  livestock 
13 
sector  and  their  involvement  at  different  stages  of  the  livestock  value  chain  as 
producers,  traders,  butchers,  processors  etc.  The  livestock  Master  Plan  and 
strategies  will  also  identify  the  main  constraints  faced  by  them  in  accessing, 
controlling  and  managing  livestock  while  highlighting  the  additional  and  specific 
challenges faced by women and  specific strategies to address challenges faced by 
women. The Master Plan and strategies will also identify the role of young women 
and men in the livestock value-chain, their specific constraints and opportunities as 
well  as  strategies  for  their  meaningful  involvement.  As  roles  vary  in  different 
livestock  sub-sectors  by  region,  county,  and  community,  reflecting  different 
economic,  social  and  cultural  contexts  and  are  also  influenced  by  the  particular 
dynamics that characterize specific livestock sub-sectors, the county strategies will 
capture the county and value-chain specific roles played by men, women and youth 
smallholder farmers and stakeholders.  
40.  The project will also facilitate the recognition of the role played by marginalized tribes 
who  have  their  own  traditional  ways  of  managing  livestock.  Strategies  will  be 
identified to facilitate their engagement in the value chain in a way that values their 
traditional practices and capitalizes on these to capture market opportunities. There 
will  be  particular  care  taken  to  develop  a  certification  regime  for  indigenous 
producers  that  protects  their  traditional  practices  while  helping  them  to  secure  a 
market niche.  
41.  The  terms  of  reference  for  the  service  providers  involved  in  assisting  policy 
development will include the following: 
  Service provider must demonstrate expertise in mainstreaming gender, youth and 
marginalized tribes in policies.  
  Service provider will be responsible for ensuring the visibility of women, youth 
(young women and men) and marginalized tribes in the strategies, identifying 
their specific interests, constraints and opportunities and including strategies to 
address them. 
3.2 
Project Management and Coordination Unit Support 
(i)  Staff 
42.  The  PMCU  will  recruit  a  minimum  of  30  percent  women  in  its  staff.  It  will  have  a 
Social  Inclusion  Specialist  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of  the  social  inclusion 
strategy  and  to  address  social  safeguards  associated  with  the  project.  The 
responsibility of mainstreaming the social inclusion strategy will be incorporated into 
the TOR of staff, service providers and consultants recruited for the project.  
(ii) Start-up Workshop 
43.  The  start-up  workshop  will  include  a  session  on  detailing  the  rationale  for  social 
inclusion,  strategies  per  component  and  the  role  of  participating  stakeholders  in 
implementing the strategy and achieving targets.  
(iii) Monitoring & Evaluation 
44.  The baseline and completion survey for the project will incorporate the Pro- Women’s 
Empowerment in Agriculture  Index Assessment (Pro-WEIA)3 assessment. The Pro-
WEIA indicator to be finalized by the Environment, Climate Change and Gender (ECG) 
3 The Pro-WEIA assessment has been piloted and is in the final stages of finalization. It defines indicators for intrinsic, 
instrumental and collective agency as follows: intrinsic agency - autonomy in income self-efficacy attitudes about intimate 
partner violence respect among household members; Instrumental agency - Input in productive decisions, ownership of land 
and other assets access to and decisions on financial services, control over use of income, work balance, visiting important 
locations; collective agency - group membership, membership in influential groups.  
14 
department  in  IFAD  has  been  included  as  an  impact  and  output  indicator  in  the 
logframe. The following indicators have been incorporated into the logframe: access 
to productive capital, access to financial services and group membership. The project 
will  collect  gender  and  youth  disaggregated  data  against  all  its  indicators.  The 
progress reports submitted by service providers will highlight the targets achieved, 
lessons learnt and strategies for course correction regarding the projects targeting 
strategy.  
3  Project Description 
3.1  Project Duration 
45.  The project will be implemented over a six-year period with a total implementation 
duration of 72 months from start to completion. 
3.2  The Components and activities of KeLCoP 
46.  The  IFAD  supported  project  will  have  three  inter-related  components.  The  first 
component will target the production level, the second will support participation of 
smallholders  in  the  value  chain.  The  third  component  will  ensure  project 
coordination,  implementation  support,  the  improvement  of  the  institutional  and 
policy  environment  and  finance  monitoring  and  evaluation  aspects  of  the  project. 
The structure by component, sub-component and activity is as follows 
3.3  Project structure 
Component 1: Climate-smart production enhancement for small livestock 
Sub component 1.1: Integrating Vulnerable HHs into Value Chains 
Activity 1.1.1: Identification and Mentoring of Households 
Activity 1.1.2: Technical Training in Gender Action Learning System 
Activity 1.1.3: Gender Sensitive Value Chain Maps 
Activity 1.1.4: Asset Transfer (poultry unit, goat package, hives) 
Activity 1.1.5: Procurement and Transport costs 
Activity 1.1.6: Improved technical and business skills 
Activity 1.1.7: Short-Term Technical Specialists (nutrition messages, prototype 
poultry housing, branding and labelling, etc.) 
Activity 1.1.8: E-finance voucher support 
Activity 1.1.9: E-Extension System 
Social Mobilization and Graduation of Smallholder Farmers and Vulnerable 
Households: 
47.  This component will be implemented by using the expertise of one or more than 
one service providers (SMSPs) for social mobilization and mentoring of groups and 
ultra-poor households contracted by the PMCU. It focuses on graduating ultra-poor 
households  out  of  poverty  through  an  approach  which  integrates  a  household 
methodology,  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS),  with  the  Graduation 
Approach4  as  well  as  building  the  capacity  of  market-oriented  women  and  men 
small-holder  farmers  to  increase  their  productivity,  profitability  and  well-being 
through offering them training in GALS, animal husbandry management, business 
skills,  nutrition  education  and  positioning  them  to  benefit  from  other  project 
interventions.  1.  Socio-Economic  Assessment  and  Selection  of 
Area/Households 
4 CGAP (2014), From Extreme Poverty to Sustainable Livelihoods: A Technical Guide to the Graduation Approach 
15 
48.  Socio-economic  Assessment:  In  each  County,  the  SMSP  in  close  consultation 
with  the  County  Government  will  use  the  following  criteria  to  identify  the  two  to 
four  wards  and  potential  villages  that  will  constitute  the  focal  area  of  project 
implementation.  A  rapid  socio-economic  assessment  of  these  wards  will  be 
conducted  by  the  service  provider  which  will  include  identifying  the  number  of 
villages,  population,  socio-economic  conditions  of  the  target  group,  registered 
women  and  youth  groups,  specific  constraints  of  women,  men  and  youth 
smallholders  with  regard  to  the  selected  value  chain,  existing  markets.  The 
assessment will identify the role of women and youth in the selected livestock value 
chain,  identifying  opportunities  and  constraints  in  for  their  engagement  with 
production, processing and marketing as well as any other factors that will affect 
their participation in the project .A report on the Socio-Economic Assessment will 
be  submitted  to  the  PMCU  to  finalize  the  selection  of  the  target  area  within  the 
county  and  inform  its  strategies  for  implementation  in  each  county.  The  socio-
economic assessment will also include the socio-economic assessment that will be 
done  during  the  FPIC  to  inform  on  issues  affecting  IPs  and  intervention  areas, 
including the integration of the IP action plans into the social inclusion strategy. The 
FPIC  will  be  undertaken  once  COVID  10  movement  restictions  are  lifted  by 
government. 
49.  Village Orientations ( Year 2) The SMSP will deliver orientation sessions at Village 
meetings (barazas) to inform the smallholder farmers about KelCoP. The objectives, 
activities and criteria for participation will be shared with potential beneficiaries. 
50. 
 Participatory Rural Appraisal: The SMSP will hold meetings in identified villages 
to introduce the project and conduct a PRA participatory rural appraisal to identify 
the Ultra-poor households and the market-oriented small-holder farmers who would 
like to participate in the project.  
51.  Selection of Ultra-poor households & Smallholder Farmers: The Ultra-poor 
household  will  be  identified  on  the  basis  of  a  wealth  ranking  exercise  involving 
women and men from the targeted community after the project has presented its 
objectives  and  targeting  criteria.  The  smallholder  farmers  involved  in  the  value 
chain selected for the County and interested in participating in the project will be 
selected.  The  selection  of  ultra-poor  households  will  be  finalized  after  household 
visits to validate community selection.  
Selection Criteria 
a.  The Ultra-poor households will be selected based on criteria specified by the 
project as well as criteria that emerges during PRA with communities thus 
capturing area-specific dimensions of vulnerability. The direct beneficiaries of the 
graduation packages will be women 30 per cent of them young women (18 -34 
years). The project criteria for include the following: 
  women-headed 
  asset-poor 
  persons with disabilities in the household 
  persons with HIV in the household Indigenous peoples 
b.  Small-holder women, men and youth farmers will be organized into producer 
groups by the SMSP through Group Mentors. The following criteria for inclusion 
will be used  
16 
Market Oriented Small-ruminant Smallholders 
  Pastoralists (men and women) – with up to 50 small ruminants 
  Agro-pastoralists – with up to 25 small ruminants 
  A minimum of 50% of the smallholders will be women and 30% 
youth and women – exceeding this target will be seen as an 
achievement 
  At least 10% of the overall target should be indigenous peoples 
Market-oriented Poultry Smallholders 
  Agro-pastoralists – Up to 150 – 200 birds 
  A minimum of 50% of the smallholders will be women and 30% 
youth and women – exceeding this target will be seen as an 
achievement 
  Atleast 10% of the overall target should be indigenous people 
Market-oriented Bee-keepers 
  Up to 20-40 beehives 
  A minimum of 50% of the smallholders will be women and 30% youth 
and women – exceeding this target will be seen as an achievement 
  Atleast 10% of the overall target should be indigenous peoples 
2. Mobilization and Mentoring of Small-holder Market Oriented Farmers 
2.2 Formation of Market-Oriented Smallholder Farmer Groups 
52.  Formation  of  new  group:  The  objectives  of  forming  inclusive  groups,  with  a 
minimum  of  50%  women,  30%  youth  and  smallholder  farmers  focussed  on  the 
selected value chain makes it likely that the project will have to form new groups 
and facilitate their registration. All women groups can also be formed  as long as 
young women are also included. The leadership of women in mixed groups should 
be encouraged and facilitated. 
53.  The project will make a concerted  effort to include communities benefitting from 
water infrastructures so they too can benefit holistically from the range of project 
interventions. 
54.  Existing groups can be used as an entry point but only if they fulfil the following 
criteria  (i)  good  governance  principles  are  being  followed  and  there  is  no  elite 
capture  (ii)  project’s  social  inclusion  criteria  are  being  met  (iii)  majority  of 
smallholders are engaged in the specified value chain.  
2.3 Mentoring & Capacity Building of Smallholder Farmer Groups 
55.  The  SMSP  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  the  delivery  of  capacity  building  and 
mentoring  the  groups.  In  delivering  training  or  any  other  service  to  the  groups, 
particular  attention  will  be  paid  to  training  modalities  as  these  can  pose  barriers 
especially for women and the poor. The modalities of delivery of training in terms 
of timing, duration and selection of days will be determined through consultation 
with the small-holder farmers. Childcare will be provided for women and /or women 
will be allowed to bring their children to the training as the lack of such facilities 
can  pose  barriers  for  the  participation  of  some  women.  Care  will  be  taken  when 
engaging  indigenous  peoples,  to  ensure  the  engagement  aligns  with  their  action 
plans and that they have consented to the proposed activities. 
56.  Orientation for Market-oriented Small-holder Farmers  Groups  and  Action 
Plan: Group mentors will provide smallholder farmers who have elected to be in 
17 
groups an in-depth orientation on project activities. In consultation with the group, 
an action plan for the capacity building activities including GALS, Business Skills, 
Training in Animal Husbandry and Nutrition Education for the group will be jointly 
planned and scheduled over a two-year period.  
57.  GALS  training  (8  days):  This  will  be  a  mandatory  first  step  after  project 
orientation. The Group Mentors will introduce GALS basic and advanced tools to the 
men and women to develop individual and group visions, action-plans and integrate 
gender justice into the value-chain and raise awareness on Nutrition Education and 
Climate Adaptation. The GALS tools that will be used are detailed in the section on 
GALS training. The delivery of the training in terms of days, duration and timings 
will be determined in consultation with women and men smallholder farmers. It will 
be ensured that there are no procedural barriers for women and youth in benefitting 
from the training.  
58.  Nutrition  Training  &  Mentoring:  The  Group  and  Graduation  Mentors  in  each 
county will receive a TOT organized by the SMSP in collaboration with the County 
Nutrition Officer and will disseminate the training to the ultra-poor households and 
the group mentors. The training on nutrition is likely to include the following topics: 
(IYCN,  WASH,  dietary  intake,  mother’s  nutrition,  food  safety,  preservation 
importance of good nutrition) In addition, food demonstrations will be held in each 
county. In addition, households will also be provide with mentoring in nutrition to 
influence behaviour and homestead production support to improve dietary diversity. 
59.  Business Skills Training (5 days): This will be delivered to the groups through 
young  women  and  men  in  the  community  who  will  be  trained  and  paid  by  the 
project The scope of the business skills training will focus on  
(a)  Financial literacy 
(b)  Savings 
(c)  Farming as a household business, including record keeping and climate 
resilience considerations (similarly for other non-farm household 
enterprises); 
(d)  The changing climate and how to factor it in to your business decisions; 
(e)  Group management and governance for business purposes; 
(f)  Commercialization, marketing and negotiation – becoming a reliable 
player in the market. 
60.  Training  in  Animal  Husbandry:  The  packages  developed  using  the  Behaviour 
Change  Communication  Approach  (BCC)  approach  will  be  delivered  at  the  group 
level by the Group Mentors. Mentors will also inform members about other channels 
through which information may be available. (More details in section on Behaviour 
Change Communication) 
2.4 Mentoring 
61.  The  Group  Mentors  will  visit  the  groups  on  a  monthly  basis.  The  mentoring  will 
involve the use of self-diagnostic and self-improvements tools including GALS tools 
,  so  each  group  can  “own”  its  development  process  and  regularly  benchmark  its 
strengths and weakness against objective measures. Mentoring is expected to be 
provided for approximately 4 years for newly mobilized groups, on a reducing basis. 
For more mature groups, approximately 2-3 years  of mentoring is anticipated to 
support commercialization. The mentors will be responsible for facilitating access 
to  the  project  interventions  intended  for  beneficiaries  including  access  to  e-
voucher,  e-  extension  platforms,  improved  breeds,  water  and  market 
infrastructure as well as linkages with markets. The mentors will also monitor 
18 
group dynamics, governance and progress in meeting milestones of individual and 
group  action  plans  as  well  as  reinforce  nutrition  messages.  The  mentors  will  be 
responsible for alerting the their Supervisors if there is any risk of elite capture or 
any  other  challenge  in  group  dynamics  that  they  may  not  be  able  to  address 
themselves.  
3. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households  
62.  The objective of this sub-component is to graduate 4000 households out of poverty, 
through their engagement in the three selected value chains. These households will 
be  mobilized  and  mentored  through  the  Graduation  Mentors.  The  Graduation 
mentors will be trained in the Gender Action Learning System, Business Coaching, 
Nutrition Education through TOTs. They will then use their knowledge to build the 
capacity of the households . They will also be in charge of informing the households 
about opportunities available through the project.  
63. 
In addition to refining the selection criteria, the SMSP will also define the criteria 
for  graduation,  specifying  verifiable  indicators  for  women’s  empowerment, 
nutrition,  improved  livelihoods  and  impact  on  gender  relations.  These  can  vary 
according  to  counties.  and  include  indicators  such  as  (i)  number  of  meals  (ii) 
percentage increase in income, diversification of income sources, achievement of a 
specified yearly income (iii) increase in women’s decision-making. 
The households will be provided with the following:  
(i) 
Consumption support: This will be given in the form of a small cash stipend 
for the first 3-4 months to ease the pressure on the household. 
(ii) 
Health insurance/ Linkages to healthcare providers: where possible 
19 
households will be protected from health shocks through health insurance. 
(iii)  Gender Action Learning System: Graduation mentors will train women and 
other household mentors in GALS over a period of time to help them develop 
self-confidence, well-being, a common vision for the well-being of the 
household, improved relationships, and equitable workloads informed by the 
principles of gender justice. 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Nutrition Training & Behaviour Change Support: Graduation mentors will have 
received training in nutrition from the Nutrition County Officer. They will help 
women and other members of the household set nutrition goals, analyse their 
specific challenges and develop strategies to meet their goals. These 
Graduation mentors will be linked to the Nutrition County Officers and will be 
able to link these households to any relevant nutrition initiative and draw on 
resources/knowledge needed to support the household 
Business Training: Graduation Mentors will have received training in 
coaching on business skills and will provide basic financial literacy and 
business management training to women in modules during home visits. 
Transfer of Livestock or other livestock value chain related asset: 
Graduation mentors will help women identify livelihood opportunities based on 
the market opportunities identified by the SMSP. These will be livestock 
related economic activities. This could involve rearing small-ruminants, 
poultry or bees, trading livestock, setting up a small butchery etc. in case of 
livestock, the asset package should include support in building appropriate 
housing, initial starter packs with inputs, including feed, disinfectants; feed 
troughs; drinkers, vaccinations etc.  
(vii)  Access to training and/or provision through mentor to training in skill 
required to care for asset: Graduation mentors will help to identify the kind 
of preparation and training needed for the household to care for livestock or 
other planned activity. The mentors will ensure that the women of 
participating households can access training made available for livestock 
rearing by the project or through another source. The mentors will also 
provide information about reliable sources for assistance and services (e.g., a 
veterinarian, feed suppliers etc). 
(viii)  Kitchen gardens & Homestead production: Mentors will support women in 
(ix) 
(x) 
establishing or improving kitchen gardens for improved nutrition with advice 
from Ward Agriculture Officers. Some seed and implements may also be 
provided.  
Savings will be encouraged once consumption stabilizes. This must be done 
using a modality which ensures the safety of the savings and gives women 
control over their saving. 
On-going mentoring support with weekly visits reduced over time to one 
every two weeks. Mentors will support the household through advice on 
nutrition, business planning, money management, health and disease 
prevention services. They will also support women in implementing their 
vision for gender equitable relationships, improved livelihoods and improved 
nutrition through GALS. 
4. Improved Community Nutrition and Practices 
64.  The objective of this intervention is to improve community nutrition practices and 
household  food  security  through  raising  awareness  on  nutrition  and  promoting 
informed choices. The training in nutrition will be complemented by reflection on 
nutrition issues through GALS.  In the  communities for which access to water for 
livestock  is  being  increased  through  water  infrastructures,  where  possible, 
increased water for household consumption will also be made available to increase  
20 
65.  Nutrition  Training:  The  nutrition  training  will  be  customized  to  address  the 
county-  specific  challenges  for  nutrition  and  capitalize  on  any  existing  nutrition 
initiatives  in  the  county.  The  training  will  be  developed  by  the  County  Nutrition 
Officers  who  will  inform  the  design  with  their  knowledge  of  the  current  nutrition 
initiatives, local customs and challenges in the county. The project will support them 
to  design  and  deliver  a  TOT.  The  Group  and  Graduation  Mentors  and  their 
Supervisors in each county will receive a TOT in Nutrition and will disseminate the 
training to the ultra-poor households (4000) and the smallholder famer groups (440 
groups) . The training on nutrition is likely to include the following topics: WASH, 
mothers nutrition, food safety, preservation importance of good  nutrition, recipes 
for cooking food with locally available ingredients). The training should include food 
demonstrations.  During  the  demonstration,  the  steps  for  cooking  and  nutritional 
messages will be explained with participants able to see the tasks that are being 
performed.  Once  the  different  dishes  have  been  prepared,  participants  will  taste 
the  cooked  food  and  evaluate  the  taste,  appearance,  smell  and  acceptability. 
Recipes  can  be  modified  and  refined  in  line  with  community  and  household 
capacities and needs. Graduation mentors can enlist the support of County Nutrition 
Officers in organizing these events. 
5. GALS Training 
GALS (Gender Action Learning System) is a community-led empowerment 
66.  methodology that uses principles of inclusion to improve income, food and nutrition 
security of vulnerable people in a gender-equitable way. It positions poor women 
and men as drivers of their own development rather than victims, identifying and 
dismantling  obstacles  in  their  environment,  challenging  service  providers  and 
private actors. It has proven to be effective for changing gender inequalities that 
have  existed  for  generations,  strengthening  negotiation  power  of  marginalized 
stakeholders and promoting collaboration, equity and respect between value chain 
actors.5  
67.  The  project  will  use  GALS  to  increase  the  intrinsic,  instrumental  and  collective 
agency of project beneficiaries recognizing that gender justice is critical to positive 
economic, social and nutritional outcomes. GALS will assist ultra-poor households, 
smallholder women and men farmers and young women and men to engage in the 
value chains more effectively. Some of the key issues that will be addressed include: 
  Development of individual, household and group vision to achieve greater 
productivity, profit and nutritional well-being 
  Visibility of women and youth’s engagement in the value chains and potential  
  value chains 
  women’s and youth’s meaningful representation in group leadership and 
decision 
  making 
  Women’s and youth’s access to and control over resources and 
 
benefits/expenditure 
joint decision making of group and household resources and opportunities at 
all levels 
  of value chain- planning, production, harvesting, marketing and investment 
of profits 
  understanding of requirements for nutritious diets for children and adults and 
5 Oxfam Novib (2014), GENDER ACTION LEARNING SYSTEM PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR TRANSFORMING GENDER AND UNEQUAL 
POWER RELATIONS IN VALUE CHAINS 
21 
innovative uses of oilseeds in the diet 
 
  equitable workload distribution and use of labour-saving technologies to 
reduce women’s drudgery 
  gender-based violence and other social risks identified in the ESMF 
68. 
The project will train 120 Group and Graduation mentors who will in turn train 4000 
ultra-poor households and 11,000 smallholder farmers in each county. The project 
will also train 
  A team of consultants or service provider will use GALS manuals adapted to include 
Nutrition and Climate Change Adaptation for KelCoP6. These can be further adapted 
for  the  Kenyan  context  if  necessary.  They  will  supervise  the  staff  and  the  GALS 
champions they train in the field to ensure that quality training is taking place. Field 
visits  will  be  undertaken  with  the  Supervisors  of  the  mentors  to  enable  them  to 
continue supervision. They will also be responsible for specifying the monitoring, 
evaluation and documentation system to be adopted by the Project for GALS. This 
will include developing simple formats for groups and households to document their 
progress in a standard format in their record books and for group and graduation 
mentors  In  addition,  NOSP  will  set  up  periodic  follow  ups  by  mentors  and  field 
supervisors to check on the status of both groups and ultra-poor households. They 
will  also  implement  and  design  a  short  survey  in  consultation  with  the  Social 
Inclusion Specialist and M&E Specialist to help the mentors and field supervisors 
capture information on uptake of the methodology. 
  TOT workshops (5 days) on Basic GALS Tools will be organized in each county to 
train Graduation mentors, Group mentors, Supervisors and Regional Managers in 
basic tools for GALS: These include but may not be limited to Vision Road Journey, 
Gender balance tree, Challenge Action Tree and Social Empowerment Maps. 
  The  Group  and  Graduation  Mentors  will  introduce  these  tools  to  all  groups  and 
households  they  are  working  with.  The  Graduation  Mentors  will  introduce  these 
tools  to  households  and  the  Group  Mentors  will  train  the  smallholder  farmers  in 
groups.  This  will  initiate  an  approximately  6-months  process  of  individual, 
household  and  collective  action  learning  for  gender  equality  and  livelihoods 
improvement, and setting up skills and structures for peer learning. 
  The  consultants  /  service  provider  for  GALS  will  supervise  the  mentors  through 
onsite visits with supervisors during this 6 month period. 
  After 6 months, the second TOT will focus on the Advanced Tools will be held for 
Group  and  Graduation  Mentors.  This  TOT  will  focus  on  preliminary  scoping  and 
mapping  of  gender  and  power  issues  in  value  chains,  strengthening  negotiation 
power  and  negotiating  win-win  strategies  in  value  chains  and  managing  and 
monitoring  impact,  to  promote  a  sustainable  action  learning  process.  Under  this 
phase  each  workshop  takes  5  days  the  tools  used  include  Vision  achievement 
Journey, Diamonds, Multilane highway, Trees, maps etc.  
  After a year, individuals (women, men and youth) who have used the training to 
transform their lives will be identified for further training as  GALS Champions. A 
TOT  held  in  each  county  to  train  30  Champions  in  each  county.  They  will  be 
supported  with  supervision  in  the  field  by  the  technical  service  provider  and  the 
Social Mobilization service providers. 
6 GALS manuals mainstreaming nutrtion, climate change and focusing on Value Chains have been developed by several 
projects and organizations. The manuals developed by PRELNOR project Uganda, Oxfam Novib on Value Chains may be 
particularly useful. The ECG division at IFAD can further facilitate access to other valuable resources. 
22 
  The GALS champions will be tasked with training 30 women, men and youth each 
and  will  be  paid  a  stipend  of  USD  $100  for  each  group  of  10  participants  they 
successfully introduce to the basic GALS tool. After they have completed training 
30 participants, they will be certified as GALS Champions.  
  The  consultants  /  service  provider  will  facilitate  in  collaboration  with  PMCU  and 
County  staff,  GALS  fairs.  There  will  be  five  GALS  fairs.  Each  GALS  fair  will  bring 
together  women  from  2  counties.  They  will  share  their  visions,  challenges  and 
successes in transforming their lives. Together they will build a vision of women’s 
engagement  in  the  three  value  chains.  County  Officials  will  be  invited  to  these 
events to engage in a dialogue with these women. There will be an opportunity to 
celebrate with songs and dances created by the women. A minimum of 200 women 
will participate in each fair with representation of ultra-poor households (30%) and 
young women (30%).  
6. Business Skills Training 
69.  The  SMSP  will  contract  in  experienced  business  coaches  to  provide  4  Training  of 
Trainers  courses  for  a  maximum  of  8  young  women  and  men  from  each  county, 
belonging  to  the  wards  the  project  is  being  implemented.  The  young  men  and 
women  will  be  recruited  against  specified  criteria  to  ensure  these  young  people 
have the required education and aptitude to be successful mentors. As residents in 
their  community,  these  skills  will  remain  after  the  project  and  continue  to  be 
available to support their peers in the future in preparing investment plans, loan 
applications or joint negotiations with new buyers and so enabling easy replication 
and  scaling-up  of  successful  models.  The  business  skills  training  will  include  the 
following: 
a.  Financial literacy 
b.  Savings 
c.  Farming as a household business, including record keeping and climate 
resilience considerations (similarly for other non-farm household 
enterprises); 
d.  The changing climate and how to factor it in to your business decisions; 
e.  Group management and governance for business purposes; 
f.  Commercialization, marketing and negotiation – becoming a reliable player 
in the market. 
70.  The SMSP will organize 4 TOTs for Graduation Mentors (10 from each county). The 
Graduation mentors will train the 4000 ultra-poor households in financial literacy, 
money and business management.  
71.  Matching Grants: Among the vulnerable poor households, 90 will be selected, 
after two years of mentoring support and tracking, and provided with matching grants 
of up to USD 10,000 each. This support will also be available to women (70 per cent ) 
and young (30 per cent) producers as well as persons living with disabilities (PWDs). The 
producers contact with commercial banks will be facilitated to enable them to access 
commercial credit. 
Sub component 1.2: Climate resilient production systems 
Breed improvement 
Activity 1.2.1: Strengthening County Breed Multiplication Centres (infrastructure, 
equipment and improved breeds and technical assistance 
Activity 1.2.2: Community Breed Improvement Programme  
23 
 
 
 
Training to outreach/elite breeders farmers by Technical Staff 
Improved Breeds (small ruminants for meat and dairy) 
Apprenticeship for young men and women breeders 
1.2.1: Strengthening County Breed Multiplication Centres 
72.  The breed improvement programme will be placed under the direct supervision of 
the  Production  Lead  Specialist  at  the  PMCU,  and  closely  with  the  Procurement 
Specialists/ Procurement Assistant and other officers based at the county, such as 
(i) the Livestock Production Officers/Directors of Livestock Production (at the county 
department of livestock production); and (ii) the Breeding technicians based at the 
Breed  multiplication  centers  In  this  sub-component,  the  project  will  address  the 
needs  of  small  ruminants  and  poultry  producers.  The  environment,  climate  and 
safeguards officer will support the team in ensuring that together, the environment, 
climate and social risks identified under sub-component 1.2. in the ESMF and the 
ESMP  are  addressed  and  appropriate  mitigation  actions  put  in  place  during  the 
design and implementation of interventions under this sub-component. 
73.  For  small  ruminants,  there  is  a  lack  of  capacity  from  both  commercial 
breeders/farmers and most pastoralists to undertake operations of genetic selection 
or  importation  of  improved  breeds.  The  project  will  therefore  support  (i)  the 
importation of quality parent stock and (ii) their  multiplication and dissemination 
to  smallholder  producers  through  upgrading  the  capacity  of  existing  three  breed 
multiplication centres located in three counties.. The selected centres are Nomotio 
in Samburu, Kimose in Baringo and Naivasha sheep and goat centre for the small 
ruminants. 
74.  The  support  package  to  breeding  centers  will  include,  i)  material  support  for 
fencing, upgrading of training facility, procurement of small equipment for animal 
husbandry practices and support to water supply. This support will strengthen the 
centre’s capacity to offer technical training on breeding concept, animal husbandry 
and related topics to  elite breeders/outreach farmers and  offer apprenticeship to 
young men and women breeders.  
75.  The  second  support  will  involve  supply  of  additional  parent  stocks  to  breed 
multiplication  centres,  where  the  outreach/commercial/elite  farmers  or  breeders 
can  buy  the  parent  stock  from.  With  strong  mandate  and  expertise,  the 
multiplication  centres  will  be  supported  with  additional  parent  stock  from  where 
they can do the multiplication and sell the improved stock through public auctions. 
76.  The elite breeders/outreach farmers to be trained at the center will be drawn from 
different sub-counties and wards. This is for ease of reaching as many farmers as 
possible, including in far flung wards. The selected elite breeders/outreach farmers 
should meet some minimum conditions, such as:  
(a)  They should already be in livestock production business; 
(b)  Demonstrate capacity through, ownership of land, forage, basic production 
infrastructures, and bigger flock of animals with strong management; 
(c)  They should capably act as multiplier for quality animals and have capability 
to supply farmers with pure stocks. 
77.  The young women and men breeders will be drawn from available paravets, agrovet 
dealers and students that will be sponsored through the project to pursue certificate 
courses  at  animal  health  colleges.  The  training  will  equip  them  with  hands-on 
24 
experience to learn breeding techniques and technically support the smallholders 
in their counties.  
78. 
In poultry production, supply of either improved Kienyeji birds or fertile eggs and 
day  old  chicks  to  smallholders  will  be  facilitated  through  KARLO  Center  in 
Naivasha/Kakamega  as  well  as  selected  private  hatcheries  in  TransNzoia, 
Kakamega, Bungoma and Siaya. Prior to project start, thorough assessment of the 
capabilities of selected hatcheries, nature of required support from the project and 
intervention  choices  will  be  made.  The  selected  hatcheries  will  play  the  role  of 
supervision, and technical training for outreach farmers. 
79.  Breed  improvement  interventions,  whether  institutional  or  community  based, 
should take into account potential environmental, climate and social risks identified 
in the ESMF and and the sub-project ESMP, and ensure that the proposed mitigation 
measures are put in place. 
Activity 1.2.2.: Community Breed Improvement Programme  
80.  The  project  will  concurrently  run  a  community  breed  improvement  programme 
where improved breeds (small ruminants for meat and dairy) will be distributed to 
community groups directly on a 50-50 cost sharing basis. In this arrangement, the 
farmer groups are expected to pay 50% of the purchase cost of the breeding buck 
or doe while the project will match the other 50% of the purchase cost. This activity 
can be implemented in partnership with an international research institution and 
other institutions with demonstrated expertise and experience in community breed 
improvement project.  
Climate Resilient Production Systems 
Activity 1.3.1: County Livestock Feed strategy 
Activity 1.3.2: Climate Resilient Water Infrastructure – solar-powered borehole, 
Sub-surface dams or rock - catchment, water pans and shallow 
wells with solar panel,  
Activity 1.3.3: Upscaling production of grass seeds (fencing and seeds) in 4 
counties 
Activity 1.3.4: Rangeland Governance System 
Activity 1.3.5: Rangeland Plans and GIS maps 
Activity 1.3.6: Support to GIS Laboratory 
Activity 1.3.7: Rangeland Policy Support 
Activity 1.3.8: Poultry feed improvement 
Activity 1.3.9: Feed storage infrastructure (Hayshed's, equipment for baling, hay 
harvesting equipment, labour saving equipment, etc.) 
81.  The Climate Resilient Production Systems activities will be placed under the direct 
supervision of the Production Lead Specialist/ Procurement Assistant at the PMCU, 
who  will  work  closely  with  the  Procurement  Specialists  and  the  (i)  the  Water 
Engineers (at the county department of  water); and (ii) the Range Development 
Officers/Directors  of  Livestock  Production  (at  the  county  department’s  of  range 
development and, iii) Poultry Production Officer’s at the county level. The technical 
staff should work closesly with the environment, climate and safeguards officer as 
well as the county based environment and NRM officers, to  ensure  environment, 
climate  and  social  risks  idenitified  under  sub-component  1.3.  in  the  ESMF  and 
mitigation  actions  in  the  ESMPs  are  addressed  during  the  design  and 
implementation of the various project intenventions under this sub-component. 
25 
Activity 1.3.1: County Livestock Feed strategy 
82.  Prior to rolling out feed/fodder support activities to the counties and beneficiaries, 
an assessment of the status of the availability and accessibility of livestock feed will 
be undertaken at country level. The purpose is to estimate feed and forage deficits 
in relation to small ruminants and poultry and develop a viable strategy to increase 
forage and feed production. Appropriate entry points for feed intervention will be 
guided by this assessment. 
83.  The assessment of feed deficit will build on the national level study on feed deficit 
conducted  by  FAO  and  any  other  existing  study/assessment  by  the  National 
Drought  Management  Authority  (NDMA).  This  partial  support  to  development  of 
feed  strategy  will  be  organized  into  clustered  interventions  e.g.  across  the  ASAL 
counties as one and the poultry producing counties as the other cluster. Based on 
this  and  further  consultations  with  technical  staff,  each  county  government  will 
contribute and spearhead the development of county-specific feed strategy based 
on assessment results from this exercise/activity. The feed strategy should also be 
informed by the findings  of the indepth climate  risks analysis, particularly future 
temperature, heat stress, humidity and precipitation projections and their impacts 
on the value chains at county and sub-county levels. 
Activity 1.3.2: Climate Resilient Water Infrastructure – solar-powered borehole, 
Sub-Surface Dams or rock - catchment, water pans and shallow wells with solar 
panel 
84.  Specific investments to establish water infrastructures and auxiliary facilities will be 
made for human and livestock in ASAL counties.  
85.  The establishment of water infrastructure should be based on thorough preparatory 
tasks: 
(a)  Building on or conducting fresh hydrological surveys; 
(b)  Assessment and building on existing water needs per county,  
(c)  Review of existing water maps  
(d)  Further  community  consultations  to  understand  location  of  water  points, 
choice  of  water  technology  and  related  environmental,  socio-economic 
impacts associated with each water infrastructure.  
(e)   Ensure that water development should be participatory and in compliance with IFAD’ 
safeguard  measures  as  outlined  in  the  SECAP  review  note  and  the 
ESMF/ESMP  under  sub-component  1.3.  The  inte  A.5  =  should  read  “E-
Extension services” 
86.  Water  infrastructure  will  largely  be  established  in  ASAL  counties  and  will  mainly 
support  livestock  production,  human  use  and  pasture  feedlot  development.  The 
counties with irrigation potential such as Samburu should also pursue possibility of 
pasture  production  from  irrigation  systems.  Care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that 
irrigation system that will be developed must not exceed 100ha per system, as this 
is likely to trigger a category A status of the project. 
Activity 1.3.3: Upscaling production of grass seeds (fencing and seeds) in 4 
counties 
87. 
In fodder interventions, the project will support three activities,  
(a)  Upscaling  the  production  of  grass  seeds  and  pasture,  which  will  include 
working  with  about  100  groups  across  the  10  counties  (mainly  targeting 
26 
women and youths). The support package will include fencing, water supply 
and supply of initial stock  of drought resistant  indigenous grass seeds. The 
support will facilitate the establishment of group owned pasture feedlot that 
will produce pasture and grass seeds for commercial purposes. This activity 
will  be  implemented  with  groups  already  active  in  hay  production  and  sale 
and  are  willing  to  tap  into  the  growing  demand  for  fodder.  The  project  will 
explicitly explore specific commercial opportunities for women and youths in 
fodder business. This will address seasonality by making higher quality feed 
available  during  the  dry  season.  The  production  of  grass  seeds  and  fodder 
should  be  informed  by  the  findings  of  the  indepth  climate  risk  analysis 
(especially futre climate, temperature, humidity, heat stress and precipitation 
projections) and the proposed measures to address climate related risks such 
as drought, floods, desert locusts etc. 
(b)  Feed  storage  facilities  and  infrastructure  and  equipment  (e.g.  hay  sheds, 
baling  equipment,  hay  harvesting  equipment  and  other  labour  saving 
equipment  will  also  be  given  to  groups  to  enable  them  start  their  fodder 
enterprises.  The  project  will  also  work  with  the  environment,  climate  and 
safeguards officer and their county counterpart, to ensure that potential risks 
associated  with  feed  storage  facilities  and  hay  harvesting  and  other  labour 
saving  equipment  as 
in  the  ESMF  are  mitigated  during 
implementation.  
identifed 
(c)  Rangeland  management  interventions  across  the  ASAL  counties,  and  the 
project activities will be executed as discussed below:  
Activity 1.3.4: Rangeland Governance System 
88.  This activity is an assessment/study to establish the status of rangeland governance 
in four counties, i.e. Marsabit, Samburu, Elgeyo-Marakwet and Baringo. It include 
analysis  of  institutions,  rules  and  regulations  as  well  as  the  status  of  their 
enforcement and associated bottlenecks. The  result of the improved analysis will 
shape  the  design  of  county  specific  interventions  for  improving  rangeland 
governance  and  the  management  systems.  This  study  can  build  on  existing, 
reports, assessment and the rangeland investment priorities at the county level. 
Activity 1.3.5: Rangeland Plans and GIS maps 
89.  Planning is critical to rangeland use and management. In order to improve overall 
grazing plans and management of rangeland, this activity will support participatory 
rangeland  mapping  to  articulate  priorities  for  the  protection  of  key  grazing 
resources, livestock mobility and the seasonal use and access to grazing resources.  
90.  This activity will simultaneously improve the capacities of pastoral communities to 
implement participatory rangeland planning, identify strategic resources, multiple 
users and access modalities. This activity will incorporate Geographical Information 
System  (GIS)  digital  maps  to  display  resource  distribution  data  with high  spatial 
precision. The GIS maps will form important legislative and management tools to 
protect  key  grazing  resources,  inform  community  led  resource  management  and 
link customary to formal systems of resource management. The maps should also 
be used as a means to verify the undertaking of environmental safeguards identified 
in  the  ESMF.  For  example,  to  establish  a  baseline  on  rangeland,  pastureland 
degradation and rehabilitation, and observe progress over time (mid and end term). 
The project thus should exploit the main potential uses of GIS in sustainable NRM, 
safeguards and M&E tool. 
27 
Activity 1.3.6: Support to GIS Laboratory 
91.  Sustainable and lasting solution will only result from strong capacity (technical and 
equipment) of county departments of natural resource management and rangeland 
management. 
92.  The  project  will  provide  specific  support  to  the  county  department  of  natural 
resource management. The natural resource management department is currently 
supporting  rangeland  department  to  generate  basic  GIS  maps  but  they  have 
limitation  with  respect  to  GIS  equipment, laboratory  facilities  and  technical  skills 
for  rangeland  observations.  Natural  resource  department  also  provides  technical 
assistance to rangeland officers and environmental/NRM officers on need basis. The 
project  will  identify  required  support  and  provide  additional  material  and  skills 
through provision of specific equipment to operationalize the GIS laboratory. At the 
start of the project, specific need will be assessed in four ASAL counties and tailored 
support will be provided. 
Activity 1.3.7: Rangeland Policy Support 
93.  Based  on  the  results  of  governance  assessment  (Activity  1.3.4),  the  project  will 
identify  specific  activities  for  strengthening  governance  institutions  through,  for 
example  supporting  development  of  appropriate  by-laws,  laws,  recognition  and 
strengthening of local institutions. It will also include capacity building on by-law 
formulation  and  facilitation  of  by-law  development  process  with  the  county 
assembly officials  
Activity 1.3.8: Poultry feed improvement  
94. 
95. 
In poultry feed, the project will adopt an e-voucher scheme to improve stallholders 
access to subsidized feeds, which is an electronic voucher platform for managing 
inputs and service subsidies through the private sector. The e-voucher card wallets 
will enable farmers access package of inputs (i.e. vaccines, extension, poultry feed 
etc.). The wallet will also double up as farmers’ saving account.  
In collaboration with other stakeholders, the livestock production officers in every 
county  will  mobilize  and  recruit  the  farmers  along  established  and  validated 
eligibility  criteria  for  community-based  targeting  and  screening.  The  Financial 
Institutions  (FIs)  will  perfom  accounts  opening  and  subsequent  enrolment  of 
selected farmers in the field and accepts 10% farmers’ contribution deposits that 
could be paid either through the FIs branches/outlets, bank agents or via Mobile 
banking (M-Pesa) option.  
96.  The farmer’s initial deposit will trigger inputs access from the e-voucher platform. 
During  enrolment,  the  banks  will  train  the  farmers  focusing  on  financial  services 
module,  particularly  management  of  debit  cards  and  PIN.  Then  the  Project 
Management and Coordination Unit will prepare the payroll for each farmer from 
the  list  of  successfully  opened  accounts  and  after  10%  deposit  by  farmers.  The 
Banks credits the payroll, which are then shared with the targeted Sub-Counties 
for  mobilization  of  farmers  to  swipe  for  inputs/services  at  selected  and  qualified 
agro-vets.  
97.  The second intervention on feed will be through the youth grants where the project 
will identify and evaluate options for supporting youths to enter into poultry feed 
milling business and technical support to smallholders. 
28 
Activity 1.3.9: Feed storage infrastructure (Hayshed's, equipment for baling, 
hay harvesting equipment, labour saving equipment, etc.) 
98.  The support to pasture production enterprises will extend to include establishment 
of feed storage facilities and provision of infrastructure and equipment such as hay 
sheds, baling and hay-harvesting equipment and other labour saving equipment.  
99. 
In supporting feed storage facilities, consideration will be given to approaches that 
demonstrate  innovativeness  to  consider  spatial  and  practical  utility  aspects  of  a 
given county and community. This will be ensured through participatory planning 
for storage facilities and exploring practical questions around distance and access 
for primary users. 
Animal Health Improvement 
Activity 1.4.1: Strengthen the system of disease surveillance and monitoring 
Activity 1.4.2: Development of disease contingency plans  
Activity 1.4.3: Certificate Training for animal health workers and Para vets for 
young men and women 
Activity 1.4.4: Smart Device for Agrovets for tracking and monitoring disease 
Activity 1.4.5: Behavioral Change Approach (BCA) for Animal health and disease 
100.  The animal health improvement activities will be placed under the direct supervision 
of the Production Lead Specialist/Procurement Assistant at the PMCU, who will work 
closely with the Procurement Specialists and the county veterinary officers 
Activity 1.4.1: Strengthen the system of disease surveillance and monitoring 
101.  In  order  to  improve  disease  surveillance  and  monitoring  system,  the  project  will 
have  a  preparatory  assessment  to  understand  the  current  system  for  disease 
surveillance  and  monitoring  across  all  the  counties.  The  system  for  disease 
surveillance and monitoring will be evaluated in all the counties and intervention 
entries for strengthening the systems will be identified and supported. This support 
could  include  among  others,  capacity  building  of  field  agents  in  surveillance, 
monitoring  and  reporting,  community  based  surveillance  networks  such  as 
Community Disease Reporters (CDRs) etc. 
Activity 1.4.2: Development of disease contingency plans 
102.  The  contingency  approach  will  address  three  important  aspects  of  disease 
preparedness: (i) the development of contingency plans (i) the implementation of 
simulation exercises, and (ii) the establishment of a contingency fund to respond 
to climate and disease related emergencies. 
103.  Development  of  contingency  plans.  In  order  to  be  ready  to  respond  to  any 
sanitary crisis, veterinary services need to have ready and up to date contingency 
plans at hand, for each disease at risk (the response will be different depending on 
the specie affected, the epidemiology of the disease). The project will review the 
existing contingency measures and support the county government develop plans 
for  PPR,  CCPP,  blue  tongue,  RVF  and  any  other  known  or  emerging  disease 
depending on the epidemiological situation in the region and the actual major risks.  
104.  Organization of simulation exercises: once the contingency plans are prepared, 
the recommended practice will involve undertaking simulation exercises in order to 
(i) test the Contingency Plan, (ii) build capacity of staff for implementation of the 
plan in almost real conditions (on hands training); (iii) test  operational response 
29 
arrangements  and  examine  the  liaison  and  interdependencies  between  the  key 
operational  partners  (the  deployment  of  the  plan  often  requires  cooperation 
between veterinary services, police, customs, public health for zoonotic diseases, 
which  makes  its  implementation  very  complex).  During  the  exercise,  all 
components  of  the  response  will  be  reviewed,  such  as  laboratory  diagnosis, 
epidemiological  investigation,  biosecurity  measures,  and  disease  containment 
barriers  as  well  as  cleaning  and  disinfection  processes  of  affected  holdings.  The 
project  will  support  the  organization  of  simulation  exercises  for  common  small 
ruminant and poultry diseases. Mitigation actions on zoonotic diseases proposed in 
the  ESMF  and  ESMP  should  inform  these  simulation  exercises  and  appropriate 
measures taken to deal with potential risks. The integrated pesticides management 
plan  provides  further  information  on  the  identification,  safe  use,  handling, 
protective wear, storage, and disposal of agrochemical products. 
105.  Establishment of a contingency fund for small ruminants diseases: even if 
a  contingency  plan  is  available  and  updated,  and  if  capacities  for  response  have 
been strengthened and tested through simulation exercises, the deployment of an 
adequate  response  to  a  sanitary  crisis  also  depend  on  the  availability  and 
accessibility  of  means,  including  in  particular  financial  means,  to  implement  the 
response  mechanisms.  The  response  depends  on  the  disease  and  on  the 
epidemiological  situation,  but  it  can  require  deployment  of  measures  of 
containment,  protection  disinfection,  restriction  of  movements,  establishment  of 
buffer zones and protection zones, preventive vaccination, laboratory testing, and 
even in some cases stamping out of animals infected or at risk. All these measures 
are  costly,  in  particular  stamping  out,  which  requires  proper  compensation  of 
farmers affected. 
106.  The project will therefore establish a reserve fund that will constitute the primary 
contingency fund. In case of eligible sanitary crisis, the affected county may use 
part of these funds to finance emergency response, in line with the mutually agreed 
operational guidelines and criteria for  eligibility of the  crisis. Detailed operational 
guidelines  and  criteria  for  eligibility  of  the  crisis  will  be  developed  to  guide  the 
utilization of the funds. Should this activity be triggered, all expenditures will be 
made  in  accordance  with  IFAD  procurement  rules  applicable  to  emergency 
situations.  
107.  The contingency fund will be managed by the Directorate of Veterinary Services – 
DVS under special bank account, at the national level. This fund will be utilized at 
the  national  level  and  not  only  applicable  to  the  ten  project  counties.  The  fund 
utilization will only be made possible if the crisis fulfills the criteria mutually agreed 
upon, and should be done according to the operational guidelines. In the first year 
of the project, the set of criteria and operational guidelines will be developed and 
submitted to IFAD for approval. The transfer of the funds to the bank account will 
be  done  only  after  approval  of  these  two  documents.  Utilization  of  funds  in  the 
special account will additionally require a preliminary authorization from IFAD. Only 
DVS will be authorized to use the contingency funds, and their utilization will follow 
the procurement rules in force in the country in case of emergency. 
Activity 1.4.3: Certificate Training for animal health workers and Para vets for 
young men and women 
108.  This activity is designed to bridge the existing gaps in the extension service for the 
veterinary officers and animal health workers, predominantly in most affected ASAL 
counties. The project will offer scholarships to  young men and women to pursue 
certificate training in animal health. The number of scholarships will not be uniform 
30 
across  the  counties  but  rather  take  cognizance  of  the  level  of  skill  gaps  in  each 
county.  In  total,  200  students  will  be  sponsored  to  pursue  certificate  courses  at 
animal health colleges such as technical and vocational colleges like Animal Health 
Industrial Training Institute (AHITI) in Kabete and other recognized animal health 
colleges  across  the  country.  The  potential  youths  for  the  sponsorship  will  be 
selected from form four graduates that meet the minimum requirements and the 
youths already employed in agrovet business, for skill upgrade.  
109.  Post-training, the trainees will be supported by the project by equipping them with 
animal well fare kit and in discussion with the counties, consider them for possible 
recruitment and bonding. 
110.  The project trainees should also be trained on safeguards measures related to the 
safe use, handling, protective wear, storage and disposal of agrochemical products. 
The  integrated  pesticides  management  plan  provides  safeguards  measures  that 
should be followed. 
Activity 1.4.4: Smart Device for Agrovets for tracking and monitoring disease 
111.  The project will complement other support by providing specific equipment and kits 
for the detection of small livestock diseases (PPR, RVF, CCPP). 
112.  Smart devices will be issued to disease monitors, community disease reporters and 
agro  vets  for  regular  tracking,  monitoring  and  reporting  of  diseases.  This  smart 
devise will improve the efficiency for disease reporting and response. The details of 
the devise and operational modalities will be further  explored at the inception of 
the project. 
Activity 1.4.5: Behavioral Change Approach (BCA) for Animal health and disease 
113.  The BCA is an alternative approach to train farmers, not through a pre-packaged 
training  delivery,  but  adopting  a  Behavioural  Change  Approach  (BCA)  where  the 
community will be trained on improved animal husbandry practices. The behaviour 
change approach take into account the specific psychological and social influences 
that guide decision-making and behaviour of  farmers in livestock husbandry and 
health management. 
114.  BCA entails designing and implementing interventions in a manner that is iterative 
and a process of discovery, learning and adaptation.  
115.  The  project  will  secure  the  services  of  a  specialist  service  provider  to  work 
closely  with  community  groups  to  develop  appropriate  messages  for  behaviour 
change  and  develop  a  series  of  audio-visual  and  other  training  material  for 
dissemination and delivery of messages.  
E-Extension services  
116.  Recognizing  that  the  capacity  of  the  County  Government’s  to  provide  extension 
services using the traditional visit approach is no longer feasible given the shrinking 
manpower  and  operational  budgets  of  County  Governments,  the  project  will 
therefore  implement  an  ICT  based  approach  to  extension  services  by  using  e-
extension based models that are appropriate for the needs and literacy levels of its 
participants. The project will procure e-extension services on a competitive basis 
from the range  of  service providers  available in the country. Nutrition awareness 
messages  and  importance  of  dietary  diversity  and  the  dietary  practices  during 
pregnancy, weaning and early child development will also be integrated into the e-
extension messages. In addition, the service provider will develop modules which 
allow  farmers  to  access  expert  veterinary  advice  on  call  for  the  diagnosis  and 
31 
treatment of ailments for which local expertise may not be immediately available. 
Customer willingness to pay for the services will be assessed by the service provider 
to enable the establishment of a sustainable model of e-extension. The ESMF and 
ESMP identify risks such as e-waste disposal, that are associated with the use of 
ICT. The PMCU should ensure that these risks are mitigated during implementation. 
Component 2: Support to Livestock Market Development 
2.1  Market Infrastructure and Capacity Development 
117.  The  execution  of  the  Market  Infrastructure  activities  will  be  supervised  by  the 
Project’s  Marketing  Development  Specialist  supported  by  the  Procurement 
Specialist and in collaboration with Kenya Livestock Marketing Council (LMLC) and 
each County’s directors of Livestock Production, Veterinary Services and the county 
Environmental Officer for Compliance and Licensing of Infrastructure, and any other 
relevant enabling county official.  
 2.1.1: Upgrading Market Infrastructure 
118.  The  project  will  rehabilitate  20  markets,  two  per  county.  The  county  Director  of 
Livestock  Production  will  inform  the  project  Market  Developing  Specialist  of  two 
county  markets  selected  for  rehabilitation.  Five  of  these  markets  will  be 
rehabilitated  in  the  second  year  of  the  project,  ten  in  third  year  and  five  in  the 
fourth year.  
119.  The markets must fit the following KeLCoP criteria. Specifically, the market must, 
(i) already exist to ensure it is in the correct location; ii)  have a minimum trade 
volume of 200 goats, sheep per market day; (iii) there must be a Livestock Market 
Association in place, (iv) the County Council must have passed a Bill to adopt the 
LMA  (Livestock  Marketing  Association)  co-management  model;  (v)  the  County 
Government  must  have  agreed  to  work  with  the  LMA  to  properly  operate  and 
maintain  the  markets  after  construction;  (vi)  a  proper  business  plan  must  have 
been  prepared  that  shows  the  trade  volumes,  revenue  generation  and  fund 
allocation  for  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  market;  (vi)  the  County 
Government must be willing to consider refinements and changes to the regulatory 
framework within which markets operate. 
120.  Prior  to  onset  of  the  work,  the  county  must  present  a  rehabilitation  plan  that 
conforms to the 2017 KEBS Livestock Market Standards regarding access to clean 
water, space allowances per animal, biosecurity best practices, auction blocks, non-
slip  loading  ramps,  functioning  crushes,  isolation  pens,  auction  rings,  regulation 
sized fence spacing and forage storing facilities. Even in the absence of KEBS Market 
Standards have specifying it as a  standard, the  rehabilitation plans must include 
appropriate drainage and animal waste disposal strategies, hygienic toilets for men 
and women, adequate shade for both people and animals, appropriate shelter for 
vendors  of  cooked  food  as  well  as  raw  fruits  and  vegetables.  Each  plan  should 
include a poultry sector or designate improvements to the poultry sector of a nearby 
produce market.7  
121.  The  project  Procurement  Specialist  will  use  a  bid  process  to  hire  a  qualified 
construction contractor with experience in livestock infrastructure. This procedure 
must include an advertisement in one national newspaper and the ad should run 
7 For example, in the Siaya livestock market for ruminants, the poultry market is located in the nearby vegetable and fish 
market. In this case the definition of the livestock market may include the poultry section of other non-ruminant livestock 
markets.  
32 
for a minimum of 14 days. The advertisement will specify minimum requirements 
for bidders according to the construction planned, including a specified minimum 
experience  conducting  similar  work.  IFAD  will  support  the  project  Marketing 
Specialist  with  review  of  proposals  and  a  due  diligence  background  checks  of 
bidders. Contracts should specify pay per performance milestones.  
122.  Interventions must be climate adapted, this includes long-lived metal fencing and 
roofing, local rock and mortar construction, and appropriate drainage. Interventions 
will  include  hygienic  disposal  and  management  of  human  and  animal  waste  and 
emphasize green technology, including solar energy, use of biogas, water efficient 
technologies  and  practices,  and  strategic  location  of  infrastructure  to  reduce 
adverse environmental impacts.  
123.  The  ESMF  identifies  environmental,  climate  and  social  risks  associated  with  the 
development of market infrastructure and proposes mitigation actions. The project 
environment, climate and safeguards officer as well as the county representative 
for  NEMA  (National  Environmental  Management  Authority)  will inspect  plans  and  
infrastructure  to  ensure  that  structures  and  placement  conform  to  Kenya 
environmental and safety laws and IFAD’s SECAP guidleines, and that the mitigation 
actions in the ESMP are undertaken. 2.1.2: Support to Regulatory Mechanisms for 
Markets at County Level 
124.  KeLCoP Marketing Development Specialist will collaborate with the KLMC’s County 
Livestock Marketing Officer and a designated representative from the Ministry for 
Livestock Development (MLD) to assist the eight counties without a Livestock Sale 
Yard Bill with the process of formulating bills. These bills will define an integrated 
policy and institutional framework for management of the markets that meets local 
County  Government  approval.  For  the  two  counties  that  have  an  existing  bill, 
Samburu and Marsabit, these bills will be reviewed by KeLCoP Marketing Specialist 
and  the  KLMC  representative  and,  if  deemed  necessary,  amended.  The  two 
completed  bills  will  be  reviewed  in  the  first  year  of  the  project  and  the  eight 
incomplete bills will be produced in the second year of the project. 
125.  The  bills  will  cover  establishment  and  administration  of  livestock  sales  yards, 
transportation  and  movement  of  livestock,  handling  of  unfit  and/or  diseased 
livestock,  feeding and watering of livestock held in yards,  offences and penalties 
for  livestock  yard  infractions,  matters  related  to  sales  and  fees,  as  well  as 
recognition  LMA’s  role  in  co-managing  markets  with  the  County  and  sharing  in 
revenues intended for maintenance of the market.  
126.  To initiate the process, the County Assembly must authorize the drafting of the bills. 
127.  After authorization but before the bills are actually drafted, the short-term KeLCoP 
Marketing  Development  Specialist  will  coordinate  support  to  KLMC  to  provide 
training  to  all  county  officials  whose  tasks  involve  regulation  of  Livestock  or 
Livestock Markets. The curriculum will focus on KEBS regulations bearing on control 
of  livestock,  space  allowances,  biosecurity  plan,  health  certification  of  animals, 
moving permits, regulation of agrovets in the market, collection of fees, accounting, 
record  keeping  and  dissemination  of  information,  lobbying  and  grievance 
mechanisms for users of the market, conflict resolution, consistent reporting and 
control  of  theft.  Inconsistent  policies  that  should  be  redressed  include  double 
taxation of livestock, restrictions on trucking animals between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. 
(something  that  increases  the  cost  of  livestock  transport),  limited  use  of 
auctioneers, and sharing of market revenues with LMAs for the maintenance and 
functioning of the market.  
33 
128.  Training  will  include  use  of  smart  phones  and  establishment  of  a  communication 
protocol  between  county  officials  and  LMA  members  at  different  markets.  This 
protocol  will  serve  as  a  foundation  for  the  implementation  of  real-time  price 
information system. The ITC portion of training will be conducted by the Project ITC 
Specialist. 
129.  After completion of the training, bills will be drafted by county drafters supported 
with short-term legal expert vetted and hired by the project Market Development 
Specialist. For Marasabit and Samburu, the two counties that have existing livestock 
bills, the consultant and Marketing Development Specialist will review the bills and 
make  recommendations  consistent  with  Livestock  Yard  best  practices.  Upon 
completion the new bills and/or modifications to existing bill must be authorized by 
County Assembly.  
130.  The county training regime will be integrated with the LMA training regime seen in 
the next subcomponent to promote knowledge and consensus on the role of LMA 
vs. county and encourage seamless governance. 
2.1.2: Capacity Building support to LMAs 
131.  The project will work with 20 existing LMAs, two in each county, to strengthen the 
capacity of LMAs. The goal is to upscale the county co-management model that was 
initiated  by  the  Kenya  Livestock  Marketing  Council  (KLMC)  under  the  Arid  Lands 
Resource Management Project (ALRMP), which is intended to increase community 
participation  in  the  management  of  the  newly  constructed  markets.  The  co-
management  model  allows  for  a  partnership  between  County  Government, 
Livestock Marketing Councils and Livestock Marketing Associations. Five LMAs will 
be trained in the second year of the project, ten in the third year, and five in the 
fourth year.  
132.  KeLCoP Marketing Development Specialist will collaborate with the KLMC’s County 
Livestock Marketing Officer to bring together the County Livestock officials and the 
Livestock  Marketing  Associations  through  a  binding  mutual  agreement  that 
specifies  sharing  revenues  collected  on  a  livestock  sold  in  the  market.  The  LMAs 
will design and sign an MoU with the county authorities specifying 50-50 or 70-30 
revenue sharing arrangements, the amount that must be invested in the markets 
and  the  necessary  checks  and  balances  in  the  management  setup.  The  MoU  will 
specify how the income from revenue sharing is to be used to promote livestock 
marketing and provide required services by the relevant stakeholders. 
133.  The Project will provide financial support to the KLMC to design and carry out the 
training. The training will focus on awareness of KEBS Livestock Market Standards 
and  best  practices  for  organization  and  management  of  livestock  markets. 
Specifically,  codification  of  regulations  bearing  on  control  of  livestock,  space 
allowances,  biosecurity  best  practices,  health  certification  of  animals,  moving 
permits, regulation of agrovets in the market, collection of fees, accounting, record 
keeping  and  dissemination  of  information,  lobbying,  environmental,  climate  and 
social safeguards, conflict resolution, and proper procedures for documentation of 
theft.  
134.  Training  will  include  provision  and  use  of  smart  phones  and  establishment  of  a 
communication  protocol  between  county  officials  and  LMA  members  at  different 
markets.  The  communication  protocol  will  serve  as  a  foundation  for  the 
implementation  of  real-time  price  information  system.  Implementation  will  be 
accomplished by the PMCU and KLMC (Kenya Livestock Marketing Council). 
34 
135.  Each  LMA  will  be  evaluated  for  additional  capacity  needs.  Evaluation  will  include 
focus groups for which detailed summary notes will be archived to serve as baseline 
records for future evaluations and identification of lessons learned.  
136.  Each  LMA  will  prepare  a  market  Management  Plan  that  includes  all  the  forgoing 
considerations. 
2.1.3: Investor Forums for private sector engagement 
137.  KeLCoP will promote Investor Forums. The  Marketing Development Specialist will 
work with each County-level Trade Promotion Officer and County Planning Unit, and 
the  KLMC’s  County  Livestock  Marketing  Officer  and  each  county’s  respective 
Chambers of Commerce to coordinate Investor Forums. The forums will be held in 
all 10 counties.  The project will support 10 forums in the first year--one in each 
county--and 10 follow-up forums in the second year of the project.  
138.  Each county must do a SWOT analysis prior to the forum.  
139.  The plan for the investor forums will elaborate on County Integrated Development 
Plans (2018-2022) that exist for all 10 counties and define their overall investment 
plans and outline strategies for capital financing, resource mobilization and asset 
management  strategies,  The  plan  will  define  how  counties  attract  private  sector 
investors through regulation that facilitates businesses, such as (i) lease whereby 
the  private  party  pays  the  county  government  rent  or  royalties  and  manages, 
operates and maintains the facility or utilizes the leased property, (ii) Land Swap 
where a county government transfers existing public land or an asset to the private 
party in consideration of an asset facility that has been developed by that private 
party,  (iii)  Build-Transfer-and-Operate  where  the  private  party  constructs  an 
infrastructure  facility  and  assumes  the  costs  and  risks  associated  with  the 
construction of the building and upon completion, transfers the  ownership of the 
facility to the county government and continues to operate the facility on behalf of 
the contracting authority and (iv) Joint venture-or joint ownership of facility with 
private investor for mutual benefit, (vi) tax holidays and land grants 
140.  The  KeLCoP  Marketing  Specialist  will  help  identify  and  contact  businesses  and 
coordinate  advertising  campaigns  in  two  national  newspapers  (The  National  and 
The Standard), the two most popular county/local radio stations, and one Nairobi 
television media outlet.  
141.  KeLCoP  will  document  the  proceedings  of  the  first  forum  and  disseminate  press 
releases.  
142.  During  year  one  of  the  project,  the  project  will  finance  the  initial  round  of  10 
investor forums (one in each county). Thereafter the County Government will make 
links and support the Investor Forums on its own. So long as the forums continue, 
KeLCoP will match county funds for advertising and hosting the forum throughout 
the 6-year life of the project.  
2.2: Building Inclusive Value Chains 
2.2.1 Access to Finance Through the E-Voucher System 
143.  Subsidy  Through  E-Voucher  System:  The  project  will  introduce  a  subsidy  to 
address the needs of the very poor segment of the target group, in order to access 
the very critical livestock inputs relating to their value chains. Poultry and the small 
35 
ruminants will be covered by the subsidy as apiculture does not require a regular 
supply  of  inputs  during  the  production  cycle.  The  subsidy  will  be  administered 
through the e-voucher system that has been tried and found successful under the 
IFAD  financed  Kenya  Cereal  Enhancement  Programme  -  Climate  Resilient 
Agricultural  Livelihoods  Window  (KCEP-CRAL).  The  primary  objective  of  the  e-
voucher scheme is to improve farmers’ access to quality livestock inputs including 
animal feed, vaccines, AI, medicines, day old chicks, animal health services. The 
purpose  is  to  boost  smallholder  use  of  quality  inputs  that  would  boost  their 
production. The e-voucher will be implemented in partnership with the Equity Bank 
of Kenya (EBKL) and other key input suppliers enrolled in the scheme such as the 
Kenya  Agricultural  and  Livestock  Research  Organization  (KALRO),  agro-dealers, 
Village,  Ward  and  County  Administrators,  County/Sub  County/Ward  Agricultural 
Officers. To ensure that the project uses the services of the best financial service 
provider,  the  financial  institution  for  the  disbursement  of  the  subsidy  will  be 
competitively selected;  
144.  Implementation of the subsidy through the e-voucher system will be implemented 
through the following steps;  
(i) 
First  step  will  be  to  establish  the  criteria  for  the  selection  of  needy 
beneficiaries eligible to receive the subsidy. The criteria will be developed 
through a consultative process between the PMCU, the villages and Wards 
administrators, the Sub-County and Ward Agricultural Officers (SCAOs and 
WAOs),  the  church  representatives,  and  representatives  of  Common 
Interest  Groups  (CIGs)  operating  in  the  concerned  villages,  and  the 
participating  FIs.  Some  of  the  important  criteria  to  be  considered  for 
beneficiary  farmers  eligibility  to  participate  in  the  subsidy  programme 
include the following but are not exhaustive:  
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
high level of poverty and vulnerability, living below the poverty line; 
landlessness or very small unproductive land; 
inability to purchase inputs;  
inability  to  produce  adequate  quantities  of  food  to  meet  household 
requirements, and are therefore net buyers of staple foods; 
belongs to a common interest group or willing to join one in order to 
facilitate  access  to  services  and  collective  group  action  such  as 
marketing and resource mobilization activities, and counter defaults; 
undertake to abide to the group by-laws for effective implementation 
of group activities; 
  willingness  to  participate  in  all  trainings  including  financial  literacy 
organized by the Project; 
ability  to  contribute  the  initial  10%  of  the  total  input  cost  in  cash, 
progressing to 40%, 70% and eventually 100%;  
readiness to open an account in order to engage in a culture of savings 
mobilization for sustainability.  
not receiving subsidies from other programmes in the country; 
 
 
 
(ii) 
This will be followed by establishment of Ward Project Committees (WPCs) 
that  will  be  composed  of  all  stake  holders  (Ward  Administrators,  farmer 
representatives,  village  leaders,  church  elders,  Ward  Agricultural  Officers 
(WAOs)  and  PMCU  representative),  in  collaboration  with  Sub-County 
Project  Committees  (SCPCs),  to  carry  out  farmers  sensitization  and 
awareness creation campaign through barazas and churches at Ward and 
36 
village level, combined with SMSs messages, that explain about the subsidy 
Programme and the eligibility criteria; 
(iii) 
Interested farmers will then be issued with application forms to fill out and 
return to Ward Agricultural Officers (WAO) within an agreed timeframe and 
a closing date (generally within 2 weeks);  
(iv)  Once application period is closed, WPCs meet to pre-select the applicants 
to ensure they meet the criteria provided in the forms, and completeness 
of filled forms 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
The list of qualified applicants is then posted at strategic places within the 
Ward for all community members to see and scrutinize;  
Community  screening  barazas  are  publicized  using  various  forms  of 
communication  including  churches  and  public  gatherings  to  ensure 
maximum participation by the members of the community. The Community 
screens farmers pre-selected by the WPCs;  
The community screening involves the WPC reading through the list of all 
the  pre-qualified  e-voucher  applicants  and  informing  the  community  the 
available opportunities and the number of farmers that can be supported 
per Ward. The community then discusses openly and comes up with a merit 
list  of  selected  farmers  to  participate  in  the  e-voucher  taking  into 
consideration the gender and youth requirements;  
(viii)  WPCs  again  scrutinizes  the  list  of  farmers  generated  by  community  to 
ensure gender representation; 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
The final list will then be submitted to the Sub-County Project Committees 
(SCPCs) together with copies of the filled application forms, physical copies 
of selected farmer’s IDs and minutes of the community targeting barazas, 
for further screening before approval of the selected farmers. The purpose 
is to ensure that the beneficiaries’ details are properly captured (i.e name 
of farmer as it is in the ID, ID number, date of birth, mobile phone number, 
location, gender, land size, estimated monthly income etc). 
Once cleared by the SCPC, the list is forwarded to the PMCU who forwards 
it to the CPCC and PSC for clearance, before its submission to IFAD through 
the National Treasury; 
The final list of farmers that have received a No Objection from IFAD will 
be entered into the e-voucher computerized system where it is shared with 
the  selected  FIs  and  selected  agro  dealers,  so  that  they  can  verify  the 
farmers who go to collected input (by agro dealers), and payments (by the 
FIs).  
145.  The  KelCoP  subsidy  package  will  comprise  of  the  following  livestock  inputs  and 
services: animal feeds, vaccines and drugs, day old chicks, animal treatment and 
extension services, AI services, etc. The private sector, specifically FIs (banks) and 
agro-dealers,  will  jointly  with  the  beneficiaries  drive  the  project  implementation. 
They  will  be  selected  competitively  through  invitation  for  expression  of  interest 
followed by detailed screening of applicants. 
146.  Selection  of  Financial  Institutions:  Financial  Institutions  will  be  competitively 
selected,  though  open  invitation  for  Expression  of  Interest  to  provide  support  to 
37 
redeem subsidy funds provided through the e-voucher system. The successful FIs 
will be required to: 
  demonstrate ability and capacity to undertake the tasks; 
  Provide evidence that it has a minimum of 5 years’ experience in providing 
mobile banking transactions; 
  have a nation-wide banking coverage with a wide network of agents and a 
reliable fintech service in the project area; 
  Be willing to subsidize financial literacy training for the participants; 
  Have  a  package  of  savings  and  loans  services  that  suit  the  profile  of  the 
KeLCoP participants. 
  have extensive knowledge and experience in Kenya’s agricultural sector; 
  Provide evidence of human resource capacity in the relevant financial skills; 
  Past  execution  of  similar  activities  and  an  already  existing  e-voucher 
transaction platform will be added advantage. 
147.  Successful FIs will develop an e-voucher transaction platform while those already 
with a platform could fine-tune them for more effectiveness; 
148.  Eligible farmers will be encouraged to open a bank account with their bank of choice 
or convenience among the selected banks, in order to develop a culture of saving 
while creating project sustainability.  
149.  The beneficiaries will then be issued with customized ring-fenced debit cards that 
will be divided into several wallets according to the value chain they are involved 
in. For example for poultry there will be a different wallet for each of these inputs 
-  for  day  old  chicks,  feeds,  vaccines  and  drugs,  animal  treatment  and  extension 
services. For small ruminants the wallets will respond to vaccines and drugs, animal 
feed, animal treatment, and extension services (animal husbandry). 
(i)  Selection of the Agro-dealers Selection of agro dealers will be initiated by 
the PMCU by advertising invitation of Expression of Interest (EIs) in the local 
newspapers, posting the invitations in the nearest markets and churches, with 
instructions to submit the EIs in the SCIPT Offices within 1 month of the date 
of  the  advertisement.  The  advertisements  will  also  provide  for  briefing 
sessions in each locality with all interested agro dealers in the Sub County to 
explain to them about the Project, the logistics and implementation modalities 
of the  e-voucher, as well as the  roles implementing  partners (including the 
agro dealers) are expected to play in the delivery of the subsidized inputs to 
beneficiaries. The purpose of the briefing sessions is to ensure that the agro-
dealers understand the Project, and what will be expected of those who will 
be  selected  to  participate.  The  agro  dealers  will  be  required  to  include  the 
following information in the EI: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Physical Address where located – town or village (priority will be given 
to agro dealers from the implementing Sub Counties and Wards); 
Copy of valid business permit; 
Evidence that the business is at least 3 years old; 
Provide financial statements as evidence that the agro dealer will be 
able to provide the required inputs; 
Provide list of livestock input commonly stocked by the agro dealer; 
Provide  a  list  of  equipment  available  in  the  shop  for  drugs/vaccine 
storage (e.g freezers for storing vaccines); 
38 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
k) 
Name  and  qualification  of  qualified  veterinary  doctor  or  paravet(s) 
attached  to  the  agro  dealer  who  provides  the  necessary  support  to 
the beneficiaries as needed; 
Evidence  that  the  agro  dealer  is  trained  in  animal  health  and 
registered  with  the  Kenya  Veterinary  Board;  or  the  person  running 
the shop meets these requirements; 
Gives an undertaking to attend trainings organized by the Project for 
both the attendants as well as the business owner; 
Gives  an  undertaking  to  adhere  to  the  prevailing  prices  in  the 
geographical areas of operation, and avoid over charging (any agro 
dealer found to charge prices above the prevailing prices for similar 
products  will  be  removed  from  the  list  of  selected  agro  dealer 
participants); 
Must be willing to sign and abide by a Contract with the Project; 
(ii)  Received  expression  of  interests  will  first  be  reviewed  jointly  by  the  WAO, 
the  SCPTT  and  SCPCC  representatives,  who  will  pre-select  the  promising 
candidates,  by  screening  the  EIs  for  completeness  and  to  ensure  that  the 
required documents are attached;  
(iii)  The list of the pre-selected candidates will then be forwarded to the  PMCU 
who will review it jointly with the CPTTs; 
(iv)  The final list will be submitted to the PSC for clearance and transmission to 
IFAD through the National Treasury; 
(v)  Lists from each county will be cleared independent of other counties; 
(vi)  Successful agro dealers are then issued with Point of Sale (POS) devices by 
the participating FI for transactions in the project; 
(vii)  The  selected  partner  financial  institution  will  provide  input  into  the  final 
selection of the agro dealers in order to verify that they comply with the FI’s 
policies  and  procedures  relating  to  merchant/agency  banking  services 
criteria. 
150.  Voucher Funds Flow: Funds disbursed by IFAD for the E-Voucher will flow in the 
normal process: from IFAD to the Central Bank of Kenya, to the National Treasury, 
to the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, and finally to Participating 
Banks. Special account and replenishment mode of disbursement will be used. This 
will  entail  PMCU  estimation  of  the  first  batch  of  beneficiaries,  amount  of  inputs 
required and estimated cost of the inputs. This will constitute the initial request for 
funds  disbursement  by  the  PMCU  (through  the  NT)  to  IFAD.  The  funds  will  be 
disbursed into the designated accounts that the selected FIs will open specifically 
for this activity. Once the FIs have paid out 50% of the resources disbursed, they 
will request for the replenishment of the accounts: showing how they have utilized 
the  50%  of  the  initial  disbursement;  and  the  new  estimated  expenditure  for  the 
second batch of beneficiaries, and the process continues. 
 
 
 
Farmers will present themselves to the agro-dealer to purchase inputs; 
the agro-dealer verifies the farmer as a registered beneficiary through 
the device or smart telephone;  
the beneficiary then pays to the agro dealer 10% of the  value of the 
inputs purchased up front, which is his/her contribution to the project.  
39 
 
 
The agro-dealer swipes the card for the remaining 90% of the value of 
the inputs, which can be accessed several times until it is exhausted, 
and gives the farmer required inputs; 
The  transaction  is  immediately  registered  with  the  participating  bank 
and the dealer is paid his/her dues immediately; 
151.  The beneficiaries will be supported for 4 reproduction cycles as follows:  
Poultry which takes about 4 months to mature, the beneficiary will contribute 10% 
of all inputs (day old chicks, drugs, vaccines, treatment, extension services) for the 
first batch. The second batch he/she will contribute 40%, the third batch he/she 
will contribute 70% and pay the full value for the 4th batch; 
Small ruminants: The beneficiary will contribute 10% of the total value of inputs, 
treatment and extension services for the first 6 months, 40% from above 6 months 
to 12 months; 70% from above 12 months to 18 months and then he/she assumes 
100% responsibility above 18 months .  
Reporting: reporting on the implementation of the project will be contributed by 
the different participants  – FIs, agro dealers, SCPTTs through the CPTTs and the 
PMCU  which  will  compile  and  send  the  reports  to  IFAD  through  the  normal 
Government process.  
The  roles  and  responsibilities  of  each  of  the  implementing  partners  of  the  e-voucher 
scheme are discussed in the table below. 
40 
Role and Responsibilities of the e-Voucher Scheme Implementing Partners 
Partner 
Project 
Management and 
Coordination 
Unit 
Roles and Responsibilities 
  Overall management and coordination of the e-voucher scheme; 
 
In consultation with the village and Ward administrators, the Ward Agricultural 
Officers (WAOs), the church representatives, representatives of Common 
Interest Groups (CIGs) operating in the concerned village/ward, and the 
participating FIs, develop the criteria for the selection of the beneficiary 
farmers; 
Preparation of the e-voucher packages according to the relevant regions and 
value chains, in consultation with the stakeholders, the village administrators, 
the Ward Agricultural Officers (WAOs), the church representatives, 
representatives of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) operating in the concerned 
village, and the participating FIs; 
Procurement and contracting of the participating FIs, agro dealers and services 
providers for the mobilization of target beneficiaries with approval of GoK and 
IFAD; 
 
 
  Review and submission to CPCC and PSC the list of the beneficiaries that has 
been screened and submitted by the Sub-County Project Committees (SCPCs), 
for clearance and onward transmission to IFAD for No Objection; 
  Review (jointly with the selected FIs) and submission for CPCC, PSC, GoK and 
IFAD clearance of the lists of selected agro dealers for participation in the e-
voucher programme;  
  Submission of the cleared lists of selected agro dealers to the selected FIs for 
enrolment into e-voucher platform; 
  Make available the list of selected e-voucher beneficiaries to selected FIs to 
load them on to the e-voucher platform;  
  Overall oversite and monitoring performance of the e-voucher scheme;  
  Submission to IFAD of the initial request and subsequent replenishments, 
through the National Treasury, for funds to be disbursed to the participating 
FIs, to finance the e-voucher programme;  
Ensure timely and complete financial reporting and audit of the e-voucher 
system, including the capacity building activities.  
 
Financial 
Institutions 
  Develop and implement the e-voucher platform for the beneficiary farmers; 
  Review the list of e-voucher beneficiary farmers and enroll them into the e-
voucher platform; 
  Review and screen the list of pre-selected agro dealers for conformity with the 
agency banking policy and enroll those that conform into the e-voucher 
platform;  
  Advice the PMCU in case of failure to the required conformity by selected agro 
dealers after the screening, and agree on the ways to address the issue; 
Equip selected and enrolled agro dealers with POS devices;  
 
  Design and deliver adapted financial services (savings and loans), suited to the 
beneficiary farmers of the e-voucher scheme and participating agro-dealers;  
  Open bank accounts for farmers interested in banking and saving; 
 
Issue selected farmers with debit cards credited with monetary value of the 
agreed inputs for the given period, separated into the agreed wallets;  
  Carry out training of agro-dealers on the use of POS devices, and participating 
farmers on financial literacy;  
KALRO 
  Support the operationalization of the e-voucher scheme through producing 
Service 
Providers  
 
improved breeds of chicks, sheep and goats and availing them to the e-voucher 
participating farmers in the quality and quantity required on a timely basis;  
Jointly with the village and ward administrator, and Ward and Sub-County 
Agricultural Officers, mobilize and participate in the mobilization of target 
beneficiaries, and their sensitization for the e-voucher scheme participation; 
41 
Partner 
County/Sub 
County/Ward 
Agriculture 
Officers 
Agro dealers  
Selected e-
Voucher Farmers 
Roles and Responsibilities 
 
 
 
 
 
Participate in the review and screening of selected beneficiaries and agro 
dealers at every level of screening and filtering process; 
Train participating beneficiaries and agro-dealers on business management and 
technical skills; 
Jointly with Ward and Sub-County Agricultural Officers, carry out 
demonstrations, organize exchange visits for e-voucher beneficiaries, trade 
fairs and exhibitions where necessary;  
Lead in mobilization and sensitization of beneficiaries and stakeholders on all 
aspects of KelCoP e-voucher programme; 
Participate in selection, screening, vetting and validation of e-voucher 
beneficiaries and agro dealers, and assist where need be in their enrollment by 
participating FIs; 
  Oversee and support in the training of participating beneficiaries and agro 
dealers by the services providers and the FIs; 
  Submission of selected farmers and selected agro dealers lists to the PMCU; 
  Mobilization, sensitization and support of e-voucher beneficiary farmers for 
account opening, enrolment into the e-voucher platform and capacity building 
by selected FIs and the service providers;  
  Monitor and report on the performance of e-voucher scheme with regard to the 
use by beneficiary farmers of inputs and other services provided under the 
scheme, and any evidence of beneficiary financial graduation. 
  Comply with the agency banking policies and requirements; 
 
Participate in all required business management and technical training; 
  Stock their shops with the input packages agreed for the KelCoP e-voucher 
programme; 
  Adhere to the agreed inputs prices to the e-voucher beneficiary farmers, and 
avoid over charging which could lead to removal of the agro dealer from the list 
of selected participants; and  
  Maintain a Veterinary Doctor or a paravet that can be contacted by 
 
 
 
participating beneficiary farmers for advice or treatment of their livestock 
animals  
Ensure that extremely/highly hazardous agrochemicals are not promoted by 
the project 
Ensure that best practices promoted in the integrated pesticides management 
plan is adhered to and agro-dealers are well trained 
Join farmers’ groups for ease of services provision, and monitoring of each 
other’s activities to mitigate the risk of falling off the programme, as well as 
elite capture of the project;  
  Abide by Project guidelines in implementation of the e-voucher scheme 
including maintenance of their operations records – use of and cost of inputs, 
production and sales receipts under the various enterprises, that provide the 
necessary project performance data; 
  Meet their obligation of monetary contribution (10%, 40%, 70%) towards the 
 
 
 
cost of the e-voucher package; 
Timely collection of the required inputs as per the e-voucher package from the 
designated agro dealers; 
Participate in farmer trainings as organized by the Project; 
Engage in collective group action aimed at aggregation of adequate volumes to 
empower them to access output market outlets and have bargaining power;  
Lessons learned from the implementation of the IFAD financed KCEP-CRAL Project are as follows: 
•  The e-voucher has empowered many beneficiary farmers, as they are able to open bank 
accounts and make savings, own debit cards, and transact some businesses through the banks. 
42 
However, they need a lot of training and hand holding to understand the system. For example 
many farmers give their cards to husbands or neigbours to buy inputs for them, not 
understanding that they are the only ones who can use the cards. They also do not understand 
the danger of other people misusing the cards. This is mainly because vendors are located far 
from the beneficiaries who consider cost of transport and tend to reduce it by sending others. 
KelCop will make efforts to contract vendors according to their proximity to the beneficiaries. 
•  Vendors sometimes take advantage of the farmers by changing the prices for subsidy 
recipients. Agreements to be signed with the farmers and the financial institutions will include 
agreed prices to the farmers which can only be changed with agreements between the farmers, 
the Government and financial institution if there is a general price increase nationally.  
•  While the subsidy programme encompasses a graduation system where farmers make 
contributions on an increasing scale (10% the first year, 40%, the second year, 80% the third 
year and 100% in the fourth year), the project has not, in the past, considered situations where 
farmers lose all or most of their crops or animals due to drought or floods. They are expected to 
continue increasing their contribution on the face of food and economic devastation. This issue 
has been addressed in the project by increasing the price and physical contingency of the cost 
of the e-voucher to address such an eventuality.  
•  Financial institutions also take advantage of the farmers by charging them highly for the initial 
cards and their replacement when lost. Financial institutions will need to reduce these costs and 
to also provide products tailored for the poor farmers. 
Therefore, in the implementation of the eVoucher subsidy program under KeLCoP, the above will 
be borne in mind. 
2.2.2 Matching grants for smallholder commercial producers 
152.  The KeLCoP Marketing Development Specialist will supervise this sub-component 
with support from the project Financial Controller, and Procurement Specialist. On 
the side of the county Trade Promotion Officer and Social Development office will 
support  activities  as  well  as  the  National  Environmental  Management  Authority 
(NEMA). Private sector partners will include Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA) 
and the USAID supported Kenya Youth Employment and Skills Program (K-YES). 
153.  The project will provide 300 matching grants of up to USD 5,000 for an individual 
entrepreneur and up to USD 15,000 for organizations with a minimum of 3 to 15 
members. The grants will be  distributed equally in each  of the 10  counties. Fifty 
grants will be given in the second year of the project, 100 in the third year, another 
100 in the fourth year, and 50 in the fifth year. 
154.  Recipients must already be engaged in the marketing activity for which they seek 
a  grant.  They  must  provide  a  CV  and  a  business  plan  that  describes  ongoing 
operations, assets owned, profit margins, losses, and a specification of all services 
and materials that will purchased with the grant money and how the  investment 
will increase the quality and/or volume of their sales.  
155.  Targeted activities include, a) improvement of existing small scale existing or small 
scale  livestock  slaughter  facilities  (slaughters  slabs)  through  renovation  and 
improvements  that  conform  to  standards  in  the  Kenya  Meat  Control  Act,  b) 
improvement of poultry processing centres by equipping them with micro-slaughter 
and  refrigeration  capacity  for  both  meat  and  egg  aggregation  and  storage,  c) 
introduction  or  improvement  of  new  meat  processing  technologies  (smokers, 
sausage makers, picklers), d) provision of manual centrifuges in the case of honey, 
pasteurizing  equipment  in  the  case  of  goats  milk,  e)  harvesting,  refinement  and 
sale of honey by products beeswax, pollen, propolis, bee  venom, royal jelly, bee 
colonies, bee brood, queen bees, and package bees, f) making of cheese and soaps 
from  goats  milk,  g)  hide  transformation  into  shoes  or  sandals,  purses,  masks, 
43 
ornaments  and  other  apparel  for  the  urban  and  export  market.  Special 
consideration  will  be  given  to  (i)  ICT  platforms  that  bear  on  the  target  market 
chains, (ii) those exploring innovative feed formulation or storage strategies; (iii) 
distributors  of  innovative  feed  formulations;  (iv)  innovators  of  new  storage 
technologies;  (v)  agro-vets  that  help  to  deliver  vaccination  services  thereby 
reducing the need for closing of markets due to livestock epidemics. The ICT call 
for proposals will target a range of innovators in the field as well as candidates from 
the university Agronomy and Computer Programming/Science colleges. 
156.  Participants will be selected based on a combination of selective head hunting using 
(recruiting) and call for proposals. 
157.  The  KeLCoP  Marketing  Development  Specialist,  Financial  Controller,  and 
Procurement Specialist will define the appropriate capacity a Service Provider will 
need to manage the grant program. send an invitation-to-bid to organizations with 
the defined capacity that are working in Kenya and have a functional, online website 
and  are  listed  in  a  Kenyan  phone  directory.  KeLCoP  will  also  prepare  an  open 
invitation to bid and publish it in a national newspaper. The advertisement will be 
posted for a minimum 14 days. The approved service provider must demonstrate 
the defined capacity. IFAD will vet bidders and do due diligence background checks.  
158.  The Service Provider will receive and vet first submission grant applications. This 
includes a credit and criminal background check. The applicant must also provide 
the  Service  Provider  with  three  notarized  signees  who  are  non-family  members 
from  each  applicant’s  community  thereby  ascertaining  the  legitimacy  of  the 
investment. All the preceding—grant application and business plan, CV, background 
and credit checks and notarized signatures—will be archived in KeLCoP office.  
159.  The  Marketing  Development  Specialist,  Financial  Controller,  and  Procurement 
Specialist will work with the county Trade Promotion Officer and Social Development 
office to review and select final grant applications  
160.  The Service Provider will assist each successful applicant to refine their business 
plan as per the previously defined specifications.  
161.  The  project  will  fund  up  to  70  percent  of  the  total  proposed  investment.  The 
beneficiary must provide a minimum of 30 percent of the investment, whether it is 
from  intermediary  financial  institution  (e.g.  bank  or  SACCO)  loans,  group 
contributions. Merry-go-Rounds (rotating savings groups) will qualify as a funding 
source; verification will be signed affirmation from the savings group animator and 
two other group participants. 
162.  Those grants that touch on infrastructure, technologies and processing equipment 
or  building  construction  must  be  climate  adapted  and  eco-friendly.  This  includes 
long-life  metal  fencing  and  roofing,  local  rock  and  mortar  construction,  and 
appropriate  drainage  and  interventions  that  facilitate  hygienic  disposal  and 
management  of  human,  animal,  solid  and  chemical  waste.  Improvements  and 
innovations must conform to the mitigation actions provided for in the ESMF and in 
the  ESMP,  and  with  Kenyan  environmental  laws  regulations  for  new  businesses. 
However, in the absence  of  existing laws, investments will also  emphasize green 
technology, including solar energy, water efficient technologies and practices, and 
strategic location of infrastructure to reduce adverse environmental impacts. Such 
projects and/or plans must conform with the National Environmental Management 
Authority (NEMA) compliance standards, and in accordance with IFAD Environment 
and  Social  Safeguard  Standards.  Where  applicable,  NEMA  will  inspect  the  site. 
Procurement by the PMCU or contractors should comply with IFAD’s environmental 
44 
that  equipment,  approaches 
and  social  standards  and  should  ensure 
(environmental  and  social)  should  not  lead  to  adverse  environmental  or  social 
impacts, and that to a large extent green and efficient technologies or systems are 
promoted.  The  ESMF/ESMP  provides  details  on  risks  and  appropriate  mitigation 
actions. 
2.2.3 Grants to Youth Innovative Start-ups 
163.  The project will give 50 matching grants at an average of USD 30,000 per grantee 
to poultry  value chain  start-ups that fill critical niches in the development  of the 
poultry  value  chain.  The  grants  will  be  distributed  equally  in  each  of  counties 
targeted  for  development  of  the  poultry  value  chain.  These  grant  dispersals  will 
begin with 10 grantees in the second year of the project, 15 in the third year, 15 in 
the fourth year, and 10 in the fifth year.  
164.  Qualifying entities are registered sole proprietorships or partnerships of up to five 
people that own breeding flocks for one or several of the following activities: egg 
production  for  reproduction,  hatcheries,  purchase  of  day  old  chicks  to  pullet 
production, egg production for consumption, extension services or feed formulation 
specialists, or any business whose activities directly facilitate the cited processes, 
such as ITC or digital technologies, production of incubators, innovative processing, 
storage or transportation technologies.  
165.  Recipients must already be engaged in the marketing activity for which they seek 
a  grant.  They  must  provide  a  CV  and  a  detailed,  professional  business  plan  that 
describes  ongoing  operations,  assets  owned,  profits  margins,  losses,  and  a 
specification of all services and materials that will purchased with the grant money 
and how and how much the investment will increase the quality and/or volume of 
their sales.  
166.  The grants will be vetted and selected by IFAD while the Marketing Development 
Specialist, Financial Controller, and Procurement Specialist will define and supervise 
grant dispersal schedule. The dispersals should be given in at least three phases: 
30 percent upon approval of the grant, 30 percent after the initial investment in 
scaling up, and upon verification and final approval of the investments made with 
the first two instalments, a final dispersal of 40 percent.  
2.2.4: Training and peer to peer exchange and exposure visits 
167.  The  project  will  provide  opportunities  for  training,  peer  to  peer  learning  and 
exposure to entrepreneurs and specialists working in the selected value chains for 
2000 members of cooperatives, groups or associations distributed equally in each 
of the 10 counties. Five hundred beneficiaries will be trained in the second year of 
the project, 500 in the third year, 500 in the fourth year, and 500 in the fifth year. 
Sixty percent of beneficiaries will be women and 30 percent will be young men. 
168.  The  KeLCoP  Marketing  Development  Specialist,  Financial  Controller,  and 
Procurement Specialist will define the appropriate capacity a Service Provider will 
need  to  manage  the  training  program  and  then  send  an  invitation-to-bid  to 
organizations  with  the  defined  capacity  that  are  working  in  Kenya  and  have  a 
functional, online website and are listed in a Kenyan phone directory. The approved 
service provider must demonstrate the defined capacity. IFAD will vet bidders and 
do due diligence background checks.  
169.  To assure that potential participants are aware of the opportunity to participate in 
training, the contracted service provider will craft radio advertisements that will be 
45 
aired on three different local stations over a period of three weeks, notify at least 
20  rural  churches  and  organize  a  meeting  with  county  Trade  Officer  and  Social 
Development office to coordinate dissemination of the information. 
170.  The  training  opportunities  will  include  modules  for  business  skills,  economic 
analysis  and  technical  aspects  regarding  the  processing,  storage,  value  addition 
and marketing of meat, dairy, poultry and honey production.  
171.  The training must involve hosting at least five innovative entrepreneurs who have 
demonstrated  experience  in  their  fields.  The  entrepreneurs  chosen  to  give  guest 
lectures must be approved by the project Marketing Development Specialist. Each 
entrepreneur will receive some level of compensation (recommended $50).  
172.  The SP will also identity visits to successful entrepreneurs and groups  working in 
the value chain. These visits can be to business sites of the guest lecturers.  
2.2.4: Training of Young Entrepreneurs 
173.  The  project  will  facilitate  the  training  of  young  entrepreneurs  interested  in 
opportunities  associated  with  the  target  market  chains  through  training  and 
facilitating apprenticeship opportunities for 500 young men and women distributed 
equally in each of the 10 counties The target delivery schedule is two-hundred-fifty 
candidates trained in the third year of the project and 250 trained in the fourth year 
of the project. At least 30% of the beneficiaries will be women.  
174.  The  KeLCoP  Marketing  Development  Specialist,  Financial  Controller,  and 
Procurement Specialist will define the appropriate capacity a Service Provider will 
need  to  manage  this  training  program  and  then  send  an  invitation-to-bid  to 
organizations  with  the  defined  capacity  that  are  working  in  Kenya  and  have  a 
functional, online website and are listed in a Kenyan phone directory. The approved 
service provider must demonstrate the defined capacity. IFAD will vet bidders and 
do due diligence background checks.  
175.  The  service  provider  will  inform  youth  in  the  county  of  the  opportunity  through 
announcements on at least three local radio stations. The announcements will be 
made over a period of three weeks at least five times daily and during peak listening 
hours. The service provider will also post notices on bulletin boards and distribute 
fliers at local high schools, universities and technical schools.  
176.  The  service  provider  will  receive  and  vet  first  submission  grant  applications.  The 
applicant must also provide the service provider with three notarized signees who 
are non-family members from each applicant’s community thereby ascertaining the 
sincerity to participate in the training and not waste KeLCoP resources.  
177.  Training  will  include  basic  financial  literacy,  business  practices  and  resources, 
transport  pooling  strategies,  how  to  search  for  and  source  inputs,  review  of 
available  services  sector  resources  (such  as  state  and  civil  sector  entities  that 
provide extension  services), how to  search for and contact buyers, and business 
contract best practices.  
178.  The  KeLCoP  Marketing  Development  Specialist  will  work  with  county  Social 
Development  office,  the  Kenya  Private  Sector  Alliance  (KEPSA)  and  the  USAID 
supported  Kenya  Youth  Employment and  Skills Program  (K-YES)  to  connect  the 
graduates of the KeLCoP Young Entrepreneur Program to formal sector processing 
and marketing internships in the relative value chains. Internships will be sought 
with  implementing  partners,  agro-vets  and  input  suppliers,  livestock  markets, 
46 
LMAs, as well as the county and KeLCoP itself to place the youth at key nodes in 
the value chain as apprentices.  
179.  Upon completion of an internship, the Service Provider will guide the entrepreneurs 
in the preparation of a business proposal of the candidate’s choice but focused on 
development of the targeted market chains.  
2.2.5 Grants to Young Entrepreneurs 
180.  As many as 500 of the  young entrepreneurs  who successfully graduate from the 
training sub-component 2.2.4 and develop a business proposal will receive  small 
grants (up to $2,000). Two-hundred-fifty grants will be dispersed in the fourth year 
and the other 250 grants will be dispersed in the fifth year. 
181.  Prospective business projects include mechanized micro-processing and specialized 
micro-transporters,  use  of  refrigeration  for  storage,  processing  of  milk,  meats, 
cheeses, production and storage of feeds as well as any undertaking that services 
the respective market chains, such as tool kits for small engine and refrigeration 
repair. Special consideration will be offered to entrepreneurs seeking to develop ICT 
solutions  and  those  exploring  innovative  feed  formulation  strategies  as  well  as 
micro-transport that uses motorcycles or three wheelers modified to transport live 
animals, or any of the products related to the targeted value chains.  
182.  Marketing Development Specialist, Financial Controller, and Procurement Specialist 
will develop a protocol for management and dispersal of the funds using accounting 
best practices.  
2.2.6: County Level multi-stakeholder platforms 
183.  KeLCoP  will  use  multi-stakeholder  meetings  to  facilitate  dialogue  between  key 
actors in the target value chains. Each year and in each of the 10 targeted counties 
there will be a possible total of four MSPs per value chain: one general MSP and 
one for each value chain. The MSPs will begin during the second year of the 6-year 
project,  so  there  will  be  a  possible  total  of  20  MSPs  per  county.  The  project 
marketing specialist and the respective county chief officer of trade. 
184.  KeLCoP Market Developing Specialist will work with the Country Trade  Promotion 
Officer, Social Development office, and the Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA) 
to  identify  and  invite  interested  stakeholders  from  commercial  service  providers 
and suppliers (of technical or financial services or inputs), government departments 
and  research  institutions  to  be  members  of  the  MSP  and  to  attend  the  meetings 
(some can be identified from the investor forums).  
185.  County livestock officers with support from the project M&E specialist will create a 
database  of  farmer  groups  in  each  region  to  facilitate  ease  of  their  identification 
and  representation  in  the  MSPs.  This  database  should  include  location  of  farmer 
group, contact information for two group officials, type of livestock the groups deals 
with, monthly production volumes, approved livestock vaccination timesheets.  
186.  MSPs  will  be  jointly  convened  for  actors  across  all  value  chains  with  commodity 
specific  MSPs  conducted  separately  thereafter.  Where  one  of  the  priority  value 
chains is missing, the county and PMCU should allocate that space for another value 
chain MSP that may require additional efforts (e.g. attracting more stakeholders) 
and time to set up.  
187.  The MSP meetings will entail identification of opportunities for developing strategic 
linkages across the supply chain (both vertically and horizontally) and developing 
47 
priorities for individual or joint actions that KeLCoP can support or facilitate. Topics 
will  include  quality  control,  packaging,  volumes,  transport,  order  and  delivery 
schedules, guarantees, pricing logical and costs.  
188.  The  KeLCoP  M&E  and  Knowledge  Management  specialist  will  summarize  the 
conclusions  from  MSPs  in  a  non-binding  cluster  action  plan  that  identifies 
investment  priorities  for  private  and  public investments  and  follow-up  actions  by 
the  project,  county  governments  and  other  stakeholders.  The  plan  will  be  made 
available to inform policy decisions at the county and national levels.  
189.  Business-to-business (B2B) follow-up. Shortly after the MSPs (normally within 1-2 
weeks),  bilateral  follow-up  meetings  should  take  place,  typically  between  a 
business (either a buyer or supplier) and a set of producers who met  during the 
MSP  and  who  have  identified  specific  opportunities  to  do  business  together.  The 
B2B follow-up meetings will focus on developing and negotiating practical trading 
plans between producers and buyers/businesses. Experience suggests that it may 
take  three  or  more  follow-up  meetings  before  a  final  agreement  is  negotiated 
depending  of  the  scale  and  complexity  of  the  proposed  deal/arrangement.  The 
agreed trading plans will often lead to the need for specific actions or investments 
to be made by the producers, buyer/business or both. The investments and actions 
may be taken individually or jointly, depending on what has been agreed. Similarly, 
follow up meetings/interactions will take place between service providers (financial, 
technical,  business)  and  producers/traders  who  utilize  the  available  services  and 
products.  
2.2.7 Dashboard for Crowd Funding 
190.  The project will facilitate selected beneficiaries access to crowdfunding platforms. 
The Marketing Development Specialist and the ICT Specialist  will carefully screen 
and  select  20  to  50  profiles  of  young  men  and  women  who  are  credible 
entrepreneurs  from  among  its  beneficiaries  and  develop  their  profiles  and  detail 
their  specific  business  venture  and  their  opportunities  for  growth.  The  selected 
profiles  do  not  have  to  be  equally  distributed  among  the  counties  but  will  be 
selected solely on merit of undertaking. This subcomponent will be carried out in 
the  fifth  year  of  the  project,  after  all  proposals  and  projects  have  been 
accomplished.  
191.  The  selection  of  the  candidates  will  be  from  among  those  who  also  provide  an 
opportunity for employment generation and growth to others associated with the 
business  the  determination  of  which  will  be  made  by  the  KeLCoP  Marketing 
Development Specialist, ICT Specialist, and IFAD. 
192.  The Project ICT Specialist will place these profiles on a specially designed platform 
for on-line giving using mobile platforms such as M-Changa in Kenya.  
2.3 Value Chain Management Information Systems 
2.3.1  E-Marketing  
193.  In  accordance  with  IFAD’s  November  2019  Information  and  Communication 
Technology for Development (ICT4D) and the GoK Blueprint for digital Economy by 
2030, KeLCoP will leverage its ICT capacity to create linkages between buyers and 
sellers, transporters, service and input providers. 
194.  The ICT Programming Specialist will work for the life of the KeLCoP project under 
the guidance of a recognized and experienced consultant who will design and guide 
48 
implementation  of  a  platform  that  crowd  sources  information  from  the  LMA 
members,  County  Livestock  Officials,  traders  entrepreneurs,  and  cooperative 
members, all of whom will have been trained under the auspices of KeLCoP activities 
described under Component 1 and other sub-components of Component 2.  
195.  The ICT Specialist will be responsible for overseeing implementation, maintaining 
the digital application, and training users. 
196.  The  exact  configuration  of  the  information  system  should  be  defined  by  the 
consultant during the first few months of the KeLCoP project. While the consultant 
will determine the necessary task, the ITC application should not be restricted to 
market  information,  but  should  attempt  to  link  to  other  e-service  activities  in 
Component 1 and Component 3 as well as M&E, the logic being that all bear directly 
on marketing and the success  of the project. For  example, disease monitoring is 
critical  to  avoiding  market  closures  associated  with  regional  quarantines  and  for 
opening  quarantined  markets  as  rapidly  as  possible  when  a  threat  has  passed. 
Tracking climactic conditions is critical for early warning of drought and mobilizing 
markets to respond with stockpiling of fodder. 
197.  All  KeLCoP  staff  will  participate  in  weekly  ITC  meetings  where  the  ITC  specialist 
presents the progress of the KeLCoP ITC platform to staff from each component. 
Staff from each sector should prepare and offer feedback and suggestions that help 
guide  the  process.  These  meetings  are  critical  to  the  continuity  and  success  of 
integrating ITC into all aspects of the project and meeting IFAD and GoK ITC goals 
and should be coordinated in such a way that the consultant who has designed the 
process  participates  in  the  meetings  remotely  through  Skype  or  another 
teleconferencing platform, something that should be made a stringent requirement 
written into the consultant’s ToR.  
198.  Although the value chain Information System should be a stand-alone component, 
KeLCoP  must  not  lose  site  of  the  potential  for  integrating  efforts  and  the  digital 
platform with the other KeLCoP activities, as doing so will provide a catalyst that 
integrates the entire project, giving it focus and encouraging communication and 
linkages  between  all  the  component  activities  and  staff.  Specifically,  the  ITC 
activities under the supervision of the ITC specialist can provide a mechanism to, 
a)  crowdsource  market  prices  to  make  real-time  price  information  available  to 
buyers and sellers, b) provide a platform for open purchase and sales orders, and 
c) maximize use and availability of transport as when a truck is loading for transport 
to or from and market destination. ICT can also be used to publicize the availability 
of d) feed and fodder, e) water, f) vaccinations, and g) AI breeding services as well 
as h) identification of available and appropriate financial services. Other needs that 
can be met by ICT applications and that bear directly on the market chain include 
i) notification of incidences of disease among livestock, something that, because of 
imperfect information flows, necessitate market closures in an effort to contain the 
disease,  and  j)  crowdsourcing  climactic  conditions  for  real-tracking  impending 
drought thereby facilitating early harvesting, transport, sale and stockage of fodder. 
The e-extension service is also an ITC strategy that should be linked to all the ITC 
activities in these other components.  
199.  At least one of the fifty $30,000 start-up grants and at least 10 of the 300 Matching 
$5,000 grants should target ITC enterprises or development plans. 
49 
Component 3: Policy Support and Project Management 
Sub component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support to County and National Government 
Activity 3.1.1: Livestock Master Plan 
Activity 3.1.2: Development of Regulations for Livestock Bill (Selected Value 
Chains) 
Activity 3.1.3: County Level Livestock Strategies 
Activity 3.1.4: County Level Livestock Strategies Developing Standards and 
Certification Regime for Honey products 
200.  Project Coordinator will lead the policy and institutional support in collaboration with 
the  State  Department  of  Livestock.  In  executing  different  policy  and  institutional 
support,  the  coordinator  will  work  with  several  government  and  development 
institutions at different levels. At the county level, the  activity will be co-executed 
with  the  directors  of  livestock  production  and  veterinary  services  and  county 
assembly for regulations and supportive legislation while the directorate of veterinary 
services will be closely engaged at the national level. 
Activity 3.1.1: Livestock Master Plan 
201.  Development  of  a  Livestock  Master  Plan  will  guide  policy  and  investment 
interventions in the livestock sub-sector. There is are prior activities and initiative 
going on with regard to the master plan and the additional project support to the 
livestock  master  plan  development  will  be  in  form  of  financing  future  technical 
meetings,  logistics  and  other  identified  support  required  by  the  secretariat.  This 
activity  will  be  implemented  in  collaboration  with  the  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organization  and  the  International  Livestock  Research  Institute  that  will  provide 
the technical support and overall technical expertise to master plan development. 
Activity 3.1.2: Development of Regulations for Livestock Bill (Selected Value 
Chains) 
202.  After  the  final  approval  of  the  livestock  bill  (in  2020),  the  next  tasks  will  be  the 
development of appropriate regulations to fully operationalize different facets of the 
policy. The project will support the drafting of appropriate rules and regulations to 
specifically foster development of three value chains (bee keeping, poultry, sheep 
and  goats).  The  supportive  regulations  will  address  issues  from  production  to 
consumption  through  developing  standards,  guidelines,  thus  establish  regulatory 
industry,  and  value  chain 
mechanisms 
developments. 
for  various  aspects 
livestock 
in 
203.  This activity will be spearheaded by the state department of livestock at the national 
level  in  close  collaboration  with  the  county  director  of  livestock  and  the  county 
director  of  veterinary  services  and  other  county-level  stakeholders  in  livestock 
sector, including private sectors, development partners, livestock producers and the 
county assembly in respective county.  
204.  The specific nature of the support required for different value chains (bee keeping, 
poultry, sheep and goats) will be identified during the project implementation.  
205.  The regulation should also ensure that environment, social and climate safeguards 
are embedded based on the ESMF/ESMP and lessons from project interventions. 
50 
Activity 3.1.3: Development of County Level Livestock Strategies 
206.  This is county specific support to identified priorities on feed production/security, 
breeding, extension services etc. Hence, this activity will support development of 
identified  county  level  livestock  strategies.  Counties  are  already  investing  in 
different priorities identified and envisioned in the County Integrated Development 
Programme (CIDP).  However,  some  of the investments are not clearly guided by 
strategy  or  investment  guidelines.  This  activity  will  identify  priority  investments, 
assess  the  level  to  which  current  investments  are  shaped  by  the  bigger  thinking 
and  investment  logic  and  then  support,  based  on  the  gap,  any  strategies  for 
livestock development.  
207.  This activity will be executed under the guidance of the production lead specialist, 
at the PMCU, working closely with the director of livestock production and director 
of  veterinary  services,  in  collaboration  with  other  technical  experts  such  as 
rangeland  management  officers.  Counties  will  take  the  lead  in  identifying  the 
strategic issues for livestock development, itemize and prioritize them for action. 
Then  the  necessary  budget  is  allocated  to  support  the  prioritized  activities  and 
strategy development. 
Activity 3.1.4: Development of Standards and Certification Regime for Honey 
products at national Level  
208.  Honey  producers  need  to  be  secured  from  unscrupulous  dealers  through 
certification  and  seal  of  quality/standard.  Such  effort  will  ensure  smallholder 
capture market opportunities in certified and premium market such as in organic 
honey chain among others. Honey testing, certification and quality assurance is the 
mandate  of  the  National  Bee  Keeping  Institute.  However,  the  institute  has 
operational and capacity challenges to discharge such essential duties. Through this 
activity,  this  project  will  support  capacity  building  for  the  National  Bee  Keeping 
Institute,  the  only  institute  in  the  country  that  provide  honey-testing  facilities.. 
Such  certification  will  be  used  by  the  project  to  link  honey  produced  by  the 
indigenous  people  (e.g.  Ndorobo  in  mount  Elgon  and  Ichamus  in  Baringo  to 
international organic markets 
209.  This support will be made directly to the National Bee Keeping Institute to support 
them  upgrade  equipment  and  laboratory  for  honey  testing,  quality  control, 
standards and certification. 
Sub-Component 3. 2 Project Coordination and Management 
4  Institutional framework and project management 
4.1  Alignment and Ownership 
210.  GoK’s strategy is currently guided by the Big Four Agenda (2017), which comprises 
of four key development pillars initiated by President Uhuru to improve the living 
standards  of  Kenyans  and  grow  the  economy.  The  four  pillars  are  Food  security, 
manufacturing  (for  job  creation),  affordable  universal  health  care  and  affordable 
housing. Food security would be improved through better extension services and 
better  designed  and  managed  subsidies  to  increase  food  yields  and  improve 
qualities. In the manufacturing expansion, the focus would be in the blue economy, 
agro-processing, leather and textile industries. Of particular relevance to KeLCop is 
the  government  intention  to  have  leather  products  made  in  Kenya to  create 
employment opportunities for the youth.  
51 
211.  The  Big  Four  Agenda  will  be  implemented  through  the  Agricultural  Sector 
Transformation  and  Growth  Strategy  (ASTGS  -2019-2029),  that  is  expected  to 
transform  Kenya’s  agricultural  sector  and  make  it  a  regional  powerhouse.  The 
ASTGS has incorporated most of the existing policies and strategies such as the: 
Kenya Food and Nutrition Security Policy (2011) that recognizes adequate food and 
nutrition  as  a  human  right  and is  central  to  human  development  in  the  country; 
Kenya’s Vision 2030 (GoK 2012) which is being implemented through three five-
year  Medium  Term  Plans  (currently  implementing  MTP  III),  with  an  objective  to 
promote  an  innovative,  commercially-oriented  and  modern  agricultural  sector 
through  institutional  reforms,  enhanced  productivity  of  key  commodities,  value 
addition,  improved  financial  services  and  markets;  the  National  Policy  for  the 
Sustainable Development of Northern Kenya and other Arid Lands (2012) that lays 
emphasis  on  poverty  reduction  and  the  re-balancing  of  regional  development  to 
ensure all Kenyans have an equal chance of sharing in the promise and benefits of 
Vision  2030;  Kenya  Climate  Smart  Agriculture  Strategy  (GoK  2017–2026)  which 
was  developed  as  a  commitment  of  the  GoK  to  address  agriculture  sector 
development  under  changing  climatic  conditions,  with  the  objective  to  adapt  to 
climate  change  and  build  resilience  of  agricultural  systems  while  minimizing 
emissions for enhanced food and nutritional security and improved livelihoods. 
212.  The ASTGS objectives are to: increase small-scale farmer, pastoralist and fisherfolk 
incomes by raising average annual small-scale farmer incomes by 35%, and directly 
benefiting  3.3  million  Kenyan  farming  households;  increasing  agricultural  output 
and  value  addition  by  expanding  agricultural  GDP  by  6%  and  increasing  the 
contribution  of  agro-processing  to  GDP  by  50%  over  five  years;  and  boosting 
household food resilience by reducing the number of food-insecure Kenyans in the 
arid  and  semi-arid  lands  (ASAL)  regions  from  an  average  of  2.7  million  to  zero, 
while reducing the cost of food and improving nutrition, at the same time protecting 
households against environmental and fiscal shocks.  
213.  KeLCoP  will  contribute  to  this  Government  agriculture  transformation  Agenda 
through  investments  and  activities  that  focus  on  increasing  incomes  and  food 
security  of  rural  small  -  scale  poor  livestock  farmers  and  pastoralists,  and  make 
them more resilient to climate risks and economic shocks. The project is therefore 
fully aligned with GoK’s agricultural transformation agenda. ASTGS investments are 
expressed  as  9  flagships  that  will  drive  Kenya’s  agricultural  transformation  and 
support its food security aspirations. The project is aligned to the 7 out of the 9 
ASTGS as discussed below.  
214.  The priority investment envisaged by the ASTGS that are relevant to KeLCop, and 
the project contribution to each of these priorities, are as follows: 
  Flagship-1 targets a million farmers, pastoralists and fisher-folks with provision 
of agriculture inputs and equipment for irrigation, processing and post-harvest 
aggregation. The project will contribute to this flagship through: (i) mobilization 
and  mentoring  of  smallholder  farmers  and  the  most  vulnerable  households 
(including  women,  youth  and  marginalized  tribes)  through  the  GALS  process, 
and providing them with a graduation package and asset transfer combined with 
strong business skills and technical trainings to increase their productivity and 
enable them to participate profitably in the selected value chains; improvement 
of 20 livestock market infrastructure (includes building holding pens, sheds, and 
feed  storage  facilities  to  accommodate  up  to  2,000  sheep  and  100  larger 
52 
animals, shelter for vendors of cooked food, raw fruits and raw vegetables) and 
governance in the selected counties.  
Matching grants will also be provided to promising young producers (about 90 
men and women) from among the vulnerable poor households who show growth 
promise and the commitment to further enhance their production capacity. They 
will  be  selected  through  ICT  call  for  proposals  after  two  years  of  mentoring 
support  and  tracking.  Special  consideration  will  be  given  to  those:  using  ICT 
platforms;  exploring  innovative  feed  formulation  or  storage  strategies; 
distributors  of  innovative  feed  formulations;  innovators  of  new  storage 
technologies;  and  agro-vets  that  help  to  deliver  vaccination  services  thereby 
reducing the need for closing of markets due to livestock epidemics. The project 
will  fund  up  to  70  percent  of  the  total  proposed  investment  while  the 
beneficiaries  will  provide  a  minimum  of  30  percent,  which  they  could  borrow 
from SACCOs or financial institutions. 
  Flagship-2  that  will  shift  the  nationwide  subsidies  to  focus  1.4  million  high-
needs farming households and empower them to access a range of inputs from 
multiple  providers,  enabled  by  an  e-voucher  delivery  system.  KeLCop  will 
implement an inputs and extension service subsidy through e-voucher scheme, 
through  the  private  sector  for  the  beneficiaries  to  access  various  inputs  (i.e. 
vaccines,  medicines,  inputs,  feed  supplements,  extension  services,  veterinary 
care, AI, etc). 
  Flagship-3 that envisages to set-up 6 agro-processing hubs across the country 
using a one-stop-shop rapid Public Private Partnership (PPP) process to promote 
agro-processing for local and export markets. The project will provide matching 
grants for up to 300 individual entrepreneurs and groups (including women and 
youth)  that  are  already  engaged  in  marketing  but  would  like  to  increase  the 
quality  and  volume  of  their  sales  and  add  value  to  their  produce.  Targeted 
activities  include:  a)  improvement  of  small  scale  livestock  slaughter  facilities 
(slaughters  slabs)  through  renovation  and  improvements  that  conform  to 
standards  in  the  Kenya  Meat  Control  Act;  b)  introduction  or  improvement  of 
poultry  processing  centers  by  equipping  them  with  micro-slaughter  and 
refrigeration  capacity  for  both  meat  and  egg  aggregation  and  storage;  c) 
introduction  or  improvement  of  new  meat  processing  technologies  (smokers, 
sausage  makers,  picklers);  d)  provision  of  manual  centrifuges  in  the  case  of 
honey,  &  pasteurizing  equipment  in  the  case  of  goats  milk  ;  e)  harvesting, 
refinement and sale of honey bi-products such as beeswax, pollen, propolis, bee 
venom,  royal  jelly,  bee  colonies,  bee  brood,  queen  bees,  and  packaging;  f) 
making of cheese and soaps from goats milk; g) skin transformation into shoes 
or  sandals,  purses,  masks,  ornaments  and  other  apparel  for  the  urban  and 
export market, etc. 
  Flagship-6 that will boost food resilience of 1.3 million farming, pastoralist and 
fishing ASAL households, through community driven design of interventions, and 
ensure  more  active  coordination  of  development  partners  and  private  sector 
resources through regional economic blocs. The project will support participatory 
rangeland  mapping  to  articulate  priorities  for  the  protection  of  key  grazing 
resources and the seasonal access. GIS maps will be developed to form effective 
legislative  and  management  tools,  and  together  these  will  be  used  to:  better 
inform community led resource management and protect key grazing resources; 
link customary to formal systems through appropriate legislation; empower local 
53 
level governance through supporting development of appropriate laws, by-laws, 
recognition of local institutions and capacity building on by-law formulation and 
facilitation  of  by-law  development  with  the  County  Governments.  The  GALS 
project  intervention  approach  will  ensure  that  the  engagement  with  the 
households  results  in  women’s  empowerment  and  promotes  an  equitable 
distribution of food, assets, decision-making, and workloads. 
215.  The project will assist the County Governments to invite private sector participation 
in the livestock sector development through Investor Forums to which potential 
private sector investors would be invited to assess the potential for investment in 
the selected counties in the selected value chains. The project will finance the 
initial round of investor forums in each county. The project will also assist the 
County Governments to prepare a strategy under which it would attract the private 
sector e.g through regulations that facilitate ease of business, tax holidays and 
land grants. 
  Flagship-7  focusing  on  knowledge  and  skills  building  in  technical  and 
management skills for national and county government transformation leaders 
and extension agents. The project will work with the 20 LMAs operating in the 
upgraded  livestock  markets  and  the  Kenya  Livestock  Marketing  Council  to 
strengthen the capacity of LMAs and ensure that they operate an economically 
sustainable  model  livestock  market  management  which  is  gender  and  youth 
sensitive.  It  will  also  Support  Regulatory  Mechanisms  for  Markets  by  training 
county  officials  on  KEBS  regulations  bearing  on  control  of  livestock,  space 
allowances,  biosecurity  plan,  health  certification  of  animals,  moving  permits, 
regulation  of  agrovets  in  the  market,  collection  of  fees,  accounting,  record 
keeping  and  dissemination  of  information,  lobbying,  conflict  resolution, 
consistent reporting and control of theft. 
  Flagship-8 that aims to strengthen research and innovation, and launch priority 
digital  and  data  use  cases  for  better  decision  making  and  performance 
management (starting with digital subsidy registration and delivery, farmer and 
SME performance, automated SFR buy / sell needs). The project will implement 
an ICT based approach to extension services by using e-extension based models 
that are appropriate for the needs and literacy levels of its participants. KeLCoP 
will also implement a breed improvement programme by: (i) strengthening the 
capacity  of  the  four  existing  breed  improvement  centres,  namely,  Nomotio  in 
Samburu, Kimose in Baringo and Naivasha sheep and goat centre for the small 
ruminants  and  KARLO  Center  in  Kakamega  for  poultry;  and  (ii)  through 
distribution of improved breeds of small ruminants (for meat and dairy) to the 
beneficiaries  directly,  in  partnership  with  an  international  research  institution 
that  has  expertise  and  experience 
improvement 
interventions. Rotation of males among the farmers will be carefully monitored 
to reduce in-breeding. 
in  community  breed 
  Flagship-9 relating to sustainability and crisis management that will monitor: 
(i) sustainable and climate smart natural resource management; and (ii) crisis 
management  for pests, diseases, climate and global price shocks. The project 
will contribute to the flagship through production of grass using indigenous grass 
seeds  for  pasture  that  will  also  project  land  from  further  degradation  in  the 
ASALs;  and  support  to  establishment  of  climate  resilient  water  infrastructure 
such  as  solar-powered  boreholes,  and  water  harvesting  in  sub-surface  dams, 
rock  catchments,  water  pans  and  shallow  wells.  The  participatory  rangeland 
mapping to articulate priorities for the protection of key grazing resources and 
54 
the seasonal access, and the GIS Mapping discussed under flagship 6 above will 
also contribute to this flagship.  
216.  The project will also contribute to the Kenya Youth Agribusiness Strategy (2017 -
2021) that aims at providing new opportunities for youth in agriculture and its value 
chains by developing youth-oriented mechanisms and approaches to increase their 
engagement  in  agribusiness  and  related  value  chains.  The  project  will  provide 
matching  grants  and  training  targeted  to  the  youth  to  enable  them  invest  and 
participate at any level of the selected value chains.  
217.  Contribution  to  COSOP  SOs.  The  project  will  directly  contribute  to  two  of  the 
three COSOP Strategic Objectives, SO2 and SO3. To SO2 - “access to gender and 
youth  responsive  productivity  enhancing  assets,  technologies,  rural  finance  and 
services improved” – the project will mobilize and mentor smallholder farmers and 
the most vulnerable households (including women, youth and marginalized tribes) 
through the GALS process, and provide them with a graduation package and asset 
transfer  combined  with  strong  business  skills  and  technical  trainings  to  increase 
their productivity; and provide matching grants to promising young producers (men 
and  women)  from  among  the  vulnerable  poor  households  to  enhance  their 
production capacity. SO3 - “Gender and youth responsive and sustainable access 
to  improved  post-production  technologies,  markets,  and  nutrition  enhanced”  - 
KeLCoP will focus of women and youth in most of the interventions such as provision 
of matching grants to individual entrepreneurs and groups that would be involved 
in investing in small scale livestock slaughter and poultry processing facilities, new 
meat  processing  technologies  (smokers,  sausage  makers,  picklers);  processing 
hides  and  skins,  honey  processing,  goat  milk  pasteurizing,  marketing  and 
transportation in the various value chains, making and marketing bi-products from 
the value chains etc. 
218.  Contribution  to  IFAD  SOs:  KeLCoP  is  aligned  with  IFAD’s  2016-2025  Strategic 
Framework as it will respond to IFAD’s overarching goal of supporting rural people 
to overcome poverty and achieve food security through remunerative, sustainable 
and resilient livelihoods. By selecting value chains that impact the rural poor with 
limited  resources  in  both  highly  populated  counties  with  large  pockets  of  poor 
people,  as  well  as  ASAL  counties  which  have  high  poverty  indexes,  KeLCoP  will 
contribute to IFAD’s effort to target and benefit a large number of poor rural people, 
empower them technically and business-wise, and in the process promote gender 
equality.  
219.  KeLCoP will also contribute to all three IFAD Strategic Objectives (SOs). Component 
1 that will invest in enhancing livestock productivity through livestock breeding, e-
extension  services,  graduation  packages  and  asset  transfer  for  vulnerable 
households,  GALs,  inputs  and  extension  service  subsidy  through  the  e-voucher 
system,  matching  grants  to  groups  and  individuals  to  finance  investments  in 
livestock  production,  business  skills  training,  etc  will  contribute  to  IFAD  SO1  – 
“increased poor rural people’s productive capacities”. Component 2 interventions in 
marketing  grants  to  individuals  and  groups  to  invest  in  livestock  marketing, 
processing, animal feed formulation, agro-vets shops; and investing in policy and 
strategies  to  improve  livestock  commercialization  will  contribute  to  IFAD  SO2  - 
“increase in poor rural people’s benefits from market participation”. Component 1 
55 
activities  that  include  upscaling  the  production  of  pasture  to  feed  livestock  while 
arresting  soil  degradation,  establishing  by-laws  to  protect  grazing  lands,  and 
investing in climate friendly water infrastructure such as solar-powered boreholes, 
sub-surface  dams,  rock  catchments,  water  pans  and  shallow  wells  for  water 
harvesting and storage will contribute to IFAD SO3 – “strengthening environmental 
sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities”. 
4.2  Project implementation 
220.  KelCoP  is  a  national  project  covering  ten  counties,  with the  national government 
being  the  borrower  and  recipient  of  the  project  funds.  Consequently,  the  project 
will be implemented under the Ministry in charge of Livestock Development, which 
will  provide  the  implementation  oversight.  However,  there  are  some  activities 
necessary  for  the  successful  implementation  of  the  project  that  fall  under  the 
responsibility  of  other  Ministries  and  Departments.  These  include  the  National 
Treasury and Planning; Ministries of Water and Irrigation; Devolution and Arid and 
Semi-Arid  Lands;  Lands;  ICT;  Tourism  and  Wildlife;  Energy;  Industry,  Trade  and 
Cooperatives; Public Service, Youth and Gender Affairs; Environment, and Forestry. 
Other  institutions  like  KALRO;  KWS,  Kenya  Animal  Genetics  Resource  Center; 
Kenya  Veterinary  Vaccines  Production  Institute;  National  Drought  Management 
Authority; and National Environmental Management Authority; CBOs; and financial 
institutions (mainly SACCOs), will be part of the project implementation. 
221.  Project  Management  and  Coordination  Unit  (PMCU)  –  a  PMCU  will  be 
established  comprising  of  a  Project  Coordinator,  a  Financial  Controller,  a 
Procurement  Specialist,  a  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Specialist,  a  Financial 
Assistant, a Procurement Assistant, an Environment, Climate and Social Safeguards 
Officer,  and  a  Data  Programmer.  This  team  that  will  possess  appropriate  project 
management  skills,  will  be  competitively  recruited  through  advertisements  and 
interviews, and will be supported with drivers, Secretaries, General Administrative 
and  support  staff.  The  recruitment  of  the  PMCU  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the 
State  Department  of  Livestock  (SDL),  with  close  collaboration  with  IFAD. 
Candidates who will be successful and will be appointed to positions in the project 
will be required to resign from their current employment, including those who will 
be appointed from the government. The PMCU will also be supported by short-term 
consultants  in  the  areas  of  Production  Lead  Specialist,  Marketing  Development 
Specialist,  Social 
Inclusion  and  Mobilization  Specialist,  and  Knowledge 
Management. 
222.  The PMCU will be responsible for the day to day management of the project that 
will  include:  (i)  planning  of  Project  activities  and  preparation  of  the  AWP&B;  (ii) 
procurement  and  contracting  for  the  goods,  works  and  services  required  for  the 
project  implementation;  (iii)  financial  and  administrative  management  of  Project 
resources; (iv) mobilization and coordination of the activities of the various Project 
partners; (v) supervision and preparation of progress reports; (vi) setting up and 
maintaining an effective M&E database to reflect progress in project activities and 
outcomes;  (vii)  ensuring  that  environment,  climate  and  social  issues  are 
mainstreamed  and  safeguards  measures  adhered  to,  and  (viii)  Knowledge 
management and documentation of lessons learned. The PMCU will be located in 
Nakuru to take advantage  of the structures and facilities already provided under 
the  Smallholder  Dairy  Commercialization  Project  (SDCP)  closing  in  March  2020. 
This is expected to hasten the project implementation start-up.  
223.  Multi-Stakeholder Engagement (MSPs): MSPs bring together representatives 
from  different  interest  groups  (stakeholders)  to  discuss  shared  challenges, 
56 
opportunities,  policy  actions  and  advocacy  strategies.  They  promote  better 
decision making by ensuring that the views of the main actors concerned about a 
particular  decision  are  heard  and  integrated  at  all  stages  through  dialogue  and 
consensus building. Because of the inclusive and participatory approaches used, it 
gives  stakeholders  greater  sense  of  ownership  for  decisions  made.  The  process 
takes the view that everyone involved in the process has a valid view and relevant 
knowledge and experience to bring to the decision making. Everyone involved takes 
responsibility for the outcome, and they are thus more likely to comply with them. 
224.  Given their importance, the project will establish MSPs in the selected counties to 
bring together the various stakeholders to the selected value chains – producers, 
traders,  transporters,  processors,  the  civil  societies,  environment  and  climate 
specialists,  indigenous  peoples,  national  and  county  governments,  research 
institutions,  non-government  organizations,  etc.  This  will  promote  information 
collection  on  available  opportunities  and  challenges,  remove  bottlenecks  to 
livestock commercialization due to increased chances to link producers with input 
suppliers,  markets,  processors,  traders,  services  providers,  private  and  public 
actors.  They  will  also  connect  common  interest  groups  (producers,  processors, 
traders,  etc.,)  to  share  experiences  and  foster  common  front.  The  project  will 
support the beneficiaries in the establishment of the MSPs. 
4.3  Project oversight and strategic guidance 
225.  The Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC):  to  ensure  proper  coordination  of  the 
project  implementation  among  the  various  players  and  stakeholders,  an  Inter-
Ministerial Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established with representation 
from all the concerned ministries and agencies, with the mandate to provide overall 
policy  guidance  to  the  project  (approve  Annual  Work  Programs  and  Budgets 
(AWP&Bs),  review  project  progress  against  targets,  assess  management 
effectiveness,  decide  on  corrective  measures  where  appropriate,  and  review 
lessons learned and good practices). The PSC will thus be the highest organ in the 
implementation  arrangements.  It  will  meet  regularly  under  the 
project 
chairmanship of the Principal Secretary in charge of livestock development in the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock Fisheries and Cooperatives (MALFC), to deliberate 
on  the  project  progress,  issues  and  corrective  measures.  The  membership 
representation will be at the PS level but he/she may delegate to not lower than a 
Director. The Project Coordinator will serve as the Secretary to the PSC.  
226.  County  Project  Coordinating  Committees  (CPCCs):  At  the  County  level,  the 
project implementation will be overseen by the CPCCs established in every county. 
The CPCCs comprise of County Executive Committee Members who are essentially 
Ministers of the various Government Ministries that will be involved with the project 
at the County level. They will provide overall guidance to project implementation 
within  the  county,  review  project  progress  against  targets,  review  and  approve 
AWP&Bs,  assess  project  management  effectiveness  and  issues  affecting  the 
project,  and  decide  on  corrective  measures.  Thus  majority  of  the  CPCCs 
responsibilities will be similar to those of the PSC but at the County level. CPCCs 
meetings  will  be  chaired  by  the  County  Executive  Committee  members  (CEC)  in 
charge of Livestock Development. They will meet on a quarterly basis.  
227.  Role  of  IFAD.  IFAD’s  Kenya  Country  Office  will  carry  out  supervision  and 
implementation support missions jointly with GoK representatives drawn from SDL 
and the National Treasury, as well as the implementing partners such as KALRO. 
IFAD will conduct at least one supervision mission and one implementation support 
57 
mission each year to review the project implementation progress in all spheres  – 
planning,  procurement,  finance,  M&E,  project  outcomes,  mainstreaming  themes 
and  safeguards  etc,  -  identify  challenges  and  propose  solutions.  Through 
communications and continuous monitoring, IFAD will ensure that any bottlenecks 
and  risks  identified  will  be  resolved  without  delay  to  ensure  successful 
implementation. Any changing circumstances that will necessitated adjustments to 
project implementation arrangements and/or project design will be addressed in a 
timely manner, and the logframe adjusted accordingly. The relevance of the project 
objectives to the  country, target groups and  IFAD development priorities, will be 
continuously  assessed,  and  where  need  be  adjustments  to  the  project  design 
and/or  implementation  arrangements  proposed  as  appropriate.  Moreover,  the 
project will be required to submit to IFAD for review and No Objection the following 
documents: AWP&B, Procurement Plan, tender documents and evaluation reports. 
The  IFAD  Livestock  Development  desk  at  HQ  will  provide  technical  backstopping 
support to the project. 
4.4  Project coordination 
228.  On the ground, at the county and sub-county levels, the project will be implemented 
by  County  Project  Technical  Teams  (CPTTs)  supported  by  Sub-County 
Technical  Teams  (SCPTTs).  These  teams  are  made  up  of  subject  matter 
specialists  transferred  to  counties  after  devolution.  They  will  form  the  technical 
teams that will assist the PMCU to oversee execution of the project activities on the 
ground.  The  CPTTs  and  SCPTTs  will  be  headed  by  County  Project  Coordinators 
(CPCs)  and  Sub-County  Project  Coordinators  (SCPCs)  respectively,  who  will  be 
appointed by the PS in charge of livestock. The CPTTs and SCPTTs staff on the other 
hand will be staff nominated by their Directors depending on the range of project 
activities that will be undertaken within the county or sub-county. The CPTTs will 
coordinate  implementation  of  the  project  activities  according  to  the  county-level 
AWP&Bs that will be prepared under the supervision of the CPC and approved by 
the CPCC. The CPC will also be responsible for the preparation of progress reports 
and their submission to the PMCU. The CPTTs and SCPTTs will be the link between 
the  project  and  the  local  administration.  They  will  be  at  the  forefront  of  the 
community  mobilization  and  any  Participatory  Rapid  Appraisal  (PRA)  exercises 
jointly  with  the  local  leaders  and  service  providers.  Below  is  the  proposed 
implementation organogram. The PMCU will also be supported by desk officers from 
each  implementing  agency,  and  desk  officers  from  each  county  covered  by  the 
project. 
4.5  Partnerships 
229.  The project will partner with relevant specialized national technical agencies from 
within and outside the government. These will include: the National  Environment 
Management Authority (NEMA) that has an oversight on climate and environmental 
aspects;  FAO  in  development  of  the  Livestock  Master  Plan;  ILRI  for  technical 
expertise  in  livestock  breeding,  animal  husbandry  and  pasture  management; 
private sector associations for PPP development; financial institutions; and ensuring 
complementarity with other ongoing IFAD programmes. 
230.  Synergies and partnership with other development partners and projects. 
KeLCoP will also strive to avoid duplication and ensure complementarity with other 
projects.  This  will  include  with  AfDB’s  Drought  Resilience  and  Sustainable 
Livelihoods  Programme  (DRSLP),  and  the  World  Bank’s  Regional  Pastoral 
Livelihoods Resilience  Project (RPLRP),  both 
livestock  related 
interventions in the ASALs.  
implementing 
58 
Implementing partners 
231.  Heifer  International  and  FAO  are  the  two  KeLCoP  implementing  partner,  Heifer 
International  will  be  providing  financial  and  technical  support  in  five  counties 
namely Bungoma, Kakamega, Marsabit, Samburu & Siaya. This is reflected in the 
budget  and  the  implementing  arrangements  will  be  confirmed  in  an  agreement 
between IFAD. Government and HI. However, HI will work at the county level and 
provide  support  in  the  implementation  of  the  component  activities  designed  to 
integrate poor households into the dairy and poultry value chains.  FAO will assist 
in  the  development  of  the  Livestock  Master  Plan,  as  FAO  has  a  comparative 
advantage in the animal health and food safety area. The project will thus enter 
into an agreement with FAO for the development the Master Plan. The specific areas 
of FAO and IFAD interventions will be agreed at the time of TOR preparation. 
Service providers 
232.  Service providers for the project implementation will include: specialized private sector suppliers 
of goods and services, and works contractors; NGOs, CBOs in the following areas: 
 
 
 
Private suppliers of goods such as transport and office equipment, equipment 
for  the  processing  of  livestock  products  (meat,  milk,  honey);  training  and 
capacity  building  materials  and  facilities;  agrovets  for  the  supply  of  animal 
feeds, drugs and vaccines; 2 
Suppliers of services such as training; community mobilization and mentoring; 
development of ICT based extension services; private animal health services; 
financial  institutions  for  provision  of  credit;  conduct  livestock  master  plan 
study;  design  graduation  packages  and  matching  grants  for  the  youth  and 
vulnerable households; develop a Marketing Information System; etc  
Civil works private contractors for the construction of infrastructures such as 
livestock markets; hay storage facilities; water infrastructures; infrastructure 
in the animal multiplications centers and the bee keeping station; etc.  
Implementation  plan  for  project  coordination  and  management  (including 
partnerships) 
233.  The selected value chains exist in the respective counties. However, these chains 
are inefficient. At the core of the project, is to facilitate the strengthening of the 
chains so as to commercialise the activities right from production to the point that 
the  products  reach  the  intermediary  or  final  consumer.   This  will  increase 
opportunities and raise productivity, which will in turn increase the profit margins 
for  smallholder  livestock  producers,  processers,  traders,  etc.,  and  promote 
economic activities. 
234.  Important  to  KeLCoP’s  development  of  the  selected  value  chains  is  the 
strengthening or creation, where necessary, producers’/traders’ organizations and 
their  inter-professional bodies;  and  the  stimulation  of  investments  in  facilities  and 
human  resources  along  each  value  chains.  The  entry  point  for  the  value  chain 
development will be at county level, which will cascade down to the selected Wards 
in each county. 
235.  Considering  that  each  County  is  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  activities 
within  its  jurisdiction,  activities  will  commence  in  the  first  year,  in  all  counties, 
phased  according  to  the  speed  of  setting  up  the  critical  County-level 
implementation Committees.. The sequence of the main activities in the process of 
implementation will involve:  
59 
1.  Formation of county-level project committees 
2.  Contract  relevant  Chain  facilitators  -  Facilitation  of  Value  Chains  On  the 
production  side  Heifer  International,  in  addition  to  contributing  to  project 
financing, will be one the major Facilitating Agencies (FAs), and will cover Siaya, 
Kakamega, Bungoma, Masabit and Samburu counties in small ruminant meat and 
goat milk production and poultry. Other FAs will be contracted as needed. 
3.  In  each  county,  establish  operating  mechanism  between  county  government, 
Facilitating Agencies and PMCU. 
4.  Within  each  county,  confirm  the  2-4  contiguous  wards  selected  focal  areas  for 
project intervention. 
5.  Sensitize project target group within the geographical target areas. 
6.  For each selected value chain, identify other commodities produced  
7.  Identify key actors (production, processing and marketing) in each of the 3 value 
chains selected. 
8.  The  business  model  will  centre  on  the  creation  of  Ward/sub-Ward  Level  Multi-
Stakeholder Platforms, with member agreement on governance structure.  The 
facilitator will ensure recommended representation of women and youth in the 
created  multi-stakeholder  platforms  created,  so  that  they  have  visibility,  voice 
and  exposure  to  multiple  actors  in  the  value  chain.  All  platforms  will  include 
private  sector  SMEs;  participating  finance  institutions;  transporters;  local 
leaders; among others. 
9.  Establishment of Ward Commodity Value Chain Committees (WCVCC). This is a 
value  chain  governance  structure  established  at  the  grass-root  level  (Ward  or 
sub-ward Level) to ensure efficiency in the value chain, equity in sharing value 
added, and investment for continuous upgrading for profitability and growth. It 
is made up of cross-section of actors and support institutions. The WCVCCs are 
responsible for; 
  Advancing the business of interested stakeholders in each chain. 
  Developing, strengthening and sustaining business relationships. 
  Facilitating constituent organizations to become formalized groups such as 
co-operatives. 
  Facilitating information flow amongst actors  
  Moderate and resolve disputes amongst actors. 
  Scout for market and finance for constituent actors. 
10. While WVCCs will be established, for each commodity. Value chain “nodes” could 
also  be  established  to  cascade  the  system  of  platforms  of  value  chain 
development further downstream.  
11. Identify constraints (weak links) to the value chains  - the development of each 
chain will take a private sector, demand-driven approach.  
12. Develop  activities  based  on:  the  identified  public  infrastructure  by  multi-
stakeholder  platforms;  expressed  demand  for  project  support  by  value  chain 
actors. 
13. Based on the county, and chain-specific activities, develop and register a list of 
service providers or suppliers. 
14. With  the  knowledge  of  the  chain  actors,  the  FAs  will  proactively  present  to 
platform  members  other  potential  partnerships  or  products  and  hold  private 
sector fora, in coordination with KEPSA. 
Corresponding  to  the  above  sequence  of  activities,  the  project  will  finalize  contracture 
arrangements  with  PAD,  to  initiate  the  development  of  ICT4D  tools  (e-extension;  e-
voucher; e-marketing; crowd-funding) This will be carried in close collaboration with value 
chain multi-stakeholder platforms.
60 
Year 
Year 1 (2021) 
Year 2 (2022) 
Year 3 (2023) 
Year 4 (2024) 
Year 5 (2025) 
Year 6 (2026) 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q5 
Q6 
Q7 
Q8 
Q9 
Q10 
Q11 
Q12 
Q13 
Q14 
Q15 
Q16 
Q17 
Q18 
Q19 
Q20 
Q21 
Q22 
Q23 
Q24 
Start-up activities 
Start Up 
Workshops 
Faster 
Implementation of 
Project Start-Up 
e.g.ESMF study, 
FPIC, ESMPs for 
sub-projectsand 
other studies 
Consolidated Start-
Up Workshop 
Baseline survey 
(includig min. 
dietary diversity for 
women) 
Website 
Development 
Annual Work Plan 
and Budget 
Planning workshop 
Procurement of 
vehicles and 
equipments  
Annual review 
workshop 
PMCU 
PMCU 
PMCU 
PMCU 
PMCU 
PMCU 
PMCU 
Component 1: Climate-smart production enhancement for small livestock 
1.1: Integrating Vulnerable HHs into Value Chains 
1.1.1: Identification 
and Mentoring of 
HHs  
1.1.2:Technical 
Training in Gender 
Action Learning 
System (starts with 
development of 
basic and 
advanced ToT 
tools in Q 2 & 3, 
2022) 
GALs 
champions basic 
tool, GALs 
champions) 
Nutrition 
training and 
mentoring 
Homestead 
Food production for 
Dietary Diversity 
Specialized service 
provider 
Specialized service 
provider 
Specialized service 
provider 
Specialized service 
provider 
Specialized service 
provider 
61 
Year 
Year 1 (2021) 
Year 2 (2022) 
Year 3 (2023) 
Year 4 (2024) 
Year 5 (2025) 
Year 6 (2026) 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q5 
Q6 
Q7 
Q8 
Q9 
Q10 
Q11 
Q12 
Q13 
Q14 
Q15 
Q16 
Q17 
Q18 
Q19 
Q20 
Q21 
Q22 
Q23 
Q24 
1.1.3: Gender 
Sensitive Value 
Chain Maps (study 
in each project 
county) 
1.1.4: Asset 
Transfer (poultry 
unit, goat package, 
hives)- staring with 
1500 HHs,the 1500 
HHs, 2000HHs and 
1000HHs) 
1.1.5: Improved 
technical and 
business skills 
1.1.6: Short-Term 
Technical 
Specialists 
(nutrition 
messages, 
prototype poultry 
housing, branding 
and labelling, etc.)- 
1 package per 
county 
1.1.7: E-finance 
voucher support 
1.1.8: E-Extension 
System 
Specialized service 
provider/consultant 
Service 
provider/consultant 
Service 
provider/consultant 
Service 
provider/consultant 
Service provider 
Service provider 
Sub-component 1.2: Climate Resilient Production Systems 
 Integrating Vulnerable HHs into Value Chains 
1.2.1: 
Strengthening 
County Breed 
Multiplication 
Centres 
(infrastructure, 
equipment and 
improved breeds 
and technical 
assistance- 3 small 
ruminant centres in 
Baringo, Naivasha 
&  Samburu,1 
poultry centre in 
Kakamega) 
1.2.2: Community 
Breed 
Improvement 
Programme  
Training to 
outreach/elite 
breeders farmers 
by Technical Staff, 
PMCU 
County Breeding 
Centre 
62 
Year 
Year 1 (2021) 
Year 2 (2022) 
Year 3 (2023) 
Year 4 (2024) 
Year 5 (2025) 
Year 6 (2026) 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q5 
Q6 
Q7 
Q8 
Q9 
Q10 
Q11 
Q12 
Q13 
Q14 
Q15 
Q16 
Q17 
Q18 
Q19 
Q20 
Q21 
Q22 
Q23 
Q24 
Improved 
breeds (small 
ruminants for meat 
and dairy 
Apprenticeship 
for young men and 
women breeders 
Contingencies Plan 
County Breeding 
Centre/PMCU 
County Breeding 
Centre 
Directorate of Vet. 
Service 
Livestock feed production improvement  
1.3.1: County 
Livestock Feed 
strategy 
1.3.2: Climate 
Resilient Water 
Infrastructure – 
solar-powered 
borehole, Sub-
surface dams or 
rock -catchment, 
water pans & 
shallow wells with 
solar panel, 
1.3.3: Upscaling 
production of grass 
seeds (fencing and 
seeds) in 4 
counties 
1.3.4: Rangeland 
Governance 
System 
(study/assessment) 
1.3.5: Rangeland 
Plans and GIS 
maps 
1.3.6: Support to 
GIS Laboratory 
County department 
livestock production 
Service 
providers/contractos 
County range 
division.\/PMCU 
Consultant  
Consultant  
PMCU 
1.3.7: Rangeland 
Policy Support 
County 
assembly/PMCU 
Contractors/PMCU 
Contractors/PMCU 
1.3.8: Poultry feed 
improvement 
1.3.9: Feed storage 
infrastructure 
(Hayshed's, 
equipment for 
baling, hay 
harvesting 
equipment, labour 
saving equipment, 
etc.) 
 Animal Health Improvement 
1.4.1: Strengthen 
the system of 
disease 
surveillance and 
Specialized service 
provider 
63 
Year 
Year 1 (2021) 
Year 2 (2022) 
Year 3 (2023) 
Year 4 (2024) 
Year 5 (2025) 
Year 6 (2026) 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q5 
Q6 
Q7 
Q8 
Q9 
Q10 
Q11 
Q12 
Q13 
Q14 
Q15 
Q16 
Q17 
Q18 
Q19 
Q20 
Q21 
Q22 
Q23 
Q24 
monitoring (starting 
with 3 counties, 
then 5 counties 
and finally 2 
counties) 
1.4.2: Certificate 
Training for animal 
health workers and 
Para vets for young 
men and women 
(for 3 ASAL 
counties) 
1.4.3: Smart 
Device for 
Agrovets for 
tracking and 
monitoring disease 
1.4.4: Behavioral 
Change Approach 
(BCA) for Animal 
health & disease 
(5000 pax,in 4 
ASAL counties 
spread equally 
across) 
PMCU 
Specialized service 
provider 
Specialized service 
provider 
Component 2: Support to Livestock Market Development 
Sub-component 2.1: Animal Health Improvement 
2.1.1: Upgrading 
Market 
Infrastructure 
(5,10,5) 
2.1.2: Support to 
Regulatory 
Mechanisms for 
Markets at County 
Level (starting with 
2 counties in 2021 
and 8 counties in 
2022) 
2.1.3: Capacity 
Building support to 
LMAs (starting with 
5 LMAs, the 10 and 
finally 5) 
2.1.4: Investor 
Forums for private 
sector engagement 
(10 fora in 2021 
and 10 in 2022) 
Contractors/PMCU 
KLMC 
KLMC 
KEPSA/service 
provider 
Sub-component 2.2: Building Inclusive Value Chains 
2.2.1: Access to 
Finance Through 
the E-Voucher 
System (phased 
roll out) 
PMCU/Banks 
64 
Year 
Year 1 (2021) 
Year 2 (2022) 
Year 3 (2023) 
Year 4 (2024) 
Year 5 (2025) 
Year 6 (2026) 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q5 
Q6 
Q7 
Q8 
Q9 
Q10 
Q11 
Q12 
Q13 
Q14 
Q15 
Q16 
Q17 
Q18 
Q19 
Q20 
Q21 
Q22 
Q23 
Q24 
Setting up E-
voucher scheme  
2.2.2: Matching 
grants for 
smallholder 
commercial 
producers 
(50,100,100,50) 
2.2.3: Grants to 
Youth Innovative 
Start-ups 
2.2.4: Training & 
peer to peer 
exchange & 
exposure visits & 
SSTC (500 each 
year) 
2.2.5: Training of 
Young 
Entrepreneurs (250 
- 2022, 250 -2023) 
2.2.6: Grants to 
Young 
Entrepreneurs (250 
- 2022, 250 -2023) 
2.2.7: County Level 
multi-stakeholder 
platforms 
2.2.8: Building 
dashboard for 
Crowd Funding 
PMCU/ participating 
banks 
PMCU 
PMCU 
Service provider 
Service provider 
PMCU 
PMCU/County 
government 
PMCU 
Sub-component 2.3: Value Chain Management Information Systems 
2.3.1: Building E-
Marketing system 
Service provider 
Component 3: Policy Support and Project Management 
3.1: Policy and Institutional Support to National Government 
3.1.1: Livestock 
Master Plan 
ILRI/FAO/State 
Depart of livestock 
3.1.2: Devt of 
Regulations for 
Livestock Bill (for 
selected value 
chains) 
3.1.3: County Level 
Livestock 
Strategies 
3.1.4: County Level 
Livestock 
Strategies 
Developing 
Standards and 
Certification 
County 
assembly/PMCU 
County dept of 
Livestock/PMCU 
National bee 
keeping institute 
65 
Year 
Year 1 (2021) 
Year 2 (2022) 
Year 3 (2023) 
Year 4 (2024) 
Year 5 (2025) 
Year 6 (2026) 
Activity 
Responsibility 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q5 
Q6 
Q7 
Q8 
Q9 
Q10 
Q11 
Q12 
Q13 
Q14 
Q15 
Q16 
Q17 
Q18 
Q19 
Q20 
Q21 
Q22 
Q23 
Q24 
Regime for Honey 
products 
66 
Project start-up 
Implementation plan for start-up activities 
4.6  Planning and Budget Development 
an 
will 
deploy 
KeLCoP 
innovative 
participatory 
236. 
Knowledge 
Management/Monitoring and Evaluation (km/M&E) system to be developed and managed 
by  the  PMCU.  A  key  element  of  the  KM/M&E  system  will  be  involvement  of  primary 
stakeholders as active participants to provide ways of assessing and learning from change 
that are more inclusive, and reflects the perspectives and aspirations of those most directly 
affected by the project. The project will utilize technology to inform data-driven decision 
making  in  the  implementation  and  monitoring  of  the  interventions.  The  system  to  be 
developed  will  provide  automation  of  the  entire  M&E  process  right  from  planning  to 
monitoring  and  reporting  of  project  impacts.  The  KM/M&E  team  comprising  the  M&E 
Officer, MIS Programmer and the KM Technical Assistant, working under the supervision of 
the Project Coordinator, will be responsible for coordinating the M&E and KM activities of 
the Project and in particular, for: (i) baseline survey; (ii) Annual Work Plans and Budgets 
(AWPBs);  (iii)  progress  reports  on  outputs  and  outcomes;  (iv)  status  reports  for 
supervision  and  implementation  support  missions;  (v)  Ad  hoc  reports  as  required;  (vi) 
outcome  surveys  and  impact  assessment;  (vii)  KM  products  and;  (viii)  the  Project 
Completion Report. At the County level, the county coordinators, with support from the 
County  Implementation  Teams  and  relevant  implementing  partners  and  working  closely 
with the project stakeholders, will be responsible for the collection of information, follow 
up and updating of data for their respective Counties. KeLCoP KM/M&E system should be 
set  up  and  operational  within  six  months  after  project  effective  date  using  Faster 
Implementation for Project Start-Up (FIPS) facility. The FIPs will also be used to finance 
the  SECAP  studies,  namely,  ESMF,  integrated  pesticides  management  plan,  FPIC  and 
indigenous peoples action plans, and ESMPs for the various sub-projects. 
237. 
Annual  Planning  and  Budgeting:  Planning  will  be  done  by  both  the  PMCU  and 
County  Implementation  Teams  and  Heifer  International  in  the  counties  of  Bungoma, 
Kakamega,  Marsabit,  Samburu  &  Siaya  in  conformity  with  GoK  planning  cycle  and 
budgetary approval process both at the National and County levels. The start-up workshop 
will be a critical phase for the teams to understand their respective roles in the planning 
process. In this regard, sufficient time and resources will be allocated to this event. The 
PMCU and the county teams will also be trained on SECAP, safeguards and mainstreaming 
themes. Annually, the project will be implemented based on an approved AWPB. The AWPB 
will be informed by an assessment of current implementation progress and will describe 
the strategic direction of the project for the coming year along with results expected under 
each component and how those results will be achieved. Previous year performance and 
challenges will be analysed to inform the current year plan. 
The  PMCU  will  be  responsible  for  the  timely  development,  implementation  and 
238. 
monitoring  of  AWPBs.  At  the  county  level,  AWPBs  will  be  developed  by  the  County 
Implementation Teams under the supervision and support from the PMCU KM/M&E team 
and HI. Thereafter, the County AWPBs will be reviewed and consolidated by the KM/M&E 
team  based  on  the  Project’s  operational  and  financial  targets.  A  planning  tool  to  be 
developed  as  a  module  of  the  KM/M&E  system  will  facilitate  the  planning  process  by 
providing the stakeholders with the platform to capture planned activities and the  PMCU 
to consolidate the AWPB. The AWPB will be submitted for IFAD technical comments prior 
to approval by the Steering Committee. The approved AWPB will be submitted to IFAD for 
No objection at least 30 days before commencement of the financial year. 
67 
4.7 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Summary of Financial Management arrangements 
Financial  Management  System:  KeLCoP  financial  management  arrangements 
239. 
follow the Government of Kenya financial management system with some enhancements 
proposed to mitigate on risks identified. A financial management assessment for KeLCoP 
has been carried out in accordance with IFAD’s Guidance Note on Undertaking Financial 
Management  Assessment  at  Design.  The  objective  of  FMA  is  to  provide  assurance  that 
KeLCoP  will  be  implemented  within  sound  financial  management  practices  (timely  and 
efficient accounting systems), and punctual professional reviews; both internally (internal 
audit) and externally (external audit). The assessment was based on existing IFAD Kenya 
portfolio  because  KeLCoP  will  be  adopting  similar  processes  and  procedures.  The 
assessment was combined with reviews at MALFC and the National Treasury in Kenya.  
The Government of Kenya (the Borrower) will be required to maintain acceptable 
240. 
financial  management  systems  including  accounting,  financial  reporting,  and  auditing 
systems  for  the  KeLCoP.  Some  project’s  specific  additional  measures  have  been 
incorporated to enhance financial management of the project. 
Overall, the financial management risk is rated as ‘high’ and ‘substantial’ before 
241. 
and after mitigation respectively. The project faces risks in omission of budget in the first 
and  second  year  of  operations  since  the  loan  sign-off  will  be  after  the  approval  of  the 
budget  for  year  one  and  in  the  course  of  budget  formulation  process  for  second  year. 
Without budget provisions in the printed estimates approved by the parliament, the project 
is not able to make funds transfer to enable payments for activities. There are also regular 
IFMIS downtime which has been affecting projects especially those that have operations 
bank account with the Central Bank of Kenya which is linked to IFMIS. The disbursements 
of counterpart financing has also been inconsistence in other projects which affect timely 
payments  of  activities.  The  flow  of  funds  from  Designated  Account  to  counties  project 
accounts is further a high risky area due to delays in transfers of funds from national level 
to counties project accounts. Quality financial reporting is also an area of risks especially 
if financial management software is not fully utilized leading to manual processes.  
242. 
To  mitigate  on  these  risks,  it  has  been  agreed  that  the  National  Treasury  will 
ensures authorization to incur expenditure/supplementary budget will be provided for the 
for  the  project  for  FY  2020/21  immediately  after  signing  of  the  loan  so  as  to  enhance 
transfers of funds and payments for the start-up activities in FY 2020/21. For FY 2021/22, 
the project will be included in the budget formulation process which will be on-going at 
the loan sign-off date. The project operations bank account both at the national level and 
counties  will  be  opened  at  a  commercial  bank  account  to  ensure  that  expenditure  can 
takes  place  even  during  the  IFMIS  downtime  which  has  been  a  big  challenge  in  other 
projects.  
243. 
The project is expected to receive a start-up advance that will allow the project to 
commence implementation of the start-up activities which include recruitment of the PMCU 
staff and setting up of the PMCU Offices; Procurement of Financial Management Software 
and training staff on how to use it among others. There will be orientation and capacity 
building training for all the finance team at PMCU and participating counties. The finance 
teams from one of the best performing IFAD project will carry out the training.  
Implementing and participating organizations with fiduciary responsibilities 
244. 
The  project  will  be  implemented  through  the  Government  of  Kenya’s  existing 
structures. The Lead Project Implementing Agency (LPA) will be the State Department 
68 
of  Livestock  under  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  Livestock,  Fisheries  and  Cooperatives 
(MALFC)  through  a  dedicated  Project  Management  and  Coordination  Unit  (PMCU)  which 
will directly manage all components. The implementation will be at the County level which 
makes the project a joint venture between the National Government and the concerned 
County  Governments.  The  role  of  Heifer  International  will  be  to  provide  technical  and 
financial  assistance  to  county  Governments  in  the  five  counties  of  HI’s  focus  namely 
Bungoma, Kakamega, Marsabit, Samburu & Siaya. 
Counties: There are 10 participating counties that have some which will be paid 
245. 
at counties levels based on the agreed AWPB. Key investments activities will directly be 
paid by the PMCU while facilitation activities at the counties will be paid from the counties. 
Counties will receive quarterly advances based on the approved AWPB through a project 
dedicated  account.  The  PMCU  will  provide  suitable  templates  to  enable  the  counties  to 
provide acceptable accountabilities of advances received.  
246. 
The Project Management and Coordination Unit (PMCU). The PMCU under 
MALFC will be the overall accounting hub for the project. The PMCU will be responsible for 
ensuring  the  implementation  of  Project  activities  and  will  have  the  following  fiduciary 
responsibilities:  
a) 
b) 
c) 
the  preparation  of  Annual  Work  plans  and  Budgets  ensuring  a  bottom-up 
approach  and  timely  submissions  for  inclusions  in  GoK  overall  approved 
budget  estimates  including  inclusion  in  the  schedule  for  “Conditional 
Allocations to County Governments from Loans and Grants from Development 
Partners” (CARA);  
Procurement planning, execution and support service;  
Disbursement  of  funds  to  other  implementing  agencies  as  per  funds  flow 
structure,  
d)  Management of withdrawal applications from IFAD;  
e) 
Financial  management  of  the  Project,  including  supervising  and  ensuring 
compliance with government regulations.  
Financial reporting and consolidation of financial statements for audits.  
Any requests for No Objection to IFAD will emanate from the PMCU. 
Ensuring  that  environment,  climate  and  social  safeguards  outlined  in  the 
various studied – ESMF, ESMPs, indepth climate risks analysis and integrated 
pesticides management plan are adhered to. 
f) 
g) 
h) 
Disbursement Arrangements and Flow of Funds 
247. 
There  will  be  three  types  of  disbursement  mechanisms  for  the  Project  which 
consist  of  (i)  Advance  Withdrawal;  (ii)  Direct  Payment;  (iii)  Reimbursement. 
Disbursements from IFAD will be made by way of an advance to the Designated Account 
and  subsequent  replenishments  based  on  expenditure  incurred  as  supported  with 
Statement of Expenditure (SoE). There will be one designated account that would receive 
funds from IFAD which will have a corresponding dedicated project operational account in 
Kenya  Shillings  (Kshs)  managed  by  PMCU.  The  participating  counties  will  also  have 
dedicated project operational accounts at the county level for receiving funds to facilitate 
activities to be carried out at county levels. The project operations bank account both at 
the national level and counties will be opened at a commercial bank account to ensure that 
expenditure  can  takes  place  even  during  the  IFMIS  downtime  which  has  been  a  big 
challenge in other projects.  
248. 
payments for the project. 
Below is a diagram illustrating the flow  of funds from  IFAD to various  points of 
69 
See key below for the payments points under the project. 
(a)  Transfer of Government of Kenya counterpart funds to a separate bank account 
that will be managed by PMCU. 
(b)  Payments for expenditure from counterpart funds bank account.  
(c)  Transfer of IFAD funds to KeLCoP US$ designated account. 
(d)  Transfer of IFAD funds to PMCU operational account in local currency for payments 
at PMCU. This accounts will be held in a commercial bank.  
(e)  Transfer of IFAD funds to County Project Accounts. 
(f) 
Payments of eligible expenditure at county levels.  
(g)  Payments of eligible expenditure at PMCU.  
(h)  Direct payment to suppliers or partners by IFAD. This will be on exceptional basis 
and for payments of more than USD 100,000 as will be guided in the letter to 
borrower. 
249. 
Project Bank Account: The project operations bank account both at the national 
level and counties will be opened at a commercial bank account to ensure that expenditure 
can takes place even during the IFMIS downtime which has been a big challenge in other 
projects.  The  National  Treasury  should  ensure  an  authorization  MEMO  to  open  a 
commercial bank account for the National PMCU and counties is issued out immediately 
after loan effectiveness so as not to delay disbursements of funds. The National Project 
Coordinator  will  be  the  mandatory  signatory  for  the  national  level  while  County  Project 
Coordinators will be the mandatory signatory at the county level.  
250. 
Counterpart  finance.  There  have  been  delays  observed  in  other  portfolio 
projects  in  regards  to  disbursements  of  counterpart  finance  to  projects’  accounts.  IFAD 
will  demand  commitment  from  GoK  that  this  will  be  done  promptly  for  smooth 
implementation  of  the  project.  As  shown  above,  there  will  be  a  separate  bank  account 
70 
counterpart finance will be deposited. This account will be managed by PMCU staff just like 
the project operational account. 
251.  Withdrawal Applications for Advance Withdrawal and Reimbursements may be 
submitted once ninety 90 days (quarterly basis) have lapsed from the submission of the 
previous withdrawal application. However, if the requested withdrawal amount is at least 
twenty per cent (20%) of the initial advanced amounts, a withdrawal application may be 
submitted even if ninety (90) days have not lapsed. This will be included in the letter to 
the borrower (LTB). 
252. 
The Designated Account limit will be set at the total 18 months of AWPB. The DA 
limit  may  be  reviewed  and  adjusted  if  there  are  increased  payments  as  the  project 
progresses. In that case PMCU would write an official letter to IFAD with the expected cash 
flow projections and the proposed adjusted ceiling for considerations.  
Planning and budgeting  
KeLCoP budget will, as required by the Public Finance Management Act, be part 
253. 
of the GoK overall printed national budget estimates as part of the parliamentary approvals 
and  appropriations.  The  Project  budget  would  need  to  be  included  in  the  line  ministry 
(MALFC) budget. Counties activities will further need to be appropriated in the “Conditional 
Allocations to County Governments from Loans and Grants from Development Partners” 
(CARA) for each financial year of implementation and further be included in the counties 
budget that is discussed and passed by the counties assembly.  
The  Financial  Controller  of  the  PMCU  will  coordinate  the  budget  preparation 
254. 
processes with close coordination with project  coordinator and the lead person for each 
component. At the counties levels, the activities to be carried out at the counties will also 
need to be included in their budget for approval by the counties assemblies. This will be 
done by county project coordinator under the guidance of the project’s Financial Controller. 
Payments cannot be made if the budget provisions have not been made and approved by 
Parliament at the Ministry’s level and County Assembly for county activities.  
The  GoK  budget  formulations  usually  start  by  August;  10  months  before  the 
255. 
implementation period while the AWPB for the project are usually prepared and submitted 
to  IFAD  near  the  end  of  a  financial  year.  Due  to  the  timing  difference,  there  can  be 
significant  differences  between  the  AWPB  for  which  IFAD  eventually  expresses  ‘no 
objection’,  and  the  budget  that  had  been  appropriated  and  approved  in  the  printed 
estimates. The appropriated amounts is a block limit, from which implementing entities 
have  a  window  in  May/June  at  submission  of  AWPB,  to  provide  the  breakdowns  for  the 
AWPB  signed–off  by  the  Accounting  Officer  of  the  Ministry.  The  Financial  Controller  will 
ensure  the  breakdowns  included  in  the  accounting  system  is  in  line  with  the  AWPB  for 
which IFAD has provided no-objection and spending is in line with this.  
256. 
In some cases by the time the budget is appropriated by parliament there can be 
unexplained  cuts/  reductions  in  expenditure  estimates  for  line  Ministry.  This  element  of 
uncertainty sometimes  results into discrepancies between the AWPB  on which IFAD has 
expressed No objection and that appropriated by Parliament. The Financial Controller will 
closely work with planning officers at MALFC and National Treasury to ensure the project 
is  not  affected  by  these  regular  budget  cuts  which  are  usually  based  on  estimated  and 
actual revenue collections by the government. The budgeting area is therefore considered 
high risk area that require keen monitoring. PMCU’s financial controller should ensure there 
is close collaborations with Planning and Budget Officers at MALFC and Counties to ensure 
project’s  budget  is  not  omitted  in  the  printed  estimates  and  adequate  amounts  are 
provided. While there are supplementary budget processes which ensure what may have 
71 
been omitted is rectified, this takes time, hence critical to ensure there is adequate budget 
for the project at the start of the year. Over-budgeting also poses problems in future since 
the  project  would  not  be  able  to  demonstrate  capabilities  to  absorb  future  significant 
amounts  which  leads  to  more  struggles  in  asking  for  higher  budget  allocations  in  the 
printed estimates. Close monitoring will there be critical.  
257. 
The arbitrary cut of printed estimates budgets in the course of a fiscal year due 
to  other  fiscal  measures  will  be  emphasized  during  loan  negotiations  and  specific 
assurances  be  sought  that  project  budget  estimates  will  not  be  arbitrarily  cut  by  the 
National Treasury. 
258.  Budgeting as Revenue and AIA: The project funds will be budgeted either as 
Revenue and appropriation in aid (AIA).  
  Budgeting  as  Revenue:  Budgeting  is  done  under  Revenue  IFAD  will  release  the 
funds  through  the  exchequer  system.  This  budgeting  will  be  done  for  activities 
which are expected to be paid from the project operational accounts.  
  Budgeting  under  AIA  procedure:  This  is  where  the  donor  is  expected  to  pay  the 
beneficiary direct. All the procurement procedures are followed as per the laid down 
government  procedures,  vouchers  processed  in  the  normal  way  but  the  original 
documents  accompanied  with  form  100  (Application  for  withdrawal)  with  all 
relevant  details  is  forwarded  to  Donor  for  payment  after  capturing  the  amount 
payable into the Ministry’s books by using form F.O. 25 (Journal voucher) as well 
as  in  the  Integrated  Financial  Management  System  (IFMIS).  However,  the 
minimum to be processed should not be less than USD 100,000. 
Accounting systems, policies and procedures 
259. 
Kenya  IFAD  portfolio  is  moving  towards  having  a  harmonized  financial 
management  software  for  all  upcoming  projects.  Sun  system  ERP  has  been  selected  as 
the best accounting system for the portfolio and will be adopted for this project. It is being 
used  by  the  other  portfolio  projects  who  will  also  provide  peer  learning  opportunity  to 
project’s finance staff once recruited. There has been issue of full adoption and delays in 
implementation of accounting system in other projects. To mitigate on this, acquisition of 
the accounting system has been included in startup activities. PMCU will procure a financial 
management  software  and  training  the  finance  staff  on  how  to  use  it  using  the  startup 
advance that will be provided. The selection of project finance staff will also consider the 
agility to use computerized systems. The key financial reporting parameter for IFAD project 
is  a  financial  system  that  will  be  able  to  i)  extract  SoE  for  withdrawal  applications,  ii) 
reporting expenditure per category and comparing budget vs actual for the same for the 
current  year  and  cumulatively,  iii)  reporting  expenditure  per  category  and  comparing 
budget vs actual for the same for the current year and cumulatively and iv) reporting of 
expenditure  per  financier.  The  selected  accounting  system  is  able  handle  these  key 
financial  reporting  and  monitoring  requirements.  The  training  on  use  and  installation  of 
the software will be part of the start-up advance to ensure that all will be set by the time 
project implementation commences. 
260. 
Disbursement to the counties will be made as advances. Recording of expenditure 
to  the  project  accounting  system  will  be  done  by  PMCU  based  on  expenditure  reports 
submitted by the counties.  
261. 
The project expenditure initiation, authorization and payments will be in line with 
Public Finance Management Act of Kenya. The PS, MALFC (and all ministry officials under 
their delegation) plays the key role of sanctioning all withdrawals from the bank accounts 
under them as described above. The PS is the accounting officer for the project. 
72 
The  Permanent  Secretary,  National  Treasury  and  all  Ministry  officials  under  his 
262. 
delegation play a key role of approving all financial documents for onward submission to 
IFAD on financial and other project implementation matters. Under the loan  agreement, 
The National Treasury represent GoK as the borrower. 
Financial reporting 
263. 
Financial Controller at PMCU will be responsible for all financial reporting for the 
project and will produce a consolidated financial statements for the project. The financial 
reporting will comply with International Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) -Cash 
basis. 
264. 
On  annual  basis,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  for  the  project  will  be 
audited  by  Office  of  the  Auditor  General  and  audited  financial  statements  submitted  to 
IFAD within six months after the period end in accordance with IFAD guidelines. IFAD will, 
in addition, to the annual audited financial statements require interim financial reports on 
a  six-monthly  interval.  For  management  decision  and  control,  detailed  monthly  and 
quarterly management accounts will be produced.  
STATEMENTS OF EXPENDITURES (SOE) 
265. 
SoEs will be prepared by the project for processing of Withdrawal application. The 
detailed  guidelines  and  SoE  templates  has  been  elaborated  under  financial  guidelines 
issued by IFAD which will be included in the disbursements letter. The PMCU Accounts staff 
shall assist in the compilation of the expenditures from the implementing agencies which 
upon meeting the IFAD threshold shall be submitted in form of Withdrawal Applications to 
IFAD, through the lead ministry and ERD – Treasury. This activity shall be carried by the 
PMCU every quarter  or  if the withdrawal limits has been attained. Counties will prepare 
the SoE on monthly basis and submit to PMCU.  
266. 
of the Withdrawal Applications using the guideline below: 
The PMCU will prepare the consolidated SoE which shall be used in the preparation 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Each and every category should be typed on a separate summary sheet, which 
should  be  numbered  sequentially,  and  details  of  categories  e.g.  civil  works 
clearly marked on the section – description of category. 
Reporting period on the summary sheet to be clearly indicated with the earliest 
paid voucher indicating the starting period and the latest end period e.g. 1st Nov 
2020 to 31st Dec, 2020. 
The rate of exchange will be the ruling rates when funds are transferred from 
the  special  account  to  project  operational  account  and  should  be  used  when 
exchanging to the US Dollar equivalent. The rates will be applied on FIFO basis 
until the prior transfer is fully exhausted. 
The  IFAD  forms  used  including  the  checklist  and  SPA  Reconciliation  shall  be 
attached  to  form  the  Withdrawal  Application.  Other  documentations  for 
attachment shall include: 
(a)  Bank Reconciliation Statement for the last month of reporting. 
(b)  Cash book copy of the last reporting date showing the balances. 
(c)  Copy of the bank statement for the last reporting month. 
(d)  DA statement  
(e)  DA reconciliation statement 
(f) 
PMCU bank account reconciliation statement 
73 
o  The summary sheets will be prepared according to categories and numbered 
sequentially. 
o  The  amount  spent  per  component  should  be  clearly  indicated  for  each 
County. 
o  The  summary  sheets  signed  by  the  Project  Coordinator  and  Financial 
Controller  and  to  be  signed  by  authorized  representative  from  Ministry  of 
Finance. 
o  Special  Account  Reconciliation  statement  duly  signed  by  the  Financial 
controller 
o  Checklist withdrawal application duly signed by the Project Coordinator and 
Financial Controller. 
o  Application for withdrawal to be duly signed by authorized representative. 
o  All the above supporting documents together will be forwarded to External 
Resources  department  for  further  processing  before  being  forwarded  to 
IFAD for replenishment. 
Financial management organization and staffing  
267.  As noted above, the project financial management arrangements follow the 
Government of Kenya financial management system. The PS, MALFC is the accounting 
officer for the project. The project expenditure initiation, authorization and payments will 
be in line with Public Finance Management Act of Kenya. The PS MALFC (and all ministry 
officials under his/her delegation) plays the key role of sanctioning all transactions. The 
Accounting Unit of the Project shall be managed by the Financial Controller assisted by 
the Accounts Assistants. 
268.  The Project Accounting team duties and responsibilities shall include: 
  Contributing to the preparation and update of the Financial Manuals. 
  Ensuring 
the  project’s 
the  Project 
Implementation and Financial Manuals and other guidelines that may be issued are 
strictly followed by all Project staff and implementing agencies at the national and 
devolved levels. 
financial  procedures  as  detailed 
in 
  Facilitating, as much as possible, the timely disbursement of project funds 
  Compiling the Expenditure Returns for the PMCU, the Counties, other implementing 
agencies, and headquarters for submission to the External Resources Department 
– Treasury. 
  Liaising with the implementing officers from the Project implementing Counties and 
the lead Project agency to ensure that SOE’s are prepared in timely manner and 
forwarded to External Resources Department – Treasury. 
  Preparing  periodic  and  statutory  financial  reports  and  advising  the  Project 
Coordinator on the Project’s financial status and trends; 
  Ensuring adherence to Government of Kenya’s financial practices and circulars as 
issued  from  time  to  time,  to  ensure  only  legible  payments  are  made  from  the 
Project’s funds. 
  To carry out periodic backstopping visits to the implementing agencies, providing 
financial advice and recommendations where necessary. 
  Facilitating and ensuring that external auditors are availed all necessary documents 
during  the  audit  as  detailed  in  the  Loan  Agreement,  and  making  a  follow  up  on 
audit recommendations. 
  Ensuring  that  the  financial  transactions  are  well  documented,  filed  and  that  the 
Project financial transactions are entered into the Government existing accounting 
systems. 
74 
  Any other duty (related to the Project’s activities) as may be assigned by the Project 
Coordinator. 
269.  The following staff positions have been provided for to ensure adequate 
coordination of payments for project expenditure, making appropriate accounting entries 
and financial reporting. 
Implementation 
level 
Project Staff 
position and 
numbers 
Remarks 
PMCU  
 Finance  Controller 
(1)  
 Project  Accountant 
(1) 
 Project 
Assistant 
Accountant (1) 
Counties 
Designated Project 
Accountant (1) 
 The  staffing  is  based  on  a  similar  IFAD 
funded  project  which  has  similar  types  of 
activities and implementation arrangement.  
 These  staff  will  be  hired  on  two  years 
contract,  renewable  based  on  performance 
which is expected to enhance performance.  
 The  staff  will  be  hired  as  part  of  start-up 
activities. 
 This will be a staff of the County, designated 
and 
to 
financial 
coordinating processing of transactions. 
reporting 
handle 
 It will be one of the condition in the MoU with 
Counties  to  have  a  designated  accountant 
for  the  project,  who  will  be  issued  with  an 
official  designation  letter  from  the  County 
signed by the County Treasury. 
 The  appointed  of  a  Designated  Accountant 
will  be  a  disbursements  condition  to  the 
counties. 
Internal Controls  
270.  In order to effectively safeguard project resources, internal controls have been 
instituted at the PMCU in the whole framework of financial and administrative 
procedures. The identified controls range from; proper record keeping and posting, 
authorization of accounting, procurement and administrative documents, balancing 
and checking, physical security of assets, double signing (approval) arrangements, 
to financial reporting and monitoring. These are prescribed in PFM act and further 
detailed in the finance and operation manual for the project. There will be internal 
audit function, as noted below, to check overall compliance to internal controls and 
provide support towards improving systems, procedures and processes. 
Internal Audit 
271.  Internal audits will be conducted to provide assurance that the Project is being 
implemented in accordance with the PIM, complies with GoK regulations and is 
complying with Project financing covenants. The project will utilise the internal 
audit function at MALFC and Counties to carry out internal audit. 
272.  The internal auditors were noted to be carrying out in pre-audits of transactions 
instead of providing independent appraisals of project accounting systems and 
control environments. Pre-audit jeopardizes the independence of internal auditor 
later when carrying out specific reviews as they will have been involved in 
expenditure approval process through pre-audit. The office of Internal Auditor 
General, Kenya is shifting to ex-post audits and this will be an advantage to the 
project. The internal Auditors will be required to carry out the audit of the project 
at least once annually.  
273.  IFAD supervision and implementation support missions will consistently demand 
and review the rolling internal audit plans, internal audit reports produced and 
75 
shared as per internal audit plans and implementations of internal audit 
recommendations.  
External Audit  
274.  External audits will be executed by the Auditor General who have been carrying out 
the external audit of IFAD projects implemented by the Government. Any changes 
in the Terms of Reference will require the Fund’s No Objection. IFAD will require 
specific audit opinions: (a) general opinion on the financial statements, (b) opinion 
on the balances of funds held in the special account. The new IFAD handbook on 
audit has been shared with the auditors to enhance their reviews.  
275.  The audits by OAG are carried out in accordance with the International Standards 
of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs) and relevant ethical requirements. As such 
they also include revenue, expenditure, assets and liabilities. In addition, they 
highlight any relevant material issues and systemic and control risks. This enables 
the auditor to express an opinion as to whether or not the financial statements are 
prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with an identified or applicable 
financial reporting framework and (or) statutory requirements. 
276.  The Auditor General in drawing up his audit Projects incorporates review of the 
implementation of the previous period’s recommendations. If those 
recommendations have not been followed this will be stated in the current audit 
report. The capacity of OAG has been consistently assessed by IFAD as satisfactory 
in terms of undertaking project audits. The risk assessment here is therefore low. 
The audited financial statements will be submitted to IFAD within 6 months after 
financial end as required by IFAD.  
277.  Start-up advance. To mitigate on start-up delays which may be occasioned by 
delays in recruitment and setting up Project Management and Coordination Units 
(PMCUs); procuring and installing of appropriate financial management software 
and delays in fulfilment of other disbursements conditions, the project would utilize 
facility for faster implementation of project start-up (FIPS) to implement key start-
up activities in the first six months of the project effectiveness. A start up advance 
of US$ 500,000 has been proposed which will cater for the following: i) recruitment 
of the PMCU staff and setting up of the PMCU Offices; (ii) Procurement of Financial 
Management Software and training staff on how to use it; (iii) initial baseline 
survey activities; (iv) Salaries for the key PMCU staff; (v) operating costs during 
the start-up period; (Vi) ensuring mobility of PMCU staff; and (vii) setting up of the 
M&E Systems and training project staff on M&E processes.  
278.  Nature of project eligible expenditures - Project expenditure categories have 
been allocated in accordance with the standard expenditure categories. Detailed 
cost tables are presented in this document. Transaction-based disbursement 
procedures will be used. The eligibility of expenditure should require: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
The expenditure shall meet the reasonable cost of goods, works and services 
required for the Project and covered by the relevant AWPB and procured in 
conformity with the procurement guidelines 
The expenditure shall be incurred during the project implementation period, 
except that expenditures to meet the costs of winding up the project that may 
be incurred after the project completion date and before the closing date 
The expenditure shall be incurred by a project party 
If the agreement allocates the amount of the financing to categories of eligible 
expenditures and  specifies the percentages of  such  eligible expenditures to 
be financed, the expenditure must relate to a category whose allocation has 
not been depleted, and shall be eligible only up to the percentage applicable 
to such category. 
76 
e) 
The expenditure shall be otherwise eligible in accordance with the terms of 
the financing agreement 
279.  All payment vouchers will be examined to ascertain the following requirements: 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
k) 
l) 
That the expenditure has been incurred on proper authority and is a charge 
to properly voted funds. 
That  payment  vouchers  are  supported  by  original  documents  or  certified 
photocopies of the original documents (such copies must be certified by the 
appropriate  officer  that  he  has  taken  all  possible  steps  to  ensure  that  no 
payment has been made on the original document). 
That  rates  charged  are  according  to  regulations/contracts,  fair  and 
reasonable. 
That appropriate authority e.g. DTC, MTC etc. has been obtained and a copy 
of the minutes attached to the payment vouchers for reference purposes. 
That the allocation of account codes is correct. 
That  appropriate  certificates  have  been  signed  by  the  AIE  holder  or  officer 
authorized by him in writing. 
That  the  vote  book  control  certificate  has  been  duly  signed  to  confirm 
availability of funds. 
m)  That the computations and costing have been verified and are arithmetically 
correct. 
n) 
o) 
p) 
q) 
That the persons named in the payment vouchers are those entitled to receive 
the payment. 
Any  alterations  of  payment  voucher  should  be  counter  signed  by  the  AIE 
holder in charge of the unit. 
That  the  signatories  to  the  certificates  are  as  per  those  indicated  in  the 
specimen signature document 
That  payments  are  supported  by  duly  certified  invoices,  receipted  bills  (for 
direct  cash  payments),  LPOs,  LSOs,  VAT  certificates,  copies  of  supplier’s 
delivery  note,  Form  S13,  and  the  certificate  at  the  reverse  of  the  payment 
voucher signed to confirm stores entry into the relevant inventory ledgers. 
FM Supervision plan 
280.  Supervision. KeLCoP will be directly supervised by IFAD with annual 
implementation support missions, followed initially by shorter follow-up missions 
six months later as may be assessed. Supervision will not be conducted as a 
general inspection or evaluation, but rather as an opportunity to jointly assess 
achievements and lessons, and to reflect on ways to improve implementation; and 
impact. From a financial management perspective, IFAD missions will keenly follow 
up the fiduciary risk at various levels, including the use of the report-based 
disbursement. 
4.8  Monitoring and evaluation 
281.  Monitoring and Evaluation: The PMCU will bear overall responsibility for the 
continuous Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and regular reporting on progress and 
the achievement of project objectives, milestones and results. An ICT-based 
project level M&E system will be developed to automate the entire M&E process. 
The system will provide an innovative data management and visualization platform 
that offers real-time information on both project beneficiaries and field staff 
progress and performance. As a minimum, the ICT-based system will provide 
capabilities to allow the project to: (i) more efficiently upload data from the field 
77 
(beneficiaries); (ii) easily access and export data; (iii) generate user-friendly 
reports and dashboards; (iv) track performance of project beneficiaries; (v) 
generate reports for the County Integrated Management Information System 
(CIMES), National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System (NIMES) as well as 
IFAD’s Operational Results Management System (ORMS) and; (vi) monitor 
performance of remote field project staff as well as implementing partners. 
282.  Monitoring and Evaluation will focus on two areas: (i) M&E of Project Performance 
(monitoring) focusing on the management and supervision of project activities, 
seeking to improve efficiency and overall effectiveness of project implementation. 
This will be a continuous process to collect information on actual implementation of 
project activities compared to those scheduled in the AWPBs, including the delivery 
of quality outputs in a timely manner, to identify problems and constraints, to 
make clear recommendations for corrective actions, and identify lessons learned 
and best practices for scaling up; (ii) M&E of project impact (evaluation) of the 
project’s success in achieving its outcomes to be monitored continuously 
throughout the project. The key indicators in the logical framework will be further 
reviewed/refined during the start-up workshop and during development of the M&E 
Plan. Furthermore, tools, methods and indicators for measuring project 
performance and impact will be determined and agreed to ensure that a 
standardized framework is shared with all the ten participating counties. 
Performance of the mainstreaming themes and safeguards will be monitored 
through the project’s operational M&E framework. 
283.  Learning, Knowledge Management and South-South and Triangular 
Cooperation (SSTC): Learning, KM and SSTC will be key aspects of KeLCoP 
implementation. Cross-learning between IFAD financed projects in the country will 
be promoted by the Borrower and the Lead Agencies through workshops/meetings 
to share knowledge and lessons learned on various topics such as M&E, FM, 
procurement, gender and youth, climate change and any other relevant area. 
Moreover, the project will promote South-South and Triangular Cooperation. For 
instance, the project will facilitate an SSTC initiative with Cambodia to assess the 
technical and operational features of an innovative rural poultry production model 
which has been successfully developed by the local NGO Green Innovet Cam (GIC) 
under the IFAD funded project “Accelerated Inclusive Markets for Smallholders 
(AIMS)” and “Building Adaptive Capacity through the Scaling-up of Renewable 
Energy Technologies in Rural Cambodia (S-RET). In the same context, KeLCoP 
technical experts and farmers will also have the opportunity to exchange good 
practices and knowledge with the counterpart colleagues of the IFAD funded 
“Project for Inclusive Small Livestock Markets (PRISM)” in Rwanda. 
284.  The project will produce relevant KM products and ensure documentation of lessons 
learnt, best practices and success cases. Communication materials, such as press 
releases, extension materials, and radio messages will be prepared and distributed. 
Furthermore, the project will maintain a vibrant website and blog highlighting key 
information for the wider stakeholders. Besides, maintaining social media presence, 
principally on Facebook and Twitter, will be an important element of the project’s 
larger online communication strategy. Relevant information from the project 
KM/M&E system will be used to document lessons learnt, best practices and 
success stories. The KM/M&E system will include a specific module on knowledge 
management. 
285.  ‘Beneficiary Feedback, Grievance Redress and E-Citizen Portal: KeLCoP will 
hold regular beneficiary feedback surveys that will enable it to assess how the 
participants view the various activities and their recommendations for improving 
these for greater relevance, efficiency and impact. The M&E Unit in collaboration 
with the County Governments will undertake these surveys and ensure the 
inclusion of all target groups in these feedback surveys. The project will also 
communicate a telephone number and a web address for grievance reporting at the 
78 
County and PMCU level which will record all calls and complaints. The ESMF 
provides guidance on how the grievance redress mechanism will be developed and 
how grievance logs done and dealt with by the project. The project will also 
establish an e-citizen portal application which will be designed by the ITC 
programmer to enable citizens to provide feedback or register complaints about 
any aspect of the project. This grievance mechanism will be widely circulated at the 
PMCU offices, in the KeLCoP website and project offices at the county and also be 
given to mentors and participating groups. The complaints and redress measures 
will be summarized and the results for feedback will be provided to the relevant 
county Government or institution involved. The ITC programmer and the M&E 
assistant would be required to report on the nature of the grievances and method 
of redress will be tracked. A short report will be prepared for inclusion in the 
project reporting system.  
286.  Project supervision and implementation support: KeLCoP will be supervised 
jointly by GoK (represented by the National Treasury & Planning and State 
Department of Livestock) and IFAD. Annual supervision, followed by shorter follow-
up/implementation support missions six months later, will be organized every year 
during the project’s lifetime. In addition to monitoring implementation and 
reporting on project performance status and results, supervision missions will be 
used as opportunity to assess achievements and lessons learnt, and to reflect upon 
ways to improve implementation and impact. 
287.  Implementation support will be provided for a wide range of activities, depending 
on the needs and circumstances of the project as identified during the supervision 
missions or in the course of project implementation. In addition, KeLCoP will 
benefit from implementation support missions mobilized for country programmes 
to address cross-cutting issues in the country portfolio and for multi-
country/regional initiatives to facilitate learning and knowledge sharing. 
288.  Implementation support will be particularly critical during KeLCoP start-up to help 
establish operational and fiduciary systems, recruit technical assistance and build 
the capacity of key project implementers. At project start-up, IFAD will field a 
start-up mission to support the PMCU to have a clear understanding of the project 
objectives and goals; to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the entities involved 
in implementation; clarify the legal and financial conditions in the financing 
agreement, and the associated procedures and responsibilities. The start-up 
workshop will also provide the opportunity to describe and discuss the 
management arrangements for the project, especially the use of Annual Work Plan 
and Budgets (AWPBs), the implementation strategy set out in the PIM, the 
fiduciary and reporting requirements, the M&E arrangements for setting targets 
and monitoring progress against them and clarify the procedures of official 
supervision reviews and implementation support towards project improvements. 
289.  Reporting arrangements: The PMCU will submit bi-annual progress reports 
according to a format acceptable to both IFAD. These reports will include physical 
and financial progress updates. Physical reporting will be made against a set of 
indicators based on the log-frame. Financial reporting will be done against the 
approved budget.  
290.  Mid-term review (MTR): GoK and IFAD shall jointly carry out an in-depth joint 
mid-term review of KeLCoP no later than the third year of the project. The MTR 
mission will take stock of the achievements of project objectives and constraints 
and recommend any reorientations that might be required. GoK (the National 
Treasury & Planning and SDL) will ensure that the agreed actions at MTR are 
implemented within the agreed time frame. 
79 
291.  Project completion: After KeLCoP completion date and no later than 30 days to 
project closure date, GoK will carry out a project completion review and submit the 
Project Completion Report (PCR) to IFAD. The PCR discussions will focus on 
bringing implementation to a closure, reflecting on progress achieved and lessons 
learned, taking stock of overall performance of both GoK and IFAD and reviewing 
sustainability and the project’s exit strategy. In addition, the PCR will benefit from 
the project impact evaluation to be carried out by the PMCU. 
80 
Annex 1: Draft Terms of reference of key project staff 
Project Coordinator  
Livestock Production Specialist  
Livestock Marketing Specialist  
Social Inclusion and Moblization Specialist  
Environment, Climate and Safeguards Specialist 
Financial Controller  
Procurement Specialist  
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist  
Knowledge Management  
ITC Specialist  
Data Programmer  
Financial Assistant 
M&E Assistant  
Procurement Assistant  
Service Providers to be Competitively Recruited 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Social Mobilization and nutrition messages and modules;  
Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) -Technical Assistance;  
Behaviour Change Communication- Products and Materials Development 
and Delivery; 
E-Extension; 
E-Voucher Partnership Specification with Roles and Responsibilities;  
Business Development Services and Identification Innovators -Technical 
Assistance;  
(vii)  E-Marketing;  
(viii)  Development of E-Marketing-Technical Assistance;  
(ix)  Development of E-Citizen Portal -Technical Assistance;  
(x) 
Terms of Reference for Baseline Survey.  
81 
Terms of Referencefor the KelCoP Project Co-ordinator  
1. 
Job Description  
The Project Coordinator (PC) will head the PMCU and will provide the overall leadership in 
the project implementation. S/he will: coordinate the day-to-day planning and execution 
of the project activities and ensure timely achievement of intended results; oversee and 
ensure timely procurement of works, goods and services (including training), preparation 
of AWB&P, procurement plans, project supervision and reviews and day to day monitoring 
of the project implementation; ensure timely project data capture and reporting; provide 
sound administration of project staff and project finances; promote harmonious and close 
working  relationship  between  the  project,  the  national  and  the  county  governments; 
coordinate  and  ensure  timely  execution  of  activities  assigned  to  partners  and  service 
providers;  and  promote  good  governance  and  participatory  planning.  The  PC  will  be 
answerable to the Project Steering Committee and will work closely with the CPCCs. The 
main responsibilities of the PC include:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
overall coordination of the project management with the CPTTs and SCPTTs in a 
manner that is financially sound, professional, participatory, sensitive to local needs 
and socio-economic context, environmentally and socially sound, and in accordance 
with the policies, procedures, and guidelines set forth in the Financing Agreement, 
Project  design  documents  and  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM),  and  in 
accordance with proposed environmental, climate and social safeguards as found 
in the ESMF, ESMPs, IPMP and the indepth climate risk analysis; 
Support establishment of the Counties and Sub-Counties Project Implementation 
Teams;  
Supervise the work of the PMCU staff, undertake their performance evaluation in a 
timely manner, and submit to the CPCC and the PSC. 
Coordinate  and  work  with  relevant  Government  ministries  and  departments, 
County  authorities,  implementation  partners,  service  providers,  private  sector, 
financing institutions including SACCOs, beneficiaries, CBOs and local communities 
in order to ensure smooth execution of the project activities; 
Assist the Counties to develop a strong and water tight criteria to select the counties 
and target beneficiaries to participate in the project; 
Ensure  timely  preparation,  clearance  and  approval  of  consolidated  AWP&Bs  and 
Procurement Plans (PPs), and their execution in accordance with the overall Project 
objectives,  PIM  and  IFAD  regulations  and  guidelines,  including  fiduciary 
requirements; 
vii.  Guide in the procurement process of all works, goods and services adhering to IFAD 
and  GoK  rules  and  procedures,  and  assume  full  responsibility  of  engaging  and 
contracting works contractors, goods suppliers and service providers; 
viii.  Oversee  and  ensure  close  supervision  of  works  contractors,  goods  suppliers  and 
service providers for timely and quality execution of their responsibilities; 
ix. 
x. 
Timely  prepare  and  submit  to  IFAD,  through  the  National  Treasury,  payment 
requests for works, goods and serves delivered;  
Ensure  full  social  inclusion  of  women,  youth  and  vulnerable groups  among 
identified target beneficiaries of the project by ensuring that specified quotas are 
achieved,  strategies  for  inclusion  identified  and  monitored,  and  modalities  of 
service  delivery  appropriate  to  the  constraints  and  needs  of  these  groups  are 
identified and used.  
82 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv. 
xv. 
Sensitize implementation teams and partners to the project poverty targeting and 
youth and gender mainstreaming strategies and their rationale and implementation 
arrangements;  
Promote  conducive  work  environment  that  promotes  knowledge  sharing  and 
learning  from  experiences  among  members  of  the  Project  staff,  Counties  teams 
and  those  of  the  implementing  partners  and  service  providers,  and  participating 
Government institutions at the National and County levels; 
Ensure  synergies  between  project  components  as  well  as  other  IFAD  financed 
projects to maximize the project's impact;  
Ensure that the County Coordination Bodies and authorities, the PSC, and IFAD are 
at all times fully informed of all Project-related activities, and they are consulted 
regularly  on  strategic  issues  and  implementation  challenges,  and  all  areas  that 
require  attention  and  timely  advice,  correction  and/or  reorientation  for  effective 
and successful implementation;  
Closely monitor implementation of all project activities and regularly prepare and 
submit progress and performance reports to the GoK, IFAD, the  Project Steering 
Committee and the County Coordination Committees, appropriately capturing and 
reporting  project  outputs  and  outcomes,  financial  implementation  status, 
Government and beneficiary contributions; 
xvi.  Manage with integrity and transparency the  Project funds, monitor expenditures, 
submit to the PSC and responsible line agencies quarterly financial reports, oversee 
timely preparation of the project accounts (original receipts, bank statements, and 
other financial records as necessary) and audit of the Project accounts in line with 
the Project Financing Agreement (PFA);  
xvii. 
Ensure the efficient achievement of the Project’s outputs and outcomes as set forth 
in the Project-related documents; 
xviii. 
xix. 
xx. 
xxi. 
xxii. 
xxiii. 
Facilitate  and  support  joint  IFAD/GoK  supervision  and  implementation  support, 
follow-up,  midterm  and  completion  missions,  and  ensure 
their 
recommendations are implemented fully and in a timely manner; 
that 
Build and maintain strong collaborative relationships with all project stakeholders 
(including  beneficiaries),  local  networks  and  contacts  and  partner  organizations, 
engaging  them  on  a  regular  basis  to  integrate  their  feedback  into  the 
implementation and progress of the Project;  
Coordinate the scaling up of the technological packages promoted by the Project in 
coordination with IFAD, the CPCC and the PSC, and implementing Project partners;  
Ensure that the project activities are fully harmonized with the different Counties 
Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs); 
Ensure that the project activities do not duplicate activities of projects financed by 
other development partners operating in the same area covered by KeLCoP but are 
instead complementary;  
Ensure that the Project’s poverty, gender and environment strategies, as well as 
the natural resources management aspects are fully integrated into all features of 
Project planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. 
2.   Qualifications and Experience Required for the Position:  
i. 
A  higher  degree  in  Agricultural  Economics,  Animal  Production,  Animal  Health;  or 
related  discipline  relevant  to  livestock  development,  with  sound  knowledge  of 
contemporary issues in the rural economy of Kenya.  
83 
ii. 
Relevant professional work experience of at least five years in:  
 
project management, project financial administration and budgeting, 
including leadership of multi-disciplinary team of experts (experience in 
managing projects financed through international development partners will 
be an added advantage); and 
iii. 
iv. 
  managing initiatives related to agriculture and rural development, and 
poverty alleviation.  
Excellent analytical skills, sound judgment, resourcefulness, ability to take 
initiatives, capacity to self-manage and ability to create a team-based, 
participatory work environment; 
Sound understanding of the Kenya’s multi-level government systems (National 
and County Governments), their governance and administration modalities, their 
differences and linkages; 
v. 
Skills in process facilitation, strategic planning, and partnership building;  
vi. 
vii. 
Excellent understanding of the social, economic, political and historical trends 
underpinning poverty alleviation strategies and policy reform processes in Kenya.  
Adequate understanding of Kenya’s diverse agro-ecological zones including the 
ASALs, their different agricultural systems and development needs;  
viii. 
Fluent in English (written and spoken) and Kiswahili languages;  
ix. 
Excellent communication skills (comprehension, writing, speaking);  
x. 
A high-level computer literacy;  
xi. 
Ability and flexibility to travel intensively within Project area, as may be required.  
xii. 
The incumbent should be prepared to sign as a condition of employment under a 
Special Service Agreement, an obligation to reside for the duration of the Project 
in Nakuru. The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, 
period, renewable every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
84 
Terms of Reference for the KeLCoP Livestock Production Specialist  
Technical Focus 
Animal production, dairy production, poultry production, rural development and animal 
health. 
2. 
Job Description  
Under the supervision of Project Coordinator, the Livestock Production Specialist will be in 
charge  of  the  technical  coordination  and  oversight  of  KeLCoP  activities  with  respect  to 
animal production. S/he will be coordinating and leading the implementation of Component 
1  of  the  project,  “Climate-smart  production  enhancement  for  small  livestock”,  but  also 
contribute  to  the  implementation  of  Component  2,  on  technical  aspects  linked  to 
production, in collaboration with the livestock marketing specialist. Livestock Production 
Specialist will perform the following duties:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Provide expertise and support the implementation of KeLCoP activities in livestock 
production (particularly small ruminants, poultry, honey and dairy goats); 
Contribute  to  the  production  of  technical  training  manuals  and  related  capacity 
building materials, coaching and mentoring on animal production; 
Coordinate  with  relevant  project  partners,  service  providers,  NGOs  and  other 
stakeholders on the plan and implementation of livestock production activities; 
Evaluate  the  technical  soundness  of  activities  on  livestock  designed  to  improve 
productivity; 
Provide  technical  advice  on  issues  raised  pertaining  to  livestock  production  and 
related activities; 
Establish  strategic  partnership  with  pertinent  public  institutions,  implementing 
partners,  private  sector,  national  and  regional  civil  society  organizations  for 
enhancing effectiveness, and efficiency in veterinary service delivery and disease 
control; 
vii. 
Coordinate  the  sourcing,  multiplication  and  dissemination  of  improved  animal 
breeds; 
viii. 
Ensure  that  the  livestock  production  activities  are  aligned  with  the  activities  in 
different Counties Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs); 
ix. 
x. 
Establish partnership with relevant stakeholders in production and distribution of 
indigenous pasture species and coordinate wider rangeland management activities; 
Support  the  implementation  of  climate  smart  technologies  (solar  powered 
boreholes, water harvesting technologies); 
2.   Qualifications and Experience Required for the Position:  
xiii.  Master's Degree in Animal Sciences, Animal Production and Veterinary sciences or 
related field with complementary knowledge in rural development; 
xiv. 
The candidate should have at least 5 years practical experiences in animal resource 
management and good knowledge of livestock sector in Kenya; 
85 
xv.  Must poses established professional and practical work experience in donor funded 
livestock or animal production projects in Kenya or in the region; 
xvi.  Must be familiar with Kenya’s diverse agro-ecological zones including the ASALs, 
their different agricultural systems and development needs;  
xvii. 
Fluent in English (written and spoken) and Kiswahili languages;  
xviii. 
Excellent communication skills and proven writing ability; 
xix. 
High level of computer proficiency in Microsoft Office Suite; 
xx. 
xxi. 
Be willing to undertake regular field visits in project areas and interact with 
different stakeholders; 
S/he should be prepared to sign as a condition of employment under a Special 
Service Agreement, an obligation to reside for the duration of the Project in 
Nakuru. The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, 
renewable every year on continued satisfactory performance.  
86 
Terms of Reference  
Livestock Marketing Specialist (LMS) 
Duties and Responsibilities: 
The Livestock Marketing Specialist (LMS) will oversee implementation of all marketing 
activities described in Component 2 of the PIM: Specifically, 2.1) Marketing 
Infrastructure and Capacity Development, 2.2) Building Inclusive Value Chains, and 2.3) 
the Value Chain Management Information System. He/she will work closely with the ICT 
Specialist, Data Programmer, Social Inclusion and Mobilization Specialist, and the 
Procurement Specialist. The LMS must also coordinate closely with the County Livestock 
Production Officer and the County Social Services Development Officer as well as civil 
sector county offices of the Kenya Livestock Marketing Council (KLMC) and the Kenya 
National Chamber of Commerce and Industry ( KNCCI) 
Specific duties: 
i. 
Become thoroughly familiar with the IFAD Project Aide Memoire and PIM as well as 
each County Integrated Development Plans (2018-2022). 
ii.  Map  the  targeted  value  chains  and  institutional  support.  In  order  to  effectively 
perform his/her job, the LMS will oversee the building of graphic maps of the value 
chains. This task includes the production and market chains, as well as identification 
of government, civil, and private sector entities that support the value chains. The 
goal is to fully understand the targeted value chains and provide a public and highly 
visual documentation of that understanding in order to share  that understanding 
with KeLCoP staff and stakeholders. A deep understanding of targeted value chains 
represented in visual maps will facilitate the identification of constraints, specifically 
financial,  technological,  infrastructural,  marketing,  regulatory,  policy-related, 
institutional, and human resource constraints. These limitations should be identified 
and  addressed  during  the  course  of  the  project  to  facilitate  development  of  the 
value chains. Such understanding will assist the LMS-as well as other KeLCoP staff—
to excel in the performance of their duties. He/she will  participate in and contribute 
to investor forums and MSPs (Multi-Stakeholder Platforms), and recommend public 
and private investments and policies that will help to develop the value chains. The 
value  chain  maps  will  be  shared  with  the  entire  staff  by  displaying  the  maps  on 
large  poster  boards  in  the  KeLCoP  office.  The  maps  can  also  be  used  for  visual 
presentations  at  MSP  and  Investor  forums  as  well  as  exploratory  focus  group 
discussions with beneficiaries. Specifically: 
(a) 
(b) 
To  effectively  oversee  building  the  maps  and  effectively  perform  his/her 
duties, the LMS will first conduct a thorough review of the literature on the 
targeted  value  chains  in  the  area  with  particular  attention  given  to 
ethnographic and primary research.  
To  assure  a  deep  and  up-to-date  mapping  of  the  chains  and  beneficiary 
participation in the research, the LMS will, with assistance of a consultant 
specializing  in  graphic  value  chain  mapping  techniques,  complement  the 
literature  review  with  primary  research  among  beneficiaries.  To  prompt 
feedback  and  focus  discussion,  the  LMS  will  present  the  drafts  of  maps 
produced  by  the  consultant  to  groups  of  beneficiaries.  The  maps  will  be 
presented in highly graphic, animated Power-Point presentations projected 
on  a  portable  video  screen  using  a  high-density  projector.  These 
presentations will take place in locations within the respective counties of 
the beneficiaries.  
(c)  With the aid of the mentioned consultant, the Data Programmer and the 
M&E  Specialist,  the  LMS  will  use  his/her  findings  from  the  value  chain 
research to produce physical poster-board maps of the value chains and 
87 
display those maps in the KeLCoP office at a location that other staff can 
view, comment, and modify the maps.  
iii.  Develop an annual and monthly work plan. The plans will be in line with the PIM 
and  the  AWP&B.  They  must  include  weekly  meetings  with  all  component  heads 
regarding  progress  of  ICT  for  which  a  one-page  summary  report  should  be 
submitted  and  archived.  The  work  plans  will  be  developed  the  first  week  of 
employment  and  a  monthly  work  plan  will  thereafter  be  developed  on  the  first 
Monday of every month for the life of the project/employment.  
iv. 
Identify  and  establish  contact  with  implementing  partners  and  inform  them  of 
upcoming  activities.  Specifically,  during  the  first  month  of  employment,  the  LMS 
should contact representatives of the following entities:  
(a) 
County  Livestock  Production  Office  and  the  County  Social  Services  Development 
Office in each of the 10 counties, to inform them of the specific plans, and agree 
on the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
The need to coordinate with county assembly to authorize preparation 
of Livestock bill or review existing bills. 
The expediency of recognizing LMAs and approving a revenue sharing 
agreement/MOU with them. 
The  need  to  select  two  markets  and  prepare  rehabilitation  plan  that 
conforms to the 2017 KEBS Livestock Market Standards KEBS. 
The  intention  to  support  Investor  Forums  and  the  contributions 
expected from the county. 
The  intention  to  conduct  MSPs  (Multi-Stakeholder  Platforms),  the 
purpose  and  expected  benefits,  and  the  specific  pre-requisites  and 
contributions  expected  from  the  county.  An  agreement  should  be 
reached and an MOU defining the responsibilities and contributions from 
each party signed. 
(b) 
Contact the KLMC in each of the 10 county to inform them verbally and in written 
follow-up of the specific plans listed below. 
  Market  management  training  of  the  relevant  county  officials  and  LMA 
members. Reach an agreement and sign an MOU regarding the strategy 
for training the County officials and LMA members.  
 
Inform  them  of  the  Investment  forums  and  MSPs  (Multi-Stakeholder 
Platforms).  Reach  an  agreement  and  sign  an  MOU  regarding  the 
strategy for training the County officials and LMA members.  
(c) 
Contact  the  Chamber  of  commerce  in  each  of  the  10  counties  and  inform  them 
verbally with written follow-up of specific plans on: 
 
MSPs 
  Grant programs 
  Internships 
(d) 
Contact the Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA) and the USAID supported Kenya 
Youth Employment and Skills Program (K-YES), and  inform them of the: 
a.  The intention to establish an Internship program for 500 KeLCoP youth 
trainees.  
b.  The upcoming investor forums and MSPs. 
88 
Contact two LMAs in each county selected for training, obtain a list of members and 
(e) 
establish a training schedule. 
(f) Working with the Procurement Specialist to recruit and/or issue timely calls-for-
bids that conform to procurement best practices and criteria defined in the PIM, 
the LMS will: 
 
Identify and hire the consultant who will create all ICT wire frames and 
guide ICT development processes.  
 
 
 
 
 
Identify and hire a consultant to assist with the graphic development of 
digital, interactive value chain maps and e-extension apps.  
Identify and hire a consultant to assist the counties with the livestock 
bills. 
Issue  call-to-bid  and  hire  a  qualified  construction  contractor  to 
rehabilitate the markets 
Issue  call-to-bid  and  hire  a  qualified  service  provider  to  manage  the 
grant programs. 
Issue  call-to-bid  and  hire  a  qualified  service  provider  to  manage  the 
Marketing Component training programs 
v. 
Take responsibility for grant programs 
  Work  with  the  Financial  Controller,  Procurement  Specialist,  and  county 
and  Social  Development  office  to  review  and  select  final  grant 
applications. 
Support the Business Development Service Provider (BDSP) to issue open 
calls for grant proposals/applications for programs (a) and (c) above.  
Receive  grant  proposals/applications  that  have  been  collected  by  the 
BDSP for programs (a) and (c) above. 
Run  credit  checks  on  all  grant  applicants  for  programs  (a),  (b)  and  (c) 
above  using  Kenya  Financial  sector  best  practices  for  assuring  the 
credibility of loan applicants,  
Receive and verify the authenticity of three notarized witnesses who are 
not family members of the applicant and who attest to the credibility of 
the applicant for programs (a) and (c) above. 
Review any based on best practices rate Business Plans produced by all 
the grantees for programs (a) and (c) above.  
Make dispersal payments to applicants upon approval and authorization 
from the BDSP for programs (a), (b) and (c) above. 
vi. 
Take the lead in creating and maintaining a program for internships for youth trained 
in the KeLCoP project. This involves coordinating with Kenya Private Sector Alliance 
(KEPSA) and the USAID supported Kenya Youth Employment and Skills Program (K-
YES),  Kenya  Livestock  Marketing  Council  (KLMC),  the  Kenya  National  Chamber  of 
Commerce and Industry (KNCCI) and any implementing partners that could provide 
internship opportunities to youth.  
Map out key entrepreneurship opportunities.  
  Work  closely  with  the  Data  Programmer,  the  ICT  consultant,  and  digital  graphic 
designer  to  develop  interactive  market  sourcing  applications  (Market  Information 
System).  This  will  involve  supporting  the  consultants  in  ethnographic  field  work 
89 
(intensive focus groups) and workshops with stakeholders to develop user-centered 
design for and wireframes.  
Under the guidance of the ICT consultant and working closely with the ICT Specialist 
and  Data  Programmer,  the  MLS  will  promote  and  test  Market  Information  system 
during  trainings  with  the  County  Livestock  officers,  the  LMA  members,  as  well 
cooperative,  entrepreneur  and  youth  trainings,  and  those  grant  recipients  working 
on ICT applications.  
Prepare  quarterly  reports  that  summarize  all  activities  accomplished  by  financial 
quarter and project scheduled activities and meeting of beneficiary targets.  
Oversee the conclusion and verify deliverables for all the Service Provider activities 
defined above and in the PIM.  
Oversee and  support the  ICT Specialist to coordinate and take minutes for weekly 
Friday meetings with all component heads regarding progress of ICT for which a one-
page summary report should be submitted and archived.  
Expected outputs: 
An extensive bibliography of the literature concerning the respective value chains in 
Kenya, including a summary review of all relevant articles (first three months).  
Five  Highly  Graphic  Value  Chain  Maps:  1)  master  livelihood  strategy  map 
summarizing  beneficiary  activities  for  the  entire  region  (all  10  counties),  2)  dairy 
goat map, 3) meat goat map, 4) poultry map, and 5) beekeeping and honey map. 
The maps will include points of opportunity to change or support the maps, breakages 
and/or  constraints,  institutional  entities  that  support  the  value  chains  (first  6 
months). 
A master work plan, annual work plan and weekly work plans. 
Quarterly reports specifying achievements, updated targets, projections, and work 
plan for upcoming quarter. 
A list of all county, civil sector, and implementing partner contacts (first month).  
  Weekly ICT progress reports prepared with ICT specialist (beginning in first month 
and continuing through the life of the project 
Achievement of all beneficiary targets in the Logical Matrix. 
Credit  checks  for  300  approved  applicants  for  smallholder  commercial  producer 
grants  of  up  to  $5,000  and  50  approved  applicants  for  start-up  grants  of  up  to 
$30,000 
Dossiers  with  three  witnesses  endorsing  300  approved  applicants  for  smallholder 
commercial producer grants of up to $5,000 and 50 approved applicants for start-up 
grants of up to $30,000 
Completed dispersals and signed documentation for 500 recipients of $2,000 grants 
to  small  entrepreneurs,  300  matching  grants  for  smallholder  commercial  producer 
grants of up to $5,000 and 50 grants of up to $30,000 to start-ups 
Qualifications: 
The Candidate must have at least a Master’s degree in Agricultural Economics, 
Agricultural Development or Development Economics with a specialization in Agriculture 
with an emphasis on livestock and at least 10 years of practical experience in the field of 
agriculture and rural development. At least 5 years of experience managing programs 
with outreach of 1,000 beneficiaries or more. Must be highly proficient in Word, Excel, 
90 
Power-Point and must have a solid working knowledge of basic statistics and sampling 
theory. The Specialist must also have experience with value chain analysis and 
assessments, and private sector operations in agribusiness. Three references from past 
employers. Experience in ICT and/or programming is considered an advantage. The 
Marketing Development Specialist will be  the Lead of the Marketing component, and 
therefore must have strong skills and experience in a senior management position. 
Languages: 
Must have excellent English reading, writing and speaking and fluent in Swahili.  
Key Competencies: 
Duration: 1 year, renewable after successful perfoemance evaluation, for up to 6 years. 
91 
Terms of Reference for Social Inclusion Specialist 
The Social Inclusion Specialist will report to the Project Coordinator. 
The specific duties of the Social Inclusion Specialist will include: 
a) Under the guidance of the Project Coordinator, serving as focal point and facilitate the 
project to follow the targeting strategy for mainstreaming of the poor, women, youth 
and marginalized communities in project activities. 
b) Ensuring that PMCU staff  and those in the Counties understand the rationale and the 
targeting strategy for mainstreaming of the poor, women, youth and marginalized 
communities in the project, and their specific role and responsibility in implementing it. 
c) Liaising with the Directors of Youth and Gender, and Nutrition Officers at the County 
level, keeping them informed about the projects targeting strategy and progress and 
identifying any opportunities for complementary support for the project’s beneficiaries 
from other government or donor interventions 
d) Reviewing and Monitoring the Social Mobilization Service Providers’ plans for 
community mobilization including the Socio-Economic Assessments, community entry, 
situation analysis, social and institutional mapping, wealth ranking, and assessment of 
existing community groups and beneficiary selection process, as well as capacity building 
of Group and Graduation Mentors, ensuring inclusion of the project’s target group.  
e) Overseeing and monitoring the implementation of GALS including contracting 
consultants or service providers for technical assistance, reviewing the TOR and 
coordinating between the SMSP and GALS technical assistance. 
f) Overseeing and monitoring the Graduation of Ultra-Poor households and the 
Integration of GALS with the Graduation approach specifically, methodology for selection 
of beneficiaries, quality assurance of manuals developed for Graduation and Group 
Mentors, quality of services provided to ultra-poor households and the level of 
beneficiary satisfaction. 
g) Overseeing the implementation of the indigenous peoples action plans and their 
integration into the project delivery mechanisms, and that budgets are allocated to 
implement them. 
h) Tracking the project’s effectiveness in mainstreaming poverty, gender, youth, 
indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups in collaboration with the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Specialist, to make recommendations for course correction highlighting 
challenges, achievements and lessons learnt in social inclusion in progress reports. 
i) Oversee the set up and implementation of the project’s grievance redress mechanism. 
j) Any other relevant duties as may be assigned by the project coordinator. 
Qualifications and experience: 
S/he should have  
  A Master's degree in social science or a field related to rural community 
development /gender/social inclusion.  
  A minimum of 10 years of experience in community development and applied 
gender mainstreaming at project or institutional level.  
  Experience with poverty, gender and youth targeting in agriculture-based rural 
development programmes. 
92 
  Experience in rural development project management and implementation  
  Knowledge and experience of Participatory Rural Appraisal techniques  
  Knowledge of the Graduation Approach and Household Methodologies especially 
GALS (will be valued- but not essential) 
Skills & Attributes  
 Good computer skills 
 Strong inter-personal skills 
 Strong analytical skills 
 Self-motivated and creative thinker 
 Proven ability to work in teams 
 Empathy and Open-mindedness 
 Ability to work independently and with limited supervision and to deliver work under 
pressure. 
Terms of reference for Environment, Climate and Safeguards Officer 
The environment, climate and safeguards officer will report to the project coordinator.  
Scope of Work 
The Officer will work closely with the PMCU and respective component leads as well county 
governments  and  implementing  partners,  to  cover  the  entire  project’s  environmental, 
climate and safeguards oversight. The position will provide support to the poject to comply 
with  environmental,  climate  and  safeguards  issues  through:  -(i)  technical  backstopping 
and  advising  the  PMU,  implementing  partners  and  counties  in  addressing  a  variety  of 
environmental  and  climate  issues  at  all  the  stages  of  implementation;  (ii)  coordinate 
environment and climate related training/awareness raising and coordination activities;, 
(iii)  ensure  that  environment  and  climate  issues  are  mainstreamed  into  project 
interventions and in the application of project documents e.g. the PDR, PIM, AWPBs etc.;  
(iv) ensure environment, climate and social safeguards   as   outlined   in the ESMF, ESMPs, 
indepth  climate  risk  analysis,  grievance  redress  mechanism,  and  in  the  integrated 
pesticides  management  plan    are  adhered  to,  and  oversee  the  capacity  building  and 
training activities as required. 
Specific Roles and Responsibilities  
Under the direct supervision of KeLCoP PMCU Coordinator, the Environment, Climate and 
Social Safeguards Officer will be responsible for, but not limited to, the following duties. 
  Ensure that he/she guides the project in mainstreaming environment, climate and 
NRM considerations in all interventions and implementation processes. 
  Ensuring that project investments and each activity under the project is subjected 
to appropriate environmental,climate and safeguards processes and procedures. 
  Prepare  guidelines,  tools  and  notes  for  use  in  the  project  based  on  relevant 
environmental  policies,  acts  and  regulations/  directives  of  the  Government  of 
Kenya and relevant safeguard policies of IFAD 
  Ensure  that  national  and  IFAD’s  SECAP  guidelines  and  procedures  are  complied 
with at all times and at all stages of project implementation. 
  Oversee and provide technical support towards the development of the indicators, 
tools, guidelines on environment and climate aspects of the project’s baselines, and 
that the progress is also monitored at mid-term and end line. 
93 
  Develop relevant training and capacity building materials and organize environment 
and  climate    awareness  creation  activities;  and  training  of  local  institutions, 
implementing partners and farmers/agro-pastoralists/beneficiaries. 
  Prepare  related  knowledge  products  and  materials  and  help  the  project  in 
disseminating the information to the relevant stakeholders and audiences. 
  Develop 
implementation 
to 
environment,climate  and  NRM  activities  and  ensure  AWPB  targets  are  met  in  a 
timely manner. 
of  AWP&B 
strategies 
activities 
related 
  Review activity plans and bid documents of implementing partners and contractors, 
to  ensure  environmental,  climate  issues  are  mainstreamed  and  mitigation 
measures are incorporated, and ensure all project documents and environmental 
documents are in harmony.  
  Ensure that project interventions are guided by the safeguards documents (ESMF, 
ESMP,  indepth  climate  risk  analysis,  grievance  redress  mechanism,  integrated 
pesticides management plan) developed for the project and that mitigation actions 
proposed are embedded into all relevant activities. 
  Coordinate with relevant agencies for obtaining appropriate environmental permits 
and or certification/licenses e.g. NEMA, WRA; etc. 
  Liaise  with  relevant  officers  at  the  county  level  as  well  as  at  national  level  to 
implement and promote and environment and climate agenda of the project. 
  Communicate with IPs and contractors for necessary environmental compliance. 
  Support Programme M&E through data collection and writing of required reports. 
  Perform other related duties as may be requested by the Project Coordinator. 
  Represent the PMCU in all relevant meetings and workshops, as well as in the 
preparation of any documents required to mobilise climate finances. 
  Any other duty as assigned by the project coordinator. 
Qualification and Experience 
  Master’s  Degree  or  equivalent  in  Environmental  Sciences;  Natural  Resource 
management and NRM or any related field. 
  At least 8 years of relevant and progressive experience at community, national or 
international  level  in  providing  environmental  management  advisory  services, 
hands-on experience in design, monitoring and evaluation of development projects 
and establishing interrelationships among international organizations and national 
governments. 
  Sound knowledge of policy and regulatory frameworks for environmental, climate 
assessments  and  natural  resource  management  in  the  agricultural/livestock 
context of Kenya.  
  Demonstrated  capacity  to  develop  environmental  and  social  management  plans, 
execute safeguards, prescribe solutions to natural resource management problems, 
manage budgets and programs, as well as prepare reports; 
  Excellent skills in written and spoken English and good computer skills, knowledge 
of local languages such as Swahili will be an added advantage;  
  Creative, innovative system thinker, with ability to catalyse change. 
  Affiliation to a local or international environmental body 
1.0  Duration 
This is a 2-year permanent position  renewable based on performance. 
94 
Terms of Reference for the Social Mobilization Service Provider (s) SMSP: 
The project may on a competitive basis hire one or more Social Mobilization Service 
Provider (SMSP) for the wards in the 10 counties in the project area: Marsabit, Samburu, 
Elgeyo Marakwet,  Baringo, Nakuru, Siaya, Bungoma, Busia, Trans Nzoia, Kakamega).  
The following activities will be implemented by the SMSPs:  
1.1 Socio-Economic Assessment: (Year 1): In each County, the SMSP in close 
consultation with the County Government will use the following criteria to identify the 
two to four wards and potential villages that will constitute the focal area of project 
implementation in each selected county. A rapid socio-economic assessment of these 
wards will be conducted by the service provider which will include identifying the 
number of villages, population, socio-economic conditions of the target group, 
registered women and youth groups, specific constraints of women, men and youth 
smallholders with regard to the selected value chain, existing markets. The 
assessment will identify the role of women and youth in the selected livestock value 
chain, identifying opportunities and constraints in production, processing and 
marketing as well as any other factors that affect their participation in the project. 
The Socio-Economic Assessment will be conducted in close coordination with the 
County Government and the PMCU to finalize the selection of the target area within 
the county. 
1.2  Recruitment and Capacity Building of Staff: (Year 2,3,4,5): The SMSP will 
recruit the following staff at a minimum to implement the social mobilization 
component  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Three Regional managers to manage the 10 counties.  
Two Senior supervisors per County 
Two Group Mentors per County 
Ten Graduation Mentors per County 
The SMSP will prepare manuals integrating GALS with the Graduation Approach and 
train the Graduation Mentors to support ultra-poor households. The SMSP will also 
prepare manuals for the Group Mentors who will be tasked with forming/ mentoring 
smallholder and provide them with training. The SMSP will make the Social 
Mobilization staff available for training in GALS, Nutrition, Business Skills and any 
other training identified by the PMCU as required for the mentoring of groups and 
households. The Regional and Senior Supervisors will be expected to liaise with 
County Gender and Youth Directors to identify opportunities for inclusion of project’s 
target groups in initiatives.  
1.3 Village Orientations (Year 2,3): The SMSP will deliver orientation sessions at 
Village meetings (barazas) to inform the smallholder farmers about KeLCoP. The 
objectives, activities and criteria for participation will be shared with potential 
beneficiaries. 
1.4 Participatory Rural Appraisal (year 2): The SMSP will hold meetings in identified 
villages to introduce the project and conduct a PRA participatory rural appraisal to 
identify the Ultra-poor households and the market-oriented small-holder farmers who 
would like to participate in the project. The Ultra-poor households will be identified 
on the basis of project criteria and a wealth ranking exercise involving women and 
men from the targeted community after the project has presented its objectives and 
targeting criteria. The smallholder farmers involved in the three project value chains 
and interested in participating in the project will be selected. The selection will be 
finalized after household visits to validate community selection.  
95 
1.5 Forming Smallholder Livestock Farmer Groups (Year 2,3): The SMSP will help 
the smallholder farmers to organize in to groups. The groups will be specific to one of 
the three value-chains, small-ruminants, poultry or bee-keeping. Each group is likely 
to include 20-30 members. The SMSP will mentor the group through Group Mentors 
and provide capacity building training in GALS, Nutrition, Business Skills and Animal 
Husbandry and help to aggregated production / processing and develop market 
linkages. The SMSP will be responsible for facilitating the group to develop a vision, 
maintain healthy team dynamics, the development of a capacity building schedule 
and action plan. The SMSP will inform the groups about project activities such as 
availability of improved breeds, water infrastructure etc. and facilitate the full 
participation of individual members. As the project progresses, multi-stakeholder 
forums linking farmers to different private sector partners in the value chain will be 
facilitated to further improve prospects of farmers while forging stronger outlets to 
formal markets. 
1.6 Graduation of Ultra-poor Households (Year 2, 3, 4, 5): The SMSP will follow the 
Graduation Approach integrated with the use of the Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS) for supporting ultra-poor households. (i) The SMSP will provide the following 
support through Graduation Mentors to support ultra-poor households identified 
during the PRA exercise, over an average period of 16 months: 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(i) 
(ii) 
Consumption support 
Health insurance to protect from health shocks (if viable)/linking households 
to healthcare providers 
Development of self-confidence, household well-being, gender justice and 
livelihood plan through GALS and market assessment 
Transfer of Livestock or other asset related to economic activity along the 
livestock value-chain 
Access to training and/or provision through mentor to training in skill required 
to care for asset  
(vi) 
Financial Literacy with promotion of savings 
(vii)  Nutrition training and support for kitchen gardening 
(viii)  On-going mentoring support with weekly visits reduced over time to one 
(v) 
every two weeks with business planning and money management, along with 
social support and health and disease prevention services. 
The SMSP will also define the criteria for graduation specifying verifiable indicators for 
women’s empowerment, nutrition, improved livelihoods and impact on gender relations. 
These can vary according to counties. and include indicators such as (i) number of meals 
(ii) percentage increase in income, diversification of income sources (iii)  
1.7 GALS Training (Year 2,3,4,5): The SMSP will make its Group and Graduation 
mentors and supervisors available for capacity building in GALS, a household 
methodology for empowering women, men and youth and strengthening their 
participation in the value chains by developing visions, analyzing challenges and 
developing action plans informed by principles of gender justice for household well-
being and improving their livelihoods. The Group Mentors will introduce GALS basic 
and advanced tools to the men and women to develop individual and group visions, 
action-plans and integrate gender justice into the value-chain and raise awareness 
on Nutrition Education and Climate Adaptation. The Graduation mentors will use the 
tools for mentoring ultra-poor households. The SMSP thought the Group and 
Graduation Mentors will identify community women and men to be trained as GALS 
champions. 
1.8  Animal Husbandry Training (Years 2,3,4,5): The SMSP will be responsible for 
providing technical training on Animal Husbandry for Small-Ruminants, Bee-keeping 
and Poultry through the modules developed by the Behaviour Change Communication 
96 
(BCC) service provider hired by the PMCU. The SMSP will also facilitate access to the 
smallholder farmer groups and ultra-poor households required for formative research 
to inform the BCC campaign. 
1.9 Nutrition Training (Years 2,3): The SMSP will be responsible for organizing the 
development of a training manual for raising awareness on nutrition and promoting 
improved nutrition practices among the target group of the project by the County 
Nutrition Officer of each County so that the nutrition training is customized to 
address the county- specific challenges for nutrition and capitalize on any existing 
nutrition initiatives in the county. The SMSP will organize TOTs for the Group and 
Graduation Mentors in each county with the assistance of the County Nutrition 
Officers so that the training can be disseminated to the ultra-poor households (4000) 
and the smallholder famer groups (440 groups) . The training on nutrition is likely to 
include the following topics: Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) mothers 
nutrition, food safety, preservation importance of good nutrition, recipes for cooking 
food with locally available ingredients). The trainings for communities will include 
food demonstrations Participants from the projects target village will join in meal 
preparation by cutting vegetables, pounding and mixing ingredients and cooking 
different dishes. They will learn about combining diverse foods to enhance nutritional 
value and variety, adding ingredients in the right proportions by using local 
measures, ensuring correct cooking times and handling and storing foods safely. 
1.10  The SMSP will work in close collaboration with the PMCU and will be responsible 
for providing progress reports to the PMCU The implementing partner of the pilot will 
provide quarterly summary reports on the pilot and six-monthly narrative reports and 
annual reports to PMCU. The format of these reports will be agreed. The SMSP will 
also provide annual work plans and budget as required by IFAD and fulfil other 
monitoring requirements of IFAD such as the PROFIT Log-Frame, RIMs indicators, 
etc. The Implementing partner will also assist supervision missions, provide baseline 
and impact information on the selected target group. Case studies and profiles will be 
prepared.  
1.11  The Service provider must demonstrate expertise in mainstreaming gender and 
youth in policies. Service provider will be responsible for ensuring the visibility of 
women, youth (young women and men) in the strategies , identifying their specific 
interests, constraints and opportunities and including strategies to address them. 
Qualifications: 
The Social Mobilization Service Provider should be able to demonstrate: 
(1) Experience of a minimum of 10 years in mobilizing rural communities in Kenya 
(2) Experience of a minimum of 5 years in mentoring with women and youth to 
improve their wellbeing and livelihoods. 
(3) Experience in Implementing the Graduation Approach or access to technical 
expertise for implementing the Graduation Approach 
(4) Financial, M&E and procurement systems in place to fulfil IFAD requirements 
97 
Terms of Reference: Gender Action Learning  
GALS (Gender Action Learning System) is a community-led empowerment 
methodology that uses principles of inclusion to improve income, food and nutrition 
security of vulnerable people in a gender-equitable way. It positions poor women and 
men as drivers of their own development rather than victims, identifying and dismantling 
obstacles in their environment, challenging service providers and private actors. It has 
proven to be effective for changing gender inequalities that have existed for generations, 
strengthening negotiation power of marginalized stakeholders and promoting 
collaboration, equity and respect between value chain actors.8 The project will use GALS 
to increase the intrinsic, instrumental and collective agency of project beneficiaries 
recognizing that gender justice is critical to positive economic, social and nutritional 
outcomes. GALS will assist ultra-poor households, smallholder women and men farmers 
and young women and men to engage in the value chains more effectively.  
The PMCU may contract in a firm or a team of consultants to implement the GALS sub-
component:  
The GALS consultants /service provider (GSP)will be responsible for the following:  
1.  Adapt and prepare GALS manuals adapted to include Nutrition and Climate 
Change Adaptation for training Graduation Mentors and Group mentors in GALS 
for KeLCoP9.  
2.  Design the methodology for documenting and monitoring GALS in the field 
and train Senior Supervisors and TOT participants in the methodology. This will 
include developing simple formats for groups and households to document their 
progress in a standard format in their record books. They will also implement and 
design a short survey in consultation with the Social Inclusion Specialist and M&E 
Specialist to help the mentors and field supervisors capture information on uptake 
of the methodology. 
3.  Design and Deliver TOT (1): The first round of 10 TOTs (5 days each) will be 
delivered in each county (Year 2) to train Graduation mentors, Group mentors, 
Supervisors and Regional Managers, as well some County Officials in basic tools 
for GALS: These include but may not be limited to Vision Road Journey, Gender 
balance tree, Challenge Action Tree and Social Empowerment Maps. 
4.  Supervision and Quality Assurance (Round 1): GSP will spend 7 to 10 days 
in each county observing the Group and Graduation mentors train women and 
men in the field over a period of 6 months. Field visits will be undertaken with the 
Supervisors of the mentors. The GSP will provide feedback on the quality of the 
training and train the Senior Supervisors during the field visits with a checklist to 
help them monitor the performance of the mentors in future.  
5.  Design and Deliver TOT (Round 2): The GSP will design and deliver a second 
round of 10 TOTs (5 days each) in more advanced GALS tools 6 months after the 
first TOT. This TOT will focus on preliminary scoping and mapping of gender and 
power issues in value chains, strengthening negotiation power, negotiating win-
win strategies in value chains and managing and monitoring impact, to promote a 
sustainable action learning process. The tools used could include Diamonds, 
Multilane highways, Value chain and market maps. The second TOT will also serve 
8 Oxfam Novib (2014), Gender Action Learning System Practical Guide For Transforming Gender And Unequal Power Relations 
In Value Chains 
9 GALS manuals mainstreaming nutrition, climate change and focusing on Value Chains have been developed by several 
projects and organizations. The manuals developed by PRELNOR project Uganda, Oxfam Novib on Value Chains may be 
particularly useful. The ECG division at IFAD can further facilitate access to other valuable resources. 
98 
as an opportunity for Graduation and Group Mentors to exchange experiences, 
share challenges and access expert advice. 
6.  Supervision and Quality Assurance (Round 2) The second TOT will be 
followed by another round of Supervision with the Senior Supervisors to provide 
feedback on the quality of training and assess any challenges in the field that 
need to be addressed. 
7.  Design and Deliver TOT for GALS Champions: The GSP will design and deliver 
a TOT for individuals (women, men and youth) who have used the GALS training 
to transform their lives. A TOT will be held in each county to train 30 GALS 
Champions. 5. The consultants / service provider for GALS will supervise the 
mentors through onsite visits with supervisors during this 6 month period. 
8.  Supervision and Quality Assurance (Round 3) The third TOT will be followed 
by another round of Supervision with the Senior Supervisors to provide feedback 
on the quality of training and assess any challenges in the field that need to be 
addressed as GALS champions share tools with other women and men. 
9.  The GSP will be responsible for submitting works plans, manuals, reports on the 
TOT, Supervisions and for preparing an end of project report, highlighting 
achievements and challenges. The report will also capture case studies from each 
county. 
Qualifications 
A minimum of 5 years’ experience in training and designing TOTs 
Demonstrated familiarity with a range of participatory and interactive training techniques 
A minimum of 5 years of experience of working with GALS in rural communities 
99 
Terms of Reference for the Behavioural Change and Communication Service 
provider 
Background 
The project would like to have a sustainable impact on changing behaviour and practices 
for improved production and marketing of the selected value chains.  KeLCoP intends to 
invest  in  community  capacity  through  a  Behavioural  Change  and  Communication  (BCC) 
Approach  to  improve  animal  husbandry  and  production  practices.  This  involves 
understanding  the  current  practices  in  the  value  chains  of  small  ruminants  (meat  and 
dairy),  poultry  and  honey  production  and  identifying  the  key  barrier  and  motivators  to 
ideal/recommended  behaviour  change.  The  approach  also  involves  designing  and 
implementing behaviour changes interventions in a manner that is iterative and follows a 
process of discovery, learning and adaptation. To actualize this, the project requires the 
service of a specialist service provider to work closely with the targeted community groups 
to develop a comprehensive behaviour change strategy. And based the approved strategy 
design audience specific behaviour change communications products such as video clips, 
print materials and other social media related products.  
Description of tasks 
Develop a BCC strategy which should contain the following 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Using  meta  analysis  of  existing  research  studies  and  project  recommended 
practices, design a Behaviour Change Framework. The Framework should contain 
current and ideal behaviours as well as barriers and motivators for adopting ideal 
behaviours. 
Identify  the  capacity  gaps  as  well  as  needs  of  different  target  groups  (women, 
men and youth small ruminants, poultry and bee farmers) and recommend social 
and cultural norms that may affect the behavioural changes; 
Identify and enlist potential motivators/facilitators to deliver BCC communication 
intervention 
iv. 
Identify key messages to be promoted  
v. 
vi. 
Identify  primary  and  secondary  target  audience  and  provide  profiles  of  these 
audiences 
Design  monitoring  mechanisms  to  undertake  periodic  review  and  feedback  of 
beneficiary  views  of  the  training.  And  to  assess  the  adoption  rates  of  the  key 
practices  recommended  and  the  overall  impact  on  production,  productivity  and 
marketing, etc. 
 Develop  communication  resource  package  for  facilitating  learning  along the 
production cycle of all three targeted value chains. Specific sub-tasks include: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
Identify  and  review  the  available  materials  on  livestock  production  and 
marketing, 
Adapt and develop the new communication materials including audio, visual and 
other relevant materials based on field analysis and specific needs in the three 
value chains, 
Pre-test the messages and materials for different media/target audience in the 
three value chains and incorporate feedbacks, 
100 
Minimum requirements 
i.  Pool of experts with advanced university degree in the social/behavioural sciences 
(communication, sociology, anthropology, psychology, agricultural education etc.) 
with proven experience in the field of communication for development, 
ii.  The service provider should have relevant technical knowledge, skills and extensive 
work experience in designing BCC programmes, messages, tools and materials, 
training modules and proven capacity building in agricultural sector; 
iii.  Experience of developing training/BCC packages and providing similar type of 
training on Behavioral Change Communication (BCC) in rural areas; 
iv.  Experience working with diverse groups to pre-test and adapt materials; 
v.  Excellent documentation and reporting skills. 
ToRs 
Commercialisation Project 
for  a  Social  Safeguards  Consultant 
for 
the  Kenya  Livestock 
Introduction 
In line with IFAD’s SECAP guidelines social safeguards as well as Government of Kenya 
policies, strategies and legislations, the consultant will identify social risks within KELCOP 
and  propose  mitigation  actions.  He/she  will  also  undertake  a  free,  prior  and  informed 
consent  and  together  with  the  indigenous  communities,  develop  an  indigenous  peoples 
action plan.  
Specific responsibilities 
A.  Social risks and mitigation actions 
  Consolidate and contextualize background information on description of the socio 
economic profiles of the target groups in the project and social issues facing them. 
These  include  pastoralists,  mixed  farmers,  FHHs,  vulnerable,  youth,  women, 
indigenous peoples’ communities. 
 
Identify social risks within KELCOP and propose mitigation actions, while paying 
special  attention  to  issues  such  as:  child labour;  elite  capture;  early  marriages, 
gender based violence; sexual harassment; FGM; migrant labour; and social and 
resource use conflicts. 
 
Identify  grievance  redress  mechanisms  applied  at  community  and  county  levels 
and evaluate their efficacy in addressing project related grievances. 
  Develop  a  grievance  redress  mechanism  for  the  project,  taking  into  existing 
structures at community and county levels. 
 
Identify social stakeholders and provide guidance on stakeholder engagement by 
the project with respect to consultations, participation and validation of findings, 
as  well  as  institutions  to  engage  with  in  the  management  of  social  risks  and  in 
dealing with indigenous peoples. 
B.  Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC); Indigenous Peoples Action Plan 
1.  Identify and describe indigenous peoples in the various counties in the project are 
– who are they, Where are they located? Are there past interventions in the various 
counties that have engaged them on livestock related value chains? What activities 
were they engaged in? 
101 
2.  Analyse  existing 
supportive 
legislations, 
strategies  and  policies  at 
national/international levels. 
3.  Provide a summary description how the FPIC and Action Plan will be developed in 
accordance  with  IFAD’s  Indigenous  Peoples  Policy  and  How  to  do  Notes,  and 
accepted international best practices. 
4.  Develop an FPIC implementation plan that includes: description of the activities; 
responsible  persons/institution, 
timelines.  The  plan  should  outline:  how 
consultations  will  be  done,  stakeholders  that  will  be  engaged,  indigenous 
communities  that  will  be  engaged;  how  consent  will  be  sought  and  consent 
formalized; how the processes will be recorded; and how M&E and reporting will be 
done. 
5.  Undertake  an  FPIC  and  develop  an  Indigenous  Peoples  Action  and  ensure  active 
participation and consultation with indigenous peoples, their leaders, and relevant 
agencies on the ground – this activity will be undertaken at the pre-executive board 
stage/pre-implementation stage depending on the COVID 19 situation in Kenya. 
C.  Activities that will need to be further strengthened post Covid 19 
  Consolidate and contextualize background information on description of the socio 
economic profiles of the target groups in the project and social issues facing them. 
These  include  pastoralists,  mixed  farmers,  FHHs,  vulnerable,  youth,  women, 
indigenous peoples’ communities. 
  Strengthen social risks within KELCOP and propose mitigation actions, while paying 
special  attention  to  issues  such  as:  child labour;  elite  capture;  early  marriages, 
gender based violence; sexual harassment; FGM; migrant labour; and social and 
resource use conflicts. 
  Provide guidance or framework on how the grievance redress mechanism will be 
 
undertaken, including how stakeholders will be engaged. 
Identify and describe indigenous peoples in the various counties in the project are 
– who are they, Where are they located? Are there past interventions in the various 
counties that have engaged them on livestock related value chains? What activities 
were they engaged in? 
  Analyse  existing 
supportive 
legislations, 
strategies  and  policies  at 
national/international levels for dealing with Indigenous Peoples. 
  Provide a summary description how the FPIC and Action Plan will be developed in 
accordance  with  IFAD’s  Indigenous  Peoples  Policy  and  How  to  do  Notes,  and 
accepted international best practices. 
  Finalise an FPIC implementation plan that includes: description of the activities; 
responsible  persons/institution,  timelines.  The  plan  should  outline:  how 
consultations  will  be  done,  stakeholders  that  will  be  engaged,  indigenous 
communities  that  will  be  engaged;  how  consent  will  be  sought  and  consent 
formalized; how the processes will be recorded; and how M&E and reporting will 
be done. 
Key outputs and timelines 
  An overall report covering all aspects/responsibilities (all sections) of this ToR  by 
August 2020 or after the COVID 19 situation has gone under control. 
102 
Terms  of  Reference  for  a  Consultant  to  undertake  an  Environment  and  Social 
Management Framework for the KeLCoP 
Introduction 
In line with IFAD’s SECAP guidelines on environment and social safeguards that apply to 
category B projects, as well as Government of Kenya policies, strategies and legislations, 
the consultant will develop an ESMF, an overall ESMP and a pesticides management plan. 
These ToRs provide guidance on how these activities and outputs will be delivered. 
Objective of the ESMF 
The objective of the ESMF is to ensure that adverse environmental and social impacts are 
avoided or and/or mitigated, and positive outcomes enhanced The ESMF is based on IFAD's 
SECAPs guidelines and GoK laws on environment and social safeguards. The ESMF should 
ensure that risks and mitigation actions take into account all the 4 value chains (poultry, 
bees, goats and sheep) and sub- projects such as water infrastructure, abbatoirs etc.  
Overall responsibilities 
1.  Provide  a  detailed  biophysical,  social,  economic,  cultural,  and  institutional  and 
policy/legal  background  of 
its  geographical  areas  of 
the  project  and 
implementation. To work closely with the social safeguards consultant to describe 
the social context and socio economic profiles of the project target groups. 
2.  Identify  sub-projects  within  the  project  and  develop  screening  checklist/tool  to 
ensure  compliance  with  IFAD  SECAP  guidelines  and  national  laws,  and  the 
undertaking  of  relevant  assessments.  The  screening  checklist/tool  should  be 
accompanied by an exclusion list. 
3.  Based  on  the  screening,  recommend  assessments  that  should  be  undertaken  to 
mitigate potential negative risks/impacts and to enhance positive outcomes, and 
develop ESMPs for identified sub-projects. 
4.  In close collaboration with the social safeguards consultant, identify the project's 
environment and social risks/ impacts across all value chains and sub-projects, and 
develop a comprehensive ESMP.  
5.  The  ESMP  should  have  an  embedded  monitoring  plan,  and  provide  details  on: 
specific  actions  that  should  be  taken  to  mitigate  each  impact,  identify  the  entity 
responsible for taking the action, the timing according to the stages of the project, 
performance indicators, frequency of monitoring, timelines, responsibility and the 
estimated costs.  
6.  The  ESMF  should  map  out  the  stakeholders  and  prepare  a  stakeholder 
participation/engagement  plan 
responsibilities  and 
including 
incorporating the project’s target groups e.g. indigenous peoples, women, youth, 
vulnerable etc.  
roles  and 
7.  Develop a grievance redress mechanism including the modalities and institutional 
set up for the GRM. The GRM should provide guidance on how existing community 
based dispute resolution mechanisms can be embedded into the GRM. 
8.  Undertake a capacity needs analysis and develop a training/capacity building plan 
for training project implementers and beneficiaries/communities on the execution 
of the ESMF. 
9.  Undertake  an  institutional  analysis  of  the  capabilities/and  gaps  at  national  and 
county  level  for  ESMF  implementation  and  monitoring  and  propose  a  delivery 
structure. 
10. Provide  guidelines  on  disclosure  in  line  the  context  of  the  project,  stakeholders 
involved and IFAD’s disclosure procedures. 
11. Develop  an  integrated  pesticides  management  plan  in  line  with  IFAD’s  SECAP 
guidelines and GoK laws. 
103 
12. Consolidate  and  embed  into  the  ESMF,  information  from  the  social  safeguards 
consultant  upon  completion  of  the  free  prior  and  informed  consent  (FPIC)  and 
development of an indigenous peoples action plan. 
Key deliverables by August 2020  
1.  Final ESMF and overall ESMP and well as ESMPs for sub-projects  
2.  Detailed and finalised Integrated Pesticides management Plan  
3.  Final grievance redress mechanism integrated into the ESMF  
4.  A stakeholder engagement plan 
5.  A capacity building and training plan 
Terms of Reference for the E-Extension service provider  
Background 
Extension  services  play  a  major  role  in  disseminating  knowledge,  technologies  and 
agricultural information to improve rural farmers practice and their livelihoods. However, 
the conventional one-on-one extension services in Kenya is ineffective and constrained by 
a  number  of  factors  including:  ageing  work  force,  low  worker  to  farmer  ratio,  which 
overwhelm the extension system and limited resources to reach many farmers requiring 
extension services in livestock and crop production and management. Therefore, one of 
the  key  interventions  of  the  KeLCoP  project  is  to  embrace  technology  and  support  E-
extension  services  that  is  aimed  at  reaching  out  to  many  livestock  producers,  and 
complement the government extension services. This is purposely designed to bridge the 
shortage  of  extension  officers  and  the  need  to  offer  farmers  timely  and  accurate 
information. To achieve this, it is imperative to engage a service provider with extensive 
experience in developing and delivering e-extension systems among rural farmers. 
Description of tasks  
Under  the  overall  supervision  of  the  livestock  production  officer  and  the  project 
coordinator, the service provider will undertake the following tasks: 
i.  Develop a financially sustainable model of e-extension for the smallholder farmers 
in  Bungoma,  Trans  Nzoia,  Kakamega,  Busia,  Siaya,  Nakuru  Marsabit,  Samburu, 
Elgeyo Marakwet and Baringo; 
iii. 
ii.  Develop a package of appropriate extension messages to improve productivity for 
small-ruminant  meat  production,  dairy  goat  production,  poultry  and  egg 
production, and honey processing and packaging; 
The  messages  could  encompass  all  key  areas  of  breeding,  feed,  vaccination  and 
disease control calendars for each of the three value chains; 
Periodically visit the project areas and understand the key production constraints 
of the smallholders in different project areas; 
iv. 
vi. 
v.  Develop  messages  that  can  be  sent  on  a  simple  feature  phone  as  well  as  those 
which can be transmitted in a more interactive manner  on smartphones through 
video-clips, interactive applications, audio, visual and video messages; 
The topics should cover the production cycle of all three targeted value chains and 
include  vaccination  schedules,  feed  regimes,  feed  formulation,  identification  of 
symptoms and disease diagnosis and advice on breed attributes and recognition, 
etc. 
The application should also provide for a call in service, which can help callers with 
identification of symptoms and diagnosis and appropriate advice; 
vii. 
104 
viii. 
ix. 
The application should also provide lists of AgroVets and numbers of veterinarian 
located in the region on a GIS map with option for crowdsourcing and feedback on 
service quality, reliability and cost; 
 The  service  provider  should  develop  a  financially  sustainable  model  which  is 
supported by pharmaceutical companies which are the main reliable producers of 
veterinary  medicines,  vaccinations,  good  quality  input  suppliers,  good  quality 
breeds  such  as  Kukuchicks,  input  suppliers  of  fertilized  eggs,  high  quality 
incubators,  retailers  and  wholesalers  of  feed,  and  other  key  market  players  who 
would subsidize the services to the farmers in a win-win model/arrangement; 
Minimum requirements 
i. 
Advanced degree in agriculture, adult education or other related disciplines/ pool 
of  experts  with  agriculture,  rural  development,  adult  education,  curriculum 
development background; 
ii.  Minimum  of  10  years  demonstrated  previous  experience  and  involvement  in  e-
extension services delivery and development of extension systems covering broad 
areas of agriculture where target farmers have low literacy levels; 
Experience  in  participatory  extension  methodologies  and  developing  of  farmer 
messaging; 
Ability to communicate and write clearly in English and Kiswahili language 
iii. 
iv. 
Selection criteria 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Proven expertise and experience in designing e-extension for farmers; 
Preferably, willing to develop application that is cost free to the end-user;  
Experience in developing similar applications, innovation and quality of content and 
proposed methodology and added features for a strong model of e-extension 
Capacity to work under pressure and high degree of independence, flexibility and 
ability to meet strict deadline; 
105 
Terms of Reference 
BDSP (Business Development Service Provider) 
Whereas the Livestock Marketing Provider handles the details of applicant’s credit 
approval, grants dispersal, and conformance with Kenyan financial sector regulations, 
the BDSP will deal with the actual recruiting, training design, implementation and 
oversight, business proposals, on-site verifications, follow-up verification and coaching 
for the three training programs and three grant programs in Component 2.2.  
Specific Duties: 
Disseminate  information  in  each  of  the  10  counties  about  KeLCoP  grant  and  training 
programs. This should be done three weeks before actual selection process begins and 6 
weeks before they are finalized. This includes all three training components and all three 
grant programs. 
i)  Advertising and dissemination of information about KeLCoP support, 
a.  Craft messages and advertisements for radio, newspaper and fliers. These 
messages should precisely define the target beneficiaries, criteria, and the 
relevant value chains as defined in the Aide Memoire 
b.  Disseminate information all training an gr 
c.  Price and hire media outlet: Contact and hire three local radio stations and 
run ads for a period of three weeks, notify at least 20 rural churches and 
post fliers on local bulletin boards and Universities. 
d.  Verify  that  the  radio  advertisements  have  been  made  using  an  ad 
verification company 
ii)  BDSP duties for related to training,  
a.  Identify, recruit and train, 500 young men and women hopeful 
entrepreneurs, at least 30% will be women. The training should endure at 
least 6 months. Two session per week, two hours per session and include 
a host of modules for developing general business and management skills 
needed to manage and operate a business. opportunity identification, 
organizing resources, and taking action including teamwork, 
communication, and creativity. business skills, economic analysis and 
technical aspects regarding the processing, storage, value addition and 
marketing of meat, dairy, poultry and honey production. Training will 
include at least 5 visits to ongoing businesses relevant to the chain. 
b.  Identify,  recruit  and  train,  individuals  and  organizations  working  on  the 
include  2,000  young  men  and  women  hopeful 
relevant  chains, 
entrepreneurs (see Graduation Model in Comment 1) 
c.  Support KeLCoP to develop internship program. 
iii)  BDSP duties for related to grants include,  
a.  Receive  applications  for  the  two  larger  grant  programs  to  ongoing 
businesses, 
106 
b.  Matching  grants  for  smallholder  commercial  producers  should  include 
business proposals that reviewed, recorded and passed on to the Financial 
Service Provider  
c.  Grants  to  Youth  Innovative  Start-ups,  should  include  business  proposals 
that reviewed, recorded and passed on to the Financial Service Provider  
d.  Validate  infrastructure  and  ongoing  business  operations  for  the  for  300 
approved  applicants  for  smallholder  commercial  producer  grants  of  up  to 
$5,000 and 50 approved applicants for start-up grants of up to $30,000 
e.  Verify  investments  for  the  for  300  approved  applicants  for  smallholder 
commercial  producer  matching  grants  of  up  to  $5,000  and  50  approved 
applicants for start-up grants of up to $30,000 and authorize grant payment 
dispersals 
f.  Assist in the preparation and review of bankable business proposals for the 
50  approved  applicants  for  start-up  grants  of  up  to  $30,000  and  the  300 
approved  applicants  for  smallholder  commercial  producer  grants  of  up  to 
$5,000;  
g.  Assist  the  500  graduates  of  the  Young  Entrepreneur  Training  program  to 
write business plans for the grants of $2,000 to be invested in enterprises 
bearing on the targeted market chains. 
h.  Conduct  follow-up  verifications  and  coaching  50  approved  applicants  for 
start-up  grants  of  up  to  $30,000  and  the  300  approved  applicants  for 
smallholder commercial producer grants of up to $5,000 as well as the 500 
approved grants of $2,000 to the young entrepreneurs. 
iv)  Provide follow-up Verification and continuous coaching and provision of Business 
Development Services: Each group will be visited every week by a business 
coach, who will provide a close follow up and individual support to each 
beneficiary individually, and to the group. The coaching will related both to 
technical issues and business management issues (the BDSP may use different 
staff to address different topics). The coaches will also provide feedback to the 
Districts staff and the project on the performance of the youth businesses. 
Qualifications 
The BDSPs in productive alliances will be established private service providers (company 
or NGO), specialized in the provision of business development services and training, with 
experience  in  the  domain  of  agriculture/livestock  and  active  engagement  with  private 
sector partners. Whereas the Financial Service Provider(s) were chosen because they have 
operations  in  the  particular  counties  and  therefore  could  be  as  many  as  10  different 
services  providers,  the  BDSP  should  be  only  one  or  at  the  most  two  different  service 
providers  so  to  maximise  delivery  capacity,  synergies,  and  the  capacity  of  KeLCoP  to 
coordinate and oversee the work of the BDSP. 
Duration and conditions of contract 
  The contract will be established for one year and renewed according to performance. 
  The contract will be based on a lump sum per beneficiary including the fees (staff cost) 
and  the  operating  costs  (transport,  per  diem,  etc.).  The  project  will  not  purchase 
vehicles or any other equipment for the BDSP. 
107 
Terms of Reference 
E-Marketing-Technical Assistant 
The E-Marketing Technical Assistant is a consultant or service provider who will support 
all phases of the development of the Marketing Information System. He/She must be 
enrolled in an advanced degree computer science program at a recognized and 
internationally accredited learning institution and have a strong interest in ICT 
applications in the field of agriculture and working with illiterate ICT users. His/her role is 
to assure that all research and development of the KeLCoP Marketing Information 
applications are informed with cutting-edge research and technologies and that the 
KeLCoP contribution to creating a sustainable application for Kenyan agricultural and 
livestock sector is documented and archived. The E-Marketing Technical Assistant will 
work under the direct supervision of the Senior ICT Specialist and work closely with the 
project ICT Specialist and the Data Programmer. The E-Marketing Technical Assistant 
should be hired in the first few months of the project.  
Specific Tasks: 
Review of the Literature: A report that summarizes a thorough review of the literature on 
interactive, graphic user interfaces targeting illiterate farmers. This report should be 
done in the first two months of the project and is expected to take 30 days to complete. 
The review must cover the global English literature on e-marketing applications for 
agriculture in developing regions and include an exhaustive review of the literature on 
applications in the Kenya agricultural and livestock sector as well as a physical testing of 
existing e-marking apps. The report is expected to identify the shortcomings in past 
applications and help KeLCoP to void repeating mistakes. 
Contact and Summarize all Relevant and Ongoing ICT Projects: To help KeLCoP avoid 
duplicating efforts and contribute to a whole of government approach, the E-Marketing 
Technical Assistant should and be aware of similar systems the National Livestock 
Marketing Information System (NLIMIS) that is supposed to cover the entire country, the 
Kenya National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) through its early warning 
system program that collects market data in 23 counties, the Kenya Livestock Marketing 
Council (KLMC) that works with the Livestock Market Associations (LMAs) to collect 
market information in northern Kenya, supposedly working with the private sector 
entity iCow, and USAID’s Feed the Future Kenya Accelerated Value Chain Development 
project (AVCD). Also important is to contact and understand the efforts of ILRI and VSF 
Germany program in Marsabit country where community disease reporters (CDRs) are 
using smartphones to track disease outbreaks. The consultant should also contact and 
the World Bank working group on The Disruptive Agricultural Technology (DAT) 
Challenge and all entities and individuals in Kenya implementing applications relative to 
the KeLCoP tasks. This includes but is not limited to the developers of iCoW, grow 
chicken, 
Participate and document all Research involved in the developing of the Marketing 
Information System. Specifically,  
a)  Ethnographic research (focus groups and key informant interviews) to define the 
opportunities, patterns of smartphone use, and competencies of the target users. 
b)  Definition of functional requirements and scope of minimum viable product  
c)  Identification key challenges of illiterate users in the interaction space (core tasks) 
with user panels.  
d) Creation of a user panel for various checkpoints in the design process.  
e) Identification of lead users and other human access points to support later design 
activities, testing, and roll-out. 
f)  Development and verification of iconic language and augmentations of it (adaptive 
multimodal information) and verify suitability of paradigm with target users. 
108 
g) Development of lo-fi prototypes with user panel. 
h) Verification of core design principles with user group pilot studies 
i)  Program applications, deploy, modify, and retest.  
j)  Training of users. 
Qualifications: 
The E-Marketing Technical Assistant must have a Bachelor’s degree in Information 
Systems, Information Management, Computer Science or a related discipline with an 
emphasis on human computer interaction. He/She must be enrolled in an advanced 
degree computer science program at a recognized and internationally accredited learning 
institution and have a strong interest in ICT applications in the field of agriculture and 
working with illiterate ICT users. 
Languages: 
Must have excellent English reading, writing and speaking. Fluency in Swahili is an 
advantage but not necessary.  
Time Schedule 
Activity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Recruitment of Consultant 
Review of literature 
Contact with other E-Marketing 
implementors 
Ethnographic research 
Wireframe and design 
Piloting of apps 
Training 
Corrections, refitting ….  
Report with exhaustive review of 
global and Kenyan literature and 
existing e-marketing applications 
in agricultural and livestock sector 
Ethnographic research (focus 
groups and key informant 
interviews) to define the 
opportunities, patterns of 
smartphone use, and 
competencies of the target users. 
And define requirements and 
scope of minimum viable product. 
Programmed prototype of 
interactive digital applications for 
E-marketing, sourcing transport, 
vaccines… 
Workable interactive digital 
applications for E-marketing, 
sourcing transport, vaccines… 
At least 10 LMA members and 5 
county officials trained in 
application in each of the 10 
counties; 500 entrepreneurs 
trained 
Continued improvement and 
adaptation of maintenance of the  
109 
Terms of Reference 
Information Communications Technology (ICT) Specialist 
The Information Communications Technology (ICT) Specialist works under the 
supervision of the Marketing Development Specialist and closely supervises the Data 
Programmer. The ICT specialist has a high level of autonomy because he/she is tasked 
with overseeing the development and integration of all ICT activities, including those 
from sectors outside of Marketing. In this way the ICT specialist acts as a critical focal 
node for the entire project.  
In developing interactive digital applications, the ICT Specialist will work under the 
remote guidance of a senior ICT Consultant, a PhD with extensive experience in human 
computer interaction with a user centered design approach. This should include expertise 
on how to adapt media for presentation to mobile devices with limited resources and 
needs of illiterate users of mobile phones. The ICT Specialist should have designed and 
developed interactive mobile applications for illiterate users drawing on iconic languages 
and an accomplished expert in user experience design specifically on mobile devices. The 
Senior ICT Consultant will structure the engineering protocols and ethnographic 
strategies that the ICT Specialist uses for documenting user experience journeys, 
prototyping and evaluating the target users, and running and evaluating pilots using 
machine learning/AI to better understand usage patterns and improve the interactive 
designs). The ICT specialist will then work with the ICT Senior Consultant to wireframe 
the applications (design the structure and linkages). The ICT Specialist with the Data 
Programmer will then develop the applications, pilot, deploy and refit them, and train 
beneficiaries in the use of the applications. It is expected that there will be many 
iterations and reiterations and that the task of improving, maintaining and adapting the 
applications will be, as with any software application, an on-going task.  
Specific Tasks: 
An overview of applications that the ICT specialist is expected to develop, test, modify, 
deploy and maintain are, 
a) crowdsource market prices to make real-time price information available to buyers 
and sellers  
b) create a platform for open purchase and sales orders 
c) crowdsource the availability of transport as when a truck is loading for transport to 
or from and market destination  
d) crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of feed and fodder and water  
f) crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of livestock vaccinations  
g) crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of AI breeding services  
h) provide purely graphic user interface for E-extension services usable by illiterate 
people 
h) provide a platform for identification of available and appropriate financial services  
i) crowdsource incidences of disease among livestock  
j) crowdsourcing climactic conditions for real-tracking impending drought  
k) create an ICT platform for communication and feedback from project beneficiaries 
The applications will be all feature graphic-communication interfaces, use mapping, and 
GPS identification.  
110 
Each of the components above will be dealt with specifically but with the obvious 
possibility of linking them all under a single application.  
The ICT Specialist assisted by the Data Programmer must test and deploy the 
applications. This means extensive contact with beneficiary groups under all components 
in order to a) gather basic ethnographic data on user preferences and expectations, b) 
training beneficiaries in the use of the applications, c) pilot prototypes of the 
applications, and d) document user experience journeys.  
Because the ICT Specialist links all the components in a uniquely focus, data sourcing 
strategy, he/she will perform as focal point for the project, bringing together the work of 
all the different staff. To facilitate this, the ICT Specialist with support from the 
Marketing Development Specialist will host weekly Friday meetings where staff from all 
the project components participate. Each meeting will be summarized in a one-page 
report that recounts the progress of the ICT tasks.  
Expected outputs: 
Applications for each of the components defined above.  
Qualifications: 
Master's Degree in Information Systems, Information Management, Computer Science or 
related discipline. A master programmer of Java or HTML5. At least five years of 
experience working with state-of-the-art, interactive digital communications technologies 
in the mobile domain, an accomplished expert in the creation of wireframes and designs 
for programmers and experience in GIS applications and digital mapping. The ICT 
Specialist should be a master programmer in at least one language and be familiar with 
databases and communication protocols to design the infrastructure for storage and 
distribution of the crowdsourced information.  
Because KeLCoP project is beneficiary oriented with an operational strategy that 
emphasizes beneficiary participation at every level, including M&E, the ICT Specialist 
should also have a at least a minor in in one or more of the following, a) Graphic 
Communication, Graphic Design or Art (the medium which the project intends to use 
create the interface for the ICT applications), b) Anthropology, c) Social Work, or d) 
Human Geography, e) Sociology, f) psychology.  
Languages: 
Must have excellent English reading, writing and speaking. Fluency in Swahili is an 
advantage but not necessary.  
111 
Terms of Reference 
Data Programmer 
The Data Programmer works under the ICT Specialist. His/her task is to support the ITC 
Specialist in developing applications. This includes ethnographic strategies that the ICT 
Specialist uses for documenting user experience journeys, prototyping and evaluating 
the target users, and running and evaluating pilots using machine learning/AI to better 
understand usage patterns and improve the interactive designs). The Data Programmer 
will program the applications, and then participate in pilot, deploying and refitting them. 
He/she will also participate in train beneficiaries in the use of the applications.  
Specific Tasks: 
An overview of applications that the Data Programmer is expected to participate in 
developing, testing, programming, modifying, deploying and maintaining are, 
a) crowdsource market prices to make real-time price information available to buyers 
and sellers  
b) create a platform for open purchase and sales orders 
c) crowdsource the availability of transport as when a truck is loading for transport to 
or from and market destination  
d) crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of feed and fodder and water  
f) crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of livestock vaccinations  
g) crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of AI breeding services  
h) provide purely graphic user interface for E-extension services 
h) provide a platform for identification of available and appropriate financial services  
i) crowdsource incidences of disease among livestock  
j) crowdsourcing climactic conditions for real-tracking impending drought  
k) create an ICT platform for communication and feedback from project beneficiaries 
Qualifications: 
Bachelor's Degree in Information Systems, Information Management, Computer Science 
or related discipline, and five-years experience programming mobile phone applications 
in Java or HTML5. Experience creating and marketing crowdsourcing apps as well as GIS 
is a plus. Should also have some educational background in one or more of the following, 
a) Graphic Communication, Graphic Design or Art (the medium which the project intends 
to use create the interface for the ICT applications), b) Anthropology, c) Social Work, or 
d) Human Geography, e) Sociology, or f) Psychology.  
Languages: 
Must have excellent English reading, writing and speaking. Fluency in Swahili is an 
advantage but not necessary.  
112 
Terms of Reference 
Senior ICT Consultant/E-Marketing Specialist 
The Senior ICT Consultant will design and guide the development of all the KeLCoP 
interactive digital Applications. He/She will work with the ICT Specialist and the Data 
Programmer to conduct Ethnographic field work (focus groups and workshops with 
beneficiary stakeholders) and supervise the other Marketing Information system 
Consultant, the ICT Technical Assistant. The objective of this research will be to develop 
user-centered designs for the ICT interfaces. The Senior ICT Consultant will structure the 
engineering protocols and ethnographic strategies that the ICT Specialist uses for 
documenting user experience journeys, prototyping and evaluating the target users, and 
running and evaluating pilots using machine learning/AI to better understand usage 
patterns and improve the interactive designs. The ICT Senior Consultant will wireframe 
the applications (design the structure and linkages) and then remotely oversee the ICT 
Specialist with the Data Programmer as they develop the applications, pilot, deploy and 
refit them in accordance with feedback from the AI and beneficiary feedback. It is 
expected that there will be many iterations and reiterations and that the task of 
improving, maintaining and adapting the applications will be, as with any software 
application, an ongoing task. Included in the research and development will be an 
evaluation of the constraints and opportunities regarding adoption and diffusion of the 
applications, or more specifically, identification of characteristics and influences for lead 
users vs laggards and other human access points to support later design activities, 
testing, roll-out, and introduction of modifications. The E-Marketing Technical Assistant 
should be hired in the first few months of the project. 
Specific Tasks: 
An overview of applications that the Senior ICT Consultant is expected to wireframe and 
oversee the exploration, development, testing, modification, deployment and 
maintenance of are, 
a) Review of the Literature: Work with the E-Marketing Technical Assistant to produce 
a thorough review of the relevant literature on interactive, graphic user interfaces 
targeting illiterate farmers. This report should be done in the first two months of 
the project and is expected to take 30 days to complete. The review must cover 
the  global  English  literature  on  e-marketing  applications  for  agriculture  in 
developing  regions  and  include  an  exhaustive  review  of  the  literature  on 
applications  in  the  Kenya  agricultural  and  livestock  sector  as  well  as  a  physical 
testing  of  existing  e-marking  apps.  The  report  is  expected  to  identify  the 
shortcomings in past applications and help KeLCoP to void repeating mistakes. 
b) Contact and Summarize all Relevant and Ongoing ICT Projects: To help KeLCoP 
avoid duplicating efforts and contribute to a whole of government approach, the 
Senior ICT consultant will work with the E-Marketing Technical Assistant to identify 
and  document  all  similar  ITC  projects  in  Kenya,  including  Livestock  marketing 
activities  under  the  direction  of  the  National  Livestock  Marketing  Information 
System  (NLIMIS)  that  are  supposed  to  cover  the  entire  country,  the  Kenya 
National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) through its early warning system 
program that collects market data in 23 counties, the Kenya Livestock Marketing 
Council (KLMC) that works with the Livestock Market Associations (LMAs) to collect 
market information in northern Kenya, supposedly working with the private sector 
entity iCow,  and  USAID’s  Feed  the  Future  Kenya  Accelerated  Value  Chain 
Development  project  (AVCD).  Also  important  is  to  contact  and  understand  the 
efforts of ILRI and VSF Germany program in Marsabit country where community 
disease reporters (CDRs) are using smartphones to track disease outbreaks. The 
consultant  should  also  contact  and  the  World  Bank  working  group  on  The 
Disruptive Agricultural Technology (DAT) Challenge and all entities and individuals 
113 
in Kenya implementing applications relative to the KeLCoP tasks. This includes but 
is not limited to the developers of iCoW, grow chicken, 
Specific applications that should developed will,  
c)  crowdsource market prices to make real-time price information available to buyers 
and sellers  
d) create a platform for open purchase and sales orders  
e) crowdsource the availability of transport as when a truck is loading for transport 
to or from and market destination  
f)  crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of feed and fodder and water  
g) crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of livestock vaccinations  
h) crowdsource the availability, purchase and sale of AI breeding services  
i)  provide purely graphic user interface for E-extension services 
j)  provide a platform for identification of available and appropriate financial services  
k) crowdsource incidences of disease among livestock  
l)  crowdsourcing climactic conditions for real-tracking impending drought  
m) an ICT platform for communication and feedback from project beneficiaries 
The applications will be all feature graphic-communication interfaces, use mapping, and 
GPS identification. Although the possibility of linking all interfaces under a single 
application is obvious, each activity will be dealt with specifically. The develop sequence 
for the applications will be as follows:  
n) Ethnographic research (focus groups and key informant interviews) to define the 
opportunities, patterns of smartphone use, and competencies of the target users. 
o)  Define functional requirements and scope of minimum viable product  
p) Identify key challenges of illiterate users in the interaction space (core tasks) with 
user panels.  
q) Create a user panel for various checkpoints in the design process.  
r)  Identify lead  users  and  other  human  access  points  to  support  later  design 
activities, testing, and roll-out. 
s)  Develop and verify iconic language and augmentations of it (adaptive multimodal 
information) and verify suitability of paradigm with target users. 
t)  Develop lo-fi prototypes with user panel. 
u) Verify core design principles with user group pilot studies 
v) Program applications, deploy, modify, and retest.  
Qualifications: 
The Senior ICT consultant must have a Ph.D. in Information Systems, Information 
Management, Computer Science or a related discipline. He/she must also have extensive 
experience in human computer interaction with a user centered design approach. This 
should include expertise on how to adapt media for presentation to mobile devices with 
limited resources and for the needs of illiterate users of mobile phones. The ICT 
Consultant should have designed and developed interactive mobile applications for 
illiterate users drawing on iconic languages. He/she must be an accomplished expert in 
user experience design specifically on mobile devices. Should be a leader in the field of 
designing media technology and working in mobility and tracking technologies with at 
114 
least 20 years’ experience and at least 10 refereed publications in the area of media 
technology and interactive digital communication technologies, one of which must 
specifically be a summary evaluation the development and deployment of an interactive 
digital application intended for illiterate farmers.  
Languages: 
Must have excellent English reading, writing and speaking.  
Time Schedule 
Activity 
Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 
Outputs 
Recruitment of Consultant 
Review of literature 
Contact with other E-Marketing 
implementors 
Ethnographic research 
Wireframe and design 
Piloting of apps 
Training 
Corrections, refitting ….  
Report with exhaustive review of 
global and Kenyan literature and 
existing e-marketing applications 
in agricultural and livestock sector 
Ethnographic research (focus 
groups and key informant 
interviews) to define the 
opportunities, patterns of 
smartphone use, and 
competencies of the target users. 
And define requirements and 
scope of minimum viable product. 
Programmed prototype of 
interactive digital applications for 
E-marketing, sourcing transport, 
vaccines… 
Workable interactive digital 
applications for E-marketing, 
sourcing transport, vaccines… 
At least 10 LMA members and 5 
county officials trained in 
application in each of the 10 
counties; 500 entrepreneurs 
trained 
Continued improvement and 
adaptation of maintenance of the  
115 
Terms of Reference for Financial Controller 
The financial controller reports directly to the project coordinator, and is responsible for 
financial management of the project and for maintaining all project accounts in good order. 
As head of the finance unit for the project, the financial controller will take charge of all 
matters in the project accounting cycle. The project accounting cycle to be overseen by 
the financial controller starts from financial-related inputs in AWPB preparation and budget 
control, committing funds, disbursements and cash flow management in an effective and 
efficient  manner,  financial  reporting  to  ensuring  smooth  audits  and  facilitation  for 
supervision missions on all financial management aspects. The position is based in the Lira 
project office, with frequent travels to the field. 
The Financial controller will be responsible for expediting all loan management and 
disbursement activities through MALFC systems. Specific responsibilities include but are 
not limited to the following: 
 
Installation of appropriate accounting/reporting systems to ensure that the  PMCU 
and especially the Project Coordinator are regularly informed of on-going financial 
status and transactions.  
  Ensure  timely  capture  of  project  in  the  GoK  budget  as  required  by  the  GoK 
budgeting processes and calendars including access to counterpart funding. 
  Communicate  to  all  implementing  partner  institutions,  service  providers  and 
counties  their  financial responsibilities,  the  funds  available  and  how  to  access  it, 
and the requirements of reporting and record keeping in accordance with prevailing 
government practices which are acceptable to IFAD. 
  Ensure  that  all  project  funds  are  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the 
financing agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for 
the purposes for which the funds were provided; 
  Ensure that all necessary supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in 
respect of all project activities, with clear linkages between the books of account 
and the financial statements presented to the financiers; 
  Ensure  that  designated  account  and  operational  accounts  are  maintained  in 
accordance with the provisions of the financing agreement and in accordance with 
the financier’s rules and procedures; 
  Contribute to the preparation of the Project Implementation and Financial Manuals; 
  Ensure the Project’s Financial Procedures as detailed in the Project Implementation 
and  Financial  Manuals  are  strictly  adhered  to  by  all  Project  staff  and  executing 
agencies at the national and local levels; 
  Ensure that the financial statements are prepared in accordance with International 
Public Sector Accounting Standards as adopted in Kenya; 
  Liaise  with  external  auditors  to  audit  the  project  accounts  to  meet  the  required 
submission dates by both GoK and IFAD; 
  Liaise with the Designated County Accountants from the Project counties and the 
lead  Project  agency  to  ensure  that  SOEs  are  prepared  in  timely  manner  and 
forwarded to IFAD; 
  Process documentation and follow up on disbursements from the government and 
IFAD  to  ensure  that  releases  are  not  delayed.  Ensure  that  funds  for  project 
implementation are disbursed in a timely manner to enable project interventions 
to be carried out on time: 
Qualifications and other requirements: 
In addition to the general requirements listed above, the following specific qualifications 
and other requirements are required: 
116 
(a) A Bachelor’s Degree in Commerce (Accounting option), or Finance, or Bachelor’s 
degree in Business Administration; Accounting or Finance options from a 
recognized University.  
(b) The candidate should have CPA Kenya qualification. 
(c) The candidate should have at least a minimum of 8 years’ experience working in 
a similar field and 3 years of which must have been in a senior management 
position. 
(d) The candidate should have demonstrated experience with financial 
management/accounting in a government ministry/department and donor-funded 
Project; 
(e) Strong computer skills; electronic spreadsheets and other accounting packages;  
(f)  Working knowledge of banking and financial control procedures  
Contract: 
agreed performance targets and deliverables. 
Two-year contract, with 3 months’ probation period, renewable based on 
117 
Terms of Reference for Financial Assistant  
The financial assistant reports to the financial controller, and is responsible for ensuring a 
proper  accounting  filing  system;  follow  up  of  accountabilities  from  Counties,  staff,  and 
other implementers, data entry and reconciliations.  
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
  Preparation of source documents, e.g. payment vouchers, journal vouchers 
  Chronological filing of documents with adequate cross reference to ensure ease of 
retrieval 
  Follow  up  of  accountabilities,  maintaining  a  detailed  log  of  outstanding 
accountabilities 
  Data entry into the accounting system 
  Preparation of reconciliations for review by the financial controller; 
  Facilitate;  both  internal  and  external  auditors  to  audit  the  project’s  financial 
transactions and reports to meet the required submission dates by IFAD; 
  Support the financial controller in preparation of reports to enable the withdrawal 
of funds from IFAD and GoK; 
  Proactive support to the district designated project support accountants; 
  Maintain  key  registers  such  as  fixed  assets;  inputs  into  the  contracts  register, 
contract monitoring forms 
  Support  the  financial  controller  in  the  preparation  of  informative  management 
accounts  in  the  form  of  monthly,  quarterly,  semi-annual  and  annual  reports 
regarding  aspects  of  project  financial  monitoring  bringing  out  variances  and 
advising implementers as to the limits of expenditure; 
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the financial controller 
Qualifications and experience: The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in 
accounting and at least Part II of CPA-K or its equivalent. Other skills and experience 
should include:  
 
 
 
 
 
At least two years of relevant work experience 
Excellent quantitative and analytical skills; 
Computer-literate  including  accounting  packages  and  well-versed  in  the  use  of 
Excel, Word and basic data base set-ups. 
Ability  to  work  under  pressure  and  meet  strict  deadlines  and  work  without 
supervision; 
Good interpersonal and Communication skill. 
Contract: 
Two-year contract, with 3 months’ probation period, renewable based on 
agreed performance targets and deliverables. 
118 
Terms of Reference of Project Accountant 
The Project Accountant will report to the Project Finance Controller.  
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Follow-up the counties and other implementing agencies for expenditure 
justifications 
Review eligibility of expenditure in accordance with the financing agreement 
Report on the operation of internal control including budget controls and report 
any deviations 
Prepare project reports to enable the withdrawal of funds from financers and 
manage the overall treasury/ cash flow planning aspects of the project. 
Assess compliance with Kenya laws and regulations governing the operation of 
the implementing institutions including accountancy standards and the 
requirements for audits and financial reporting.  
Review external auditor’s reports (Audit Opinions and management letters), 
including any qualifications and whether any concerns raised by auditors have 
been adequately addressed. 
Review reports of IFAD/GoK supervision or review missions and follow-up on the 
implementation of agreed to actions. 
Examine the financial management information provided to Project Coordinator, 
MALFC and IFAD, in terms of its adequacy and timeliness.  
Evaluate project accounting procedures including the adequacy of financial 
reports in terms of accountability to multiple funding sources.  
Evaluate systems for asset management, provision for asset maintenance and 
replacement. 
Review documented accounting procedures and accounting manuals in terms of 
their adequacy, and correspondence between actual and documented 
procedures. 
Evaluate annual work plan and budgeting procedures, and budgetary control 
systems applied to monitor actual expenditures versus budget including 
commitment controls to avoid commitments beyond available resources. 
Review other aspects of the accounting and financial control systems including: 
cash management and banking; procurement of goods and services; advances 
and acquittals; authorisation of expenditure and budget/actual comparisons. 
Qualifications and Experience: The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in 
accounting and at least Part II of CPA-K or its equivalent /or be qualified accountant. 
Other skills and experience should include: 
  At least five years of relevant work experience 
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting; 
  Excellent quantitative and analytical skills; 
  Computer-literate  including  accounting  packages  and  well-versed  in  the  use  of 
Excel, Word and basic data base set-ups; 
119 
Terms of Reference  
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KeLCoP)– IFAD Funded Project 
POSITION: PMCU Procurement Specialist 
1. Background 
The overall goal of the KeLCoP project is to contribute to Government’s agriculture 
transformation Agenda of increasing household incomes, food and nutrition security for 
poor rural small-scale farmers. The Development Objective is to increase incomes of 
rural small- scale poor livestock farmers and pastoralists and make them more resilient 
to climate risks. The project is expected to benefit 42,000 households including both 
direct and indirect beneficiaries with a total number of 189,000 people. Of the 
beneficiaries, direct women beneficiaries will be 55% and 30% would be youth 
beneficiaries. 
The project will cover 10 out of a total of 47 counties, four in the western region, four in 
Rift Valley region and two in the Northern Region. These include Marsabit, Samburu, 
Nakuru, Baringo, Trans Nzoia, Elgeyo Marakwet, Kakamega, Bungoma, Busia and Siaya. 
The population in these counties is predominantly rural with high rates of poverty 
ranging from 36% to 91% and deep pockets of poverty in some counties. There is 
considerable variation in the wards in some of the counties and some are widely 
dispersed. The population depends on livestock and crop production for their livelihood. 
In the Western and Rift Valley regions small scale farmers practice mixed farming, with 
poor segments of the population growing crops, keeping small ruminants, poultry and 
engage in honey production. In the North, they are predominantly pastoralists raising 
camels, beef cattle, goats and sheep for meat. 
The project will comprise two interrelated components dealing with production and 
marketing. On the supply side, production enhancement for small livestock aims to 
increase productivity of nutrition-sensitive livestock production in an environmentally 
friendly and climate resilient manner. On the market side, support will be given to small 
holders to improve access to markets, add value to their produce to increase its 
marketability, increased engagement of private sector to help identify product attributes 
that are required by the market that will in turn foster commercialization. The marketing 
approach of the project will be private sector led. 
In addition, the project will support project management and coordination arrangements 
that will require the procurement of specialized service providers and entrepreneurs with 
strong  links  with  markets.  The  project  design  includes  some  innovative  elements  and 
includes opportunities for the use  of a host  of  digital technologies and applications that 
deploy ICT4D approaches and scalable models in partnership with the private sector. The 
use of innovations and information technology will be integrated into the development of 
an e-extension approach and the development of e-finance to reduce the costs of access 
and delivery and develop e-marketing systems for information and sale. The project will 
mainstream climate resilience, and sustainable natural resource management in the small 
livestock, poultry and honey value chain development. 
2. Objective 
The  objective  of  the  assignment  is  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  processing  of 
procurement  tasks  under  KeLCoP  and  to  ensure  smooth  and  quality  implementation  of 
procurement processes for all project related activities. 
120 
3. Specific Tasks of Procurement Specialist 
The Procurement Specialist will be part of the Project Team working on the implementation 
of  the  project’s  activities.  Under  the  supervision  and  coordination  of  the  Project 
Coordinator, she/he would be responsible for the specific procurement activities needed 
for  project  implementation.  The  Procurement  Specialist  will  provide  leadership  and 
guidance  to  all  PMCU  and  County  level  project  staff  on  procurement  issues  for  goods, 
services  and  works  contracts.  Specific  responsibilities  include  but  are  not  limited  to  the 
following: 
  Review and provide more detail, where required, on the procurement section of the 
 
draft PIM;  
In  collaboration  with  other  members  of  the  PMCU,  Counties  and  implementing 
partners, and based on the AWPB update the rolling 18-month procurement plan 
for works, goods and services required by the project in accordance with IFAD PP 
Template and submit same for approval by the GOK and IFAD; 
  Ensure the timely and transparent procurement of goods, works and  services as 
identified in the procurement plan and in accordance with the applicable rules and 
procedures; 
  Ensuring that procurement of goods, civil works and services are implemented in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Loan  Agreement,  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines, National Regulations and Project Implementation Manual; 
  Prepare bidding documents and coordinate the preparation of relevant inputs such 
as  TORs,  technical  specifications  and  bills  of  quantities  by  technical  staff  or 
consultants; 
  Lead the orientation events for all KeLCoP County Project Implementation Teams 
and  implementing  agencies  on  the  principles  and  application  of  procurement 
procedures and guidelines for KeLCoP and use of the PIM guidelines; 
  Participate in relevant tender committee meetings and assist with the preparation 
of the committee reports; 
  Review  and  provide  professional  opinion  on  tender  evaluation  reports  and  make 
necessary follow-up; 
  Notification of results of tenders to all successful and unsuccessful bidders; 
  Draft contracts for signature by Accounting Officers and Vendors;  
  Manage the procurement monitoring database system; prepare periodic reports on 
the status of procurement for the Project that will allow IFAD to measure the level 
of project performance in terms of procurement; 
  Compile  and  confidentially  keep  up-to-date  procurement  files  containing  high 
quality  and  readily  available  information,  ensuring  proper  documentation, 
transparency and ease of reference; 
  Monitor  the  administrative  implementation  of  contracts  in  coordination  with  the 
Finance  Unit.  Ensure  a  sound  contract  administration  of  international  contracts, 
including handling of contractual claims, arbitrations and termination of contracts; 
  Report  in  writing  to  the  project  coordinator  on  unethical  behaviour,  potential  or 
actual  violation  of  contractual  terms  by  contractors  and  service  providers  and 
propose the appropriate remedial actions in accordance with the Contract General 
and Special Conditions; 
  Constantly review procurement arrangements in relation to the procurement plan 
to  ensure  consistency  with  the  financing  agreement  and  identify  weaknesses,  if 
any, and measures that should be undertaken to mitigate the risks posed by any 
weaknesses; 
  Train Project and implementing partners staff on procurement issues; 
  Maintain close liaison with IFAD on all issues pertaining to procurement; 
  Participate  in  Project  management  meetings  and  IFAD  supervision  missions, 
including the preparation of all information required, in particular the procurement 
records for facilitating post-procurement reviews; and  
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Management. 
121 
4. Qualifications and Experience 
The Procurement Specialist will have the following qualifications and experience: 
  A  minimum  of  first  degree  in  procurement  or  supply  chain  management  or 
engineering or administration or law or any other relevant field. A post graduate 
qualification will be an added advantage; 
  Minimum Ten (10) years relevant working experience, of which Seven (7) years’ 
experience is in procurement management at Government/donor funded projects;  
  A  comprehensive  knowledge  of  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  the  Public 
Procurement Regulations; 
  Familiarity with the World Bank Procurement Guidelines and Templates as well as 
experience  in  working  within  MALFC  procurement  processes  will  be  an  added 
advantage; 
  Experience in training, capacity building and setting up procurement systems in a 
new organisation will be a distinct advantage; 
  Computer literacy and competence, Microsoft Word, Excel, Access, Power Point;  
  Proven  ability to work  and interact with people from diverse, professional, social 
and cultural backgrounds;  
  Fluency in written and spoken English and National language; 
  Excellent analytical skills and report writing. 
5. Other Requirements 
  Strong  management  skills,  particularly  ability  to  provide  strategic  direction  and 
technical supervision,  
  Excellent communication skills and ease in interpersonal relationships; 
  Reliable  and  responsible  personality  and  capacity  to  work  under  demanding 
professional circumstances and in an international environment; 
  Excellent coordination and negotiation skills; 
  Excellent planning, organizing and recordkeeping skills; 
  Experience in dealing with senior business executives and government officials; 
  Good team player while being independent and able to work autonomously. 
6. References 
Verifiable  references  and  membership  of  professional  organization(s).  Previous  work 
experience in Donor funded projects. 
7. Performance criteria 
The performance of the Procurement Specialist will be evaluated bi-annually. The criteria 
used to measure his/her performance will be: 
  Timely processing of procurement requisitions; 
  Ability to meet deadlines in terms of procurement; 
  Compliance with procurement procedures foreseen in the project, measured by the 
number  of  rejected  submissions  for  prior  examination  and  post-review  audit 
findings (technical and financial);  
  Delivery of tendered supplies and services. 
8. Work Station 
The position will be full-time based at the Project Management and Coordination Unit office 
in Nakuru with frequent travel to the ten project Counties. 
122 
9. Duration  
Two-year contract, with six months’ probation period, renewable based on agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
Terms of Reference  
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KeLCoP)– IFAD Funded Project 
POSITION: PMCU Procurement Assistant 
Background 
The overall goal of the KeLCoP project is to contribute to Government’s agriculture 
transformation Agenda of increasing household incomes, food and nutrition security for 
poor rural small-scale farmers. The Development Objective is to increase incomes of 
rural small- scale poor livestock farmers and pastoralists and make them more resilient 
to climate risks. The project is expected to benefit 42,000 households including both 
direct and indirect beneficiaries with a total number of 189,000 people. Of the 
beneficiaries, direct women beneficiaries will be 55% and 30% would be youth 
beneficiaries. 
The project will cover 10 out of a total of 47 counties, four in the western region, four in 
Rift Valley region and two in the Northern Region. These include Marsabit, Samburu, 
Nakuru, Baringo, Trans Nzoia, Elgeyo Marakwet, Kakamega, Bungoma, Busia and Siaya. 
The population in these counties is predominantly rural with high rates of poverty 
ranging from 36% to 91% and deep pockets of poverty in some counties. There is 
considerable variation in the wards in some of the counties and some are widely 
dispersed. The population depends on livestock and crop production for their livelihood. 
In the Western and Rift Valley regions small scale farmers practice mixed farming, with 
poor segments of the population growing crops, keeping small ruminants, poultry and 
engage in honey production. In the North, they are predominantly pastoralists raising 
camels, beef cattle, goats and sheep for meat. 
The project will comprise two interrelated components dealing with production and 
marketing. On the supply side, production enhancement for small livestock aims to 
increase productivity of nutrition-sensitive livestock production in an environmentally 
friendly and climate resilient manner. On the market side, support will be given to small 
holders to improve access to markets, add value to their produce to increase its 
marketability, increased engagement of private sector to help identify product attributes 
that are required by the market that will in turn foster commercialization. The marketing 
approach of the project will be private sector led. 
In addition, the project will support project management and coordination arrangements 
that will require the procurement of specialized service providers and entrepreneurs with 
strong  links  with  markets.  The  project  design  includes  some  innovative  elements  and 
includes opportunities for the use  of a host  of  digital technologies and applications that 
deploy ICT4D approaches and scalable models in partnership with the private sector. The 
use of innovations and information technology will be integrated into the development of 
an e-extension approach and the development of e-finance to reduce the costs of access 
and delivery and develop e-marketing systems for information and sale. The project will 
mainstream climate resilience, and sustainable natural resource management in the small 
livestock, poultry and honey value chain development. 
123 
Objective 
The  objective  of  the  assignment  is  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  processing  of 
procurement  tasks  under  KeLCoP  and  to  ensure  smooth  and  quality  implementation  of 
procurement processes for all project related activities. 
Specific Tasks of Procurement Assistant 
The Procurement Assistant will be part of the Project Team working on the implementation 
of  the  project’s  activities.  Under  the  supervision  and  coordination  of  the  Procurement 
Specialist, she/he would be responsible for supporting the procurement activities needed 
for  project  implementation.  Specific  responsibilities  include  but  are  not  limited  to  the 
following: 
  Assist the Procurement Specialist to consolidate requests for procurement of goods, 
works, technical and consulting services; 
  Design, implement a database of providers and ensure the update; 
  Prepare  tender  notices  and  advertisements 
international papers and websites as required; 
in  appropriate  national  and 
  Assisting the Procurement Specialist in preparing: procurement documents (e.g., 
invitations  to  bid,  standard  bidding  documents,  bid  clarification  and  eventual 
amendments,  bid  evaluation  reports,  etc.);  obtain  timely  relevant  approval  for 
procurement documents; 
  Assisting  the  Procurement  Specialist  in  organizing  and  help  managing  pre-bid 
conferences;  conduct  the  bid  opening  process  and  prepare  the  minutes  of  bid 
opening; in due time for bid evaluations, support evaluation committees; ensure 
proper documentation of committees’ deliberations and findings; 
  Ensure timely notification of results of tenders to all successful and unsuccessful 
bidders; 
  Assist  the  Procurement  Specialist  in  tracking  progress  of  procurement  activities 
against  the  plans;  highlight  variations  in  progress,  record  reasons  and  identify 
remedial actions; report this to the Procurement Specialist and Project Coordinator 
on a monthly basis; 
  Assisting  the  Procurement  Specialist  in  drafting  contracts  for  signature  by 
Accounting Officer and Vendors; 
  Assisting the Procurement Specialist in compiling and confidentially keeping up-to-
date  procurement  files  containing  high  quality  and  readily  available  information, 
ensuring proper documentation, transparency and ease of reference; 
  Handle procurement-related correspondences with pertinent authorities; 
  Assistance with keeping an effective system for monitoring of procurement process 
and  contract  (recording  the  dates  of  all  important  approvals,  contract  awards, 
amounts  etc.),  as  well  as  an  adequate  system  record  keeping  system  to  ensure 
quick finding of procurement information; 
  Maintain the contract register and regularly update the same with monitoring data 
on progress of all contracts; 
  Maintain  regular  communication  with  Procurement  Specialist  to  ensure  that 
procurement tracking information is well coordinated with other project planning, 
project budgeting and other project financial reporting information; 
  Assist the Procurement Specialist in 
monitoring 
the 
administrative 
implementation of contracts; 
  Execute  any  other  task  required  by  the  Procurement  Specialist  and  Project 
Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Experience 
The Procurement Assistant will have the following qualifications and experience: 
124 
  A  minimum  of  first  degree  in  procurement  or  supply  chain  management  or 
administration or any other relevant field; 
  Minimum  Five  (5)  years  relevant  working  experience,  of  which  Seven  (2)  years’ 
experience is in procurement management at Government/donor funded projects;  
  A comprehensive knowledge of and the Public Procurement Regulations; 
  Familiarity with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines will be an added advantage; 
  Computer literacy and competence, Microsoft Word, Excel, Access, Power Point;  
  Proven  ability to work  and interact with people from diverse, professional, social 
and cultural backgrounds;  
  Fluency in written and spoken English and National language; 
  Excellent analytical skills and report writing. 
Other Requirements 
  Excellent communication skills and ease in interpersonal relationships; 
  Reliable  and  responsible  personality  and  capacity  to  work  under  demanding 
professional circumstances and in an international environment; 
  Excellent coordination and negotiation skills; 
  Excellent planning, organizing and recordkeeping skills; 
  Good team player while being independent and able to work autonomously. 
References 
Verifiable  references  and  membership  of  professional  organization(s).  Previous  work 
experience in Donor funded projects. 
Performance criteria 
The performance of the Procurement Assistant will be evaluated bi-annually. The criteria 
used to measure his/her performance will be: 
  Timely processing of procurement requisitions; 
  Ability to meet deadlines in terms of procurement; 
  Delivery of tendered supplies and services. 
Work Station 
The position will be full-time based at the Project Management and Coordination Unit office 
in Nakuru with frequent travel to the ten project Counties. 
Duration  
Two-year contract, with six months’ probation period, renewable based on agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
1)  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
a)  Job description  
The  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Specialist  will  be  responsible  for  the  establishment  and 
operation of a sound monitoring system in line with the Projects objectives and approach. 
He/she  will  develop  the  projects  M&E  guidelines  and  indicators,  prepare  and  compile 
AWP&B , in collaboration with other PCU and County staff, coordinate baseline surveys and 
special studies and prepare the progress report. The work station will be at PCU Nakuru 
but  he/she  will  be  expected  to  travel  extensively  within  the  Project  area,  as  may  be 
required. He/she will sign a six (6) year Contract of Employment with the initial six months 
on probation. The contract will be renewable on an yearly basis depending on satisfactory 
125 
annual performance report. He/she will be answerable to the Project Coordinator for the 
following duties and responsibilities: 
i. 
ii. 
Contributing  to  the  preparation  of  the  Project  implementation  and  financial 
manuals. 
Liaising  with  implementing  partners  and  PCU  Technical  staff  to  coordinate  the 
development of the Project’s M&E guidelines and indicators. 
iii. 
Compiling and distributing the Project’s periodic progress reports. 
iv. 
v. 
Prepare  AWP&B,  coordinate,  organize,  and 
Supervision mission, implementation support and Annual review workshops. 
facilitate  AWP&B  workshops, 
Provide technical expertise for determining the specific information needs of IFAD, 
other development partners and implementers for proper reporting by the target 
groups. 
vi. 
In collaboration with the Counties and PCU staff, coordinate the baseline surveys 
and special studies to incorporate in the Project’s M&E system. 
vii. 
Access the Project’s staff training on M&E requirements and conduct short courses. 
viii.  Developing and implementing KeLCOP learning system in consultation with the KM 
TA. 
ix.  Developing  and  implementing  processes  and  guidelines  to  ensure  that  lessons 
learnt  and  good  practices  are  systematically  captured,  shared  with  stakeholders 
and used to improve implementation. 
x. 
xi. 
 Supporting advocacy efforts through providing evidence of project impact gathered 
through the M&E system. 
Coordinating  surveys  and  case  studies  to  assess  achievements  and  outcomes  of 
KeLCOP activities. 
xii. 
Forster partnerships for broader knowledge sharing and learning. 
xiii. 
Any other duty that may be assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
b)  Academic qualifications and other requirements for the Position: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
A post graduate qualification in social sciences, Information Technology, Computer 
Science,  Agricultural  Economics,  Livestock  Economics  or  Project  Planning  and 
Management, Monitoring and Evaluation or any other related discipline.  
At  least  6  years’  experience  working  in  the  field  of  Project  Planning  and 
Management of donor funded government programmes. 
Practical  knowledge  of  Project  cycle  management,  use  of  the  log  Frame  and  the 
result based management. 
Knowledge in development of performance management plans based  on  results-
based  work  plan,  activity  &  resource  schedule  as  drawn  from  the  objective 
hierarchy. 
v. 
Have sound knowledge of participatory M&E approaches and techniques. 
vi. 
Have sound knowledge in the development of performance indicators. 
126 
vii. 
High level of Computer proficiency in Microsoft office suite; 
viii. 
Ability to work under pressure and meet strict deadlines and work with minimum 
supervision; 
ix. 
Ability  to  work  and  interact  with  people  from  diverse,  professional,  social  and 
cultural backgrounds;  
x.  Good  interpersonal  and  Communication  skills, excellent  planning,  organizing  and 
recordkeeping skills; 
xi. 
Ability to work as a team player, self-motivated and creative thinker, good analytical 
skills and report writing and excellent coordination and negotiation skills; 
xii. 
Fluent in English (written and spoken); 
2)  Knowledge Management Technical Assistant 
The  Knowledge  Management  will  address  development  of  brand  and  visibility, 
mainstreaming  beneficiary  access  to  enterprises  development  and  value  addition 
information, lessons learnt and best practices. The technical assistant will coordinate and 
facilitate collection, sharing and dissemination of various programme related information. 
The work station will be at PCU Nakuru but he/she will be expected to travel extensively 
within the Project area, as may be  required.  He/she  will sign a six (6) year Contract  of 
Employment with the initial six months on probation. The contract will be renewed annually 
on teh basis of a satisfactory annual performance report. He/she will be answerable to the 
Project Coordinator for the following duties and responsibilities: 
i.  Oversee the development of a strategy and plans to ensure systematic, continuous 
learning, improvement and knowledge sharing; 
ii.  Develop and implement processes to ensure that lessons learned and good practice 
are captured systematically, shared, and used to improve project implementation, 
including in the development of the AWPB; 
iii. 
iv. 
Support advocacy efforts through providing evidence of impact gathered through 
the  M&E  system,  closely  linked  to  knowledge  management  and  communication 
activities; 
Coordinate the development and implementation of capacity building programmes 
for  PCT  staff,  the  counties  and  implementing  partners,  including  coaching  and 
mentoring; 
v. 
Provide technical backstopping and guidance to county and implementing partner 
staff on KM&L; 
vi.  Develop  or  adapt  relevant  tools  and  processes  for  implementing  staff  to  collect, 
process/analyse, store and share information and knowledge, and ensure relevant 
staff have the capacity to use them; 
vii. 
Ensure  that  innovative  experiences,  learning  and  good  practices  are  captured, 
synthesized,  documented  and  shared  continuously  within  the  project,  within  the 
counties,  with  in  country  partners,  IFAD  and  other  regional  and  international 
partners, including through a project website, documentation centre, communities 
of practice, etc; 
viii.  Oversee communication support to awareness raising and sensitization of project 
participants, including building understanding of the project’s objectives, benefits; 
ix. 
Any other duty that may be assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
127 
b) Academic qualifications and other requirements for the Position: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Bachelor’s  degree  in  Agricultural  Economics,  Rural  Development,  Information 
Communication Technology, Statistics, Communications or other relevant field.  
Post  graduate  qualification  in  M&E,  Communications,  knowledge  management  or 
related field  
Be  proficient  in  the  use  of  databases,  spreadsheets,  modern  information  and 
communication technology (ICT) in development, and other computer applications; 
have  demonstrated  skills  in  quantitative  and  qualitative  analysis  and  data 
management; 
Have at least 8 years relevant work experience, 3 of which should be in the field of 
KM, M&E, MIS, project management, facilitation of learning processes or a related 
filed; 
Have proven experience in designing and implementing successful communication 
and knowledge management strategies for sustainable development, or in planning 
and implementing strategies at management level; 
Ability to work under pressure and meet strict deadlines and work with minimum 
supervision; 
Ability  to  work  and  interact  with  people  from  diverse,  professional,  social  and 
cultural backgrounds;  
viii.  Good  interpersonal  and  Communication  skills, excellent  planning,  organizing  and 
recordkeeping skills; 
ix. 
Ability to work as a team player, self-motivated and creative thinker, good analytical 
skills and report writing and excellent coordination and negotiation skills; 
x. 
Fluent in English (written and spoken); 
3)  Administrative Assistant 
a)  Job Description 
Answerable  to  the  PC,  the  Administrative  Assistant’s  responsibilities  will  be  to  provide 
administrative support to ensure efficient operation of the PMCU office. He/she will support the 
PC  and  other  PMCU  staff  employees  through  a  variety  of  tasks  related  to  organization  and 
communication. He/she will ensure that the offices are well kept and required supplies available 
all teh time. He/she will also manage office logistics and security.He/she will support the PC 
in  teh  supervision  of  secretaries  and  drivers.  The  work  station  will  be  at  PCU  Nakuru. 
He/she  will  sign  a  six  (6)  year  Contract  of  Employment  with  the  initial  six  months  on 
probation.  However  teh  contract  will  be  renewed  annually  on  teh  basis  of  satisfactory 
performance. Specifically, he/she will perform the following duties and responsibilities:  
i. 
ii. 
Ensure  efficient  running  of  the  PMCU  Office  with  adequest  supplies  an  proper 
maintenance. 
Assist with the management of staff leave, training and development of staff and 
welfare activities. 
iii. 
Ensure health and safety regulations are put in place and adhered to in the Project. 
128 
iv. 
Supervising  the  secretaries  and  drivers,  ensure  compliance  with  their  terms  of 
reference; 
v. 
Administering and maintaining employee records; 
vi.  Management of logistics and security of the office block and compound. 
vii. 
Collecting,  organizing  and  storing  information  on  motor  vehicle  usage  and 
managing fuel.  
viii. 
Any other duty that may be assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
b)  Academic qualifications and other requirements for the Position: 
i. 
ii. 
A  bachelor’s  degree 
Management) or any other relevant field from a recognized University. 
in  Business/Public  Administration  (Human  Resource 
Post  graduate  qualification  in  Business/Public  Administration  (Human  Resource 
Management) or any  other  relevant field from  a recognized University will be an 
added advantage. 
iii.  Minimum  of  five  years’  work  experience  in  a  similar  position  and  out  of  which  3 
years’ in a donor funded project. 
iv. 
v. 
Ability to work under pressure and meet strict deadlines and work with minimum 
supervision and sometimes work outside normal working hours; 
Ability  to  work  and  interact  with  people  from  diverse,  professional,  social  and 
cultural backgrounds;  
vi.  Good interpersonal and Communication skills, excellent planning, organizing and 
recordkeeping skills; 
vii. 
Ability to work as a team player, self-motivated and creative thinker, good 
analytical skills  and report writing, excellent coordination and negotiation skills; 
viii.  Good public relations qualities; 
ix. 
Fluent in English (written and spoken); 
x. 
Knowledge in Computer packages. 
129 
 130 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Overall Summary
1/16
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
High
High
Environment and Climate Context
Substantial
Moderate
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Moderate
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Budgeting
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Internal Controls
High
Low
Low
Low
High
High
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
High
Substantial
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Accounting and financial reporting
High
Substantial
External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
2/16
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
No risk envisaged
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Overall
Substantial
Moderate
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
In the recent past, the Government has reiterated its commitment to
macroeconomic policies, aimed at maintaining public debt at a
sustainable level, containing inflation within the target range, and
preserving external stability. The Debt-to-GDP ratio stood at 61.6% in
2019 and the Government has confirmed that debt sustainability
analysis indicates that public sector debt continues to be sustainable
although the country’s current external debt risk of distress
categorisation has moved from low to moderate. As a result, the
Government has adopted a more robust and cautious approach in
negotiations regarding external debt, often resulting in delays in
signing of financing agreements. Currently, Additional Financing
agreements for UTaNRMP and ABDP remain unsigned, almost 18
months since approval by the Executive Board (EB) and there is risk in
the delayed signing of the KeLCoP financing agreement as well.
Mitigations:
To mitigate this risk, the IFAD/Kenya country team will continue to
support government’s efforts to mobilize co-financing in the form of
grants from other development partners. So far, funding has been
secured from Heifer International and discussions are ongoing with
the German Government. In addition partnership with the IFC is being
explored o provide parallel financing targeting the private sector actors
in the value chain. These efforts are geared towards reducing overall
cost of finance of the project to the Government.
Governance
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Firstly, County Governments have limited resources and are in the
process of downsizing. They do not have the financial and personnel
capacity to undertake their mandates with respect to major areas
including the livestock sector.
Mitigations:
3/16
In order to mitigate the risk, the project will assist the county
Government with developing its overall capacity for strategic planning,
providing it support in implementation and helping to invest in key
resources, enable it to modernise its system of extension and market
information through deploying digital technologies and e-extension
models and assisting it in facilitating links with private sector and
encourage private sector investments.
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Secondly, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as well as upcoming
general (2021) and presidential elections (2022) may pose delays in
project start-up as well as implementation due to shortages of supplies
and necessary services. According to the updated IMF forecasts of
April 2020, due to the outbreak of the COVID-19, GDP growth is
expected to slow down to 1% in 2020 and pick up to 6.1% in 2021,
subject to the post-pandemic global economic recovery. This may
result in increased prices and cost.
Mitigations:
To mitigate this risk, the FIPS facility will be used to improve capability
of State Department of Livestock to faster project start-up. Preparatory
activities such set of PMU, acquisition of accounting software and
M&E system will be financed through the FIPS facility. FIPS will also
be used to support the State Department of Livestock to develop a
COVID-19 mitigation strategy for the project, which will analyse the
actual and potential impacts of the pandemic at the different levels of
project implementation and on the target groups, and offer
suggestions on the measures to be undertaken. One area that could
receive attention re-orienting project Investments to be rolled out in a
manner that pay more focus resilient livestock systems and building
back livelihoods better to speedier recovery following shocks such as
COVID-19 and political turmoil like post-election violence.
Moreover, IFAD will monitor and support implementation to agree with
implementing agency on reasonableness of the procurement
approaches and obtained outcomes considering the available market
response and needs. Finally, the project activities are aligned to the
activities in the County Integrated Development Plans (CIDP) for
which some resources have already been budgeted and there is
potential to attract financing from other development partners.
Moreover, the support requested from the county government under
the project will generally be for aspects, which are within their capacity
to provide such as land grants, tax incentives and ease of doing
business for private sector. Finally, the project will use the technical
capacity of the county governments in Livestock Production and
Veterinary Officers for technical training of smallholder farmers,
women and young men.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The medium-term growth outlook expected to be impacted by COVID-
19 pandemic as growth is projected to drop to 1.0% in 2020. In
addition recent threats of drought and continued subdued private
sector investment could drag down growth in the near-term.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate the risk, the project has a strong focus on private
sector led growth in the selected counties and has identified a host of
opportunities for encouraging the participation of the private sector in
the selected value chains through hosting investor forums and multi-
stakeholder forums.
4/16
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Secondly, there may be poor response from potential private sector
actors in the selected value chains.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate the second risk, the project, in collaboration with
the County Government, will build in attractive incentives for private
sector engagement such as land grants, and strengthen the ease of
doing business as well as linking the private sector with smallholders,
which can provide tradable volumes and reliable supplies of
appropriate quality. Discussions with county Governments show that
they are willing to offer a range of incentives for this purpose.
Fragility and Security
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Security threats (ethnic clashes, social conflicts and terrorist attacks
could be an inherent risk).
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate the risk, KeLCoP will not be implemented in
counties known to be impacted by terrorism. In one or two arid
counties there might be threats of low-level tribal feuds. Concerted
effort will be made to select Wards that are secure for project
implementation.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
There is no overarching strategic policy or planning at the national or
the county government level for livestock breed, feed and animal
disease surveillance and control.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate the risk, the project will assist the National
Government with the development of a Master Plan for Livestock
together with FAO and ILRI and assist the county Governments with
strategic plans for the livestock sector.
Policy Development and Implementation
High
High
Risk:
High
High
The livestock policies and strategies that are in place do not
adequately acknowledge the role, needs, priorities and interests of
smallholder farmers, women, youth and marginalized communities in
agriculture
5/16
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate the risk, the project will facilitate the National
Governments and the County Governments to develop inclusive
livestock strategies. The strategic interests of smallholder pastoralist
and agro-pastoralist farmers, rural women, youth and marginalized
traditional tribes will be addressed by promoting their visibility through
recognizing the critical role that they play in the livestock value chains
and addressing their needs and priorities.
Environment and Climate Context
Substantial
Moderate
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The main negative environmental risks that are likely to impact from
the project include overstocking, overgrazing, land/pasture
degradation, deforestation, soil erosion, pollution from effluent
discharge, wildfires, and resource use conflicts among others.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, the project has put in place elaborate
measures within the components, the SECAP and the ESMF to
minimise or reverse these risks. Some proposed mitigation actions
include water infrastructure development, sustainable land and water
management practices, rehabilitation of degraded pasture lands,
promotion of sustainable rangeland and pasture management
practices, development of a grievance redress mechanism, and
promotion of integrated pests management among others. It is
expected that if the project implements the proposed mitigation
actions, builds capacities of farmers, and works closely with relevant
authorities, the risk levels in the project areas will reduce significantly
or be reversed.
The project has put in place elaborate measures within the
components, the SECAP and the ESMF to minimise or reverse these
risks. Some proposed mitigation actions include water infrastructure
development, sustainable land and water management practices,
rehabilitation of degraded pasture lands, promotion of sustainable
rangeland and pasture management practices, development of a
grievance redress mechanism, and promotion of integrated pests
management among others. It is expected that if the project
implements the proposed mitigation actions, builds capacities of
farmers, and works closely with relevant authorities, the risk levels in
the project areas will reduce significantly or be reversed.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
High
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
6/16
The risk that existing or possible future climate variability and/or
extreme climatic events may have significant adverse impacts on food
and nutrition security, agricultural productivity, access to markets,
value chains, infrastructure, and/or the incidence of pests and
diseases, resulting in increased vulnerability or deterioration of target
populations’ livelihoods and ecosystems.Some of the project counties
are exposed to extreme weather events, such as drought, heat waves
and floods. Drought and heat waves will negatively affect livestock
productivity and livelihoods of agro-pastoralists in ASAL counties. The
wetter western counties are more likely to experience floods and
landslides, which could lead to disease outbreaks and loss of livestock
or human lives. Other risks associated with climate variability or
change include emergence of desert locusts, water scarcity, wild fires,
resource use conflicts, land degradation among others.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate the risks, the project has proposed mitigation
actions within its components, the SECAP, ESMF and the in-depth
climate risk analysis will minimize these risks. Some measures
include investments in water infrastructure, a contingency fund to
address climate related emergencies, sustainable pasture and
rangeland management practices, agroforestry, breed improvement,
disease and pests’ surveillance, climate and weather information
services, climate proofing market and processing facilities, and
aligning selected value chains in sub-counties with climate
projections, among others. Implementation of the proposed mitigation
actions is likely to improve farmers’ abilities to cope with and deal with
climate change.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Firstly, there may be a risk that the objectives and interventions of the
project are not well aligned with national development or IFAD
priorities, and/or are not sufficiently relevant or responsive to the
needs and priorities of the intended target group throughout the
project’s lifespan.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, the project scope and activties were
closely identified in discussion with beneficiaries and County
Governments and with relevance to their development plans.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
Secondly, there is a lack of opportunities for the rural poor especially
youth, women and smallholders reduce the scope of the project to
enable them to increase their productive capacity, access to markets
and increase their resilience to economic and climate risks.
Mitigations:
7/16
In order to mitigate the impact of this risk, a rigorous assessment of
the opportunities offered by the selected value chains will be
conducted at County level and priorities of the selected beneficiary
households will be identified in participatory manner with relevant
stakeholders and the County Government. Thus, the scope will be
tailored and focused in each County.
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
While the project is technically robust, one of the risks that can be
forseen is that the innovative aspects of the project are not adapted
rapidly by the beneficiaries.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, during implementation, the project will
work with techncial specialists in the public and private sector in order
to ensure that the beneficiaires are fully sensitized on the benefiits of
the innovative approaches.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Firstly, there may be weak technical capacity of county government
personnel in policy development and livestock extension.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, the project will invest adequately in
technical and financial support to boost capacity of county personnel
and also contract qualified extension service providers and use of e-
extension approaches where necessary to bridge capacity gaps.
Supervision and implementation support missions, especially in years
1 and 2 will support project implementation.
High
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
Secondly, a number of innovative technological tools will be deployed
in the project, hence calling for various thematic and specialized
expertise, which the PMCU may not have recourse to.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, implementing arrangements will involve
contracting an outcome-based, locally well-established NGO, with
expertise in ASALs, business, ICT, and livestock development. A
number of such NGOs have already expressed interest and they
include Heifer international; Precision Agriculture for Development
(PAD); USTADI Foundation, SNV; or ICCO, Resource Conflict
Institute (RECONCILE), amongst others.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
High
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
Weak M&E arrangements will not allow for the project’s progress and
impact to be accurately measured.
8/16
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, the KeLCoP will deploy a participatory
Knowledge Management/Monitoring and Evaluation (KM/M&E)
system to be developed and managed by the PMCU. A key element of
the KM/M&E system will be involvement of primary stakeholders as
active participants to provide inclusive assessments of results, and to
reflect the perspectives and aspirations of those most directly affected
by the project. The PMCU will bear overall responsibility for the
continuous M&E and regular reporting on progress and the
achievement of project objectives, milestones and results. As
indicated in the Kenya COSOP (2020-2025), the Kenya portfolio is
currently in the process of developing a portfolio KM Plan. Therefore,
the KM Plan developed through KeLCoP will be aligned with this
overarching portfolio KM Plan. 
Moreover, a web-based Management Information System (MIS) will
be developed to facilitate data management and allow automated
production of a number of draft progress tables.
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that the implementing entity does not have the necessary
number of adequately qualified and experienced financial
management staff in the national and regional centers, resulting in
limited ability to meet the functional needs of the project.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, the PS of MoALF will be the Accounting
Officer for the project in regards to government organizational
structure. The project will be house under the Ministry however there
will be an independent PMCU with a Finance Unit. The Financial
Controller assisted by the Accounts Assistants shall manage the
Finance Unit of the Project. These team shall be competitively
recruited as part of the start up activities.
Budgeting
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that budgeted expenditures are not realistic, not prepared or
revised on a timely basis, and not executed in an orderly and
predictable manner, resulting in funds not being available when
needed, ineligible costs and reallocation of project funds and slow
implementation progress.
Mitigations:
9/16
the Financial Controller of the PMCU will coordinate the budget
preparation processes with close coordination with project coordinator
and the lead person for each component. At the counties levels, the
activities to be carried out at the counties will also need to be included
in their budget for approval by the counties assemblies. This will be
done by county project coordinator under the guidance of the project’s
Financial Controller. Payments cannot be made if the budget
provisions have not been made and approved by Parliament at the
Ministry’s level and County Assembly for county activities. Moreover,
the arbitrary cut of printed estimates budgets in the course of a fiscal
year due to other fiscal measures will be emphasized during loan
negotiations and specific assurances be sought that project budget
estimates will not be arbitrarily cut by the National Treasury
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that funds from multiple financiers disburse with delay due to
cumbersome treasury arrangements or inability of project cost centers
and service providers to justify prior advances, resulting in delayed
implementation.
Mitigations:
A clear and streamlined process of flow of funds has been put in
place: (a) transfer of GoK counterpart funds to a separate bank
account that will be managed by PMCU; (b) payments for expenditure
from counterpart funds bank account; (c) transfer of IFAD funds to
KeLCoP US$ designated account; (d) transfer of IFAD funds to
PMCU operational account in local currency for payments at PMCU.
This account will be held in a commercial bank; (e) transfer of IFAD
funds to County Project Accounts; (f) payments of eligible expenditure
at county levels; (g) payments of eligible expenditure at PMCU; (h)
direct payment to suppliers or partners by IFAD. This will be on
exceptional basis and for payments of more than USD 100,000 as will
be guided in the letter to borrower.
Internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that appropriate controls over Project funds are not in place,
leading to the inefficient or inappropriate use of project resources.
Mitigations:
To effectively safeguard project resources, internal controls have been
instituted at the PMCU in the whole framework of financial and
administrative procedures. The identified controls range from; proper
record keeping and posting, authorization of accounting, procurement
and administrative documents, balancing and checking, physical
security of assets, double signing (approval) arrangements, to financial
reporting and monitoring. These are prescribed in PFM act and further
detailed in the finance and operation manual for the project. There will
be internal audit function, as noted below, to check overall compliance
to internal controls and provide support towards improving systems,
procedures and processes.
Accounting and financial reporting
High
Substantial
Risk:
High
Substantial
The risk that accounting systems – including polices and standards –
are not integrated and reliable, leading to inaccuracies in financial
records, and that reasonable records are not prepared, issued and
stored, leading to lack of informed decision-making.
10/16
Mitigations:
IFAD will provide intensive training and support to county financial
managers. The project will invest in accounting software to boost
PMCU’s capacity and will simultaneously do regular checks and
balances. A properly installed accounting software will be a
disbursement condition to disbursement. The acquisition of the
software including staff training will be part of the start up activities.
External Audit
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that independent and competent oversight of the Project
financial statements is not in place or performed timely leading to
possible misrepresentation of the financial results and/or suspension
or other remedies due to compliance breaches.
Mitigations:
On annual basis, Finance controllers will prepare and the audit TOR
in the beginning of the financial year and agree timelines with the
OAG. The consolidated draft financial statements for the project will
submitted to the Office of the Auditor General not later four month
after the financial year end. The audited financial statements
submitted to IFAD within six months after the period end in
accordance with IFAD guidelines.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Regulations under the Public Procurement and Disposal Act of 2015
contain some weaknesses in the area of transparency and
accountability. The use of IFAD's Standard Bidding Documents will
largely limit the risks identified though the review and reflected in the
PRM.
Mitigations:
The PIM will contain clear indication of rules, regulations, policies and
procedures to be adopted in order to ensure compliance with IFAD’s
Project Procurement Guidelines.
Accountability and Transparency
High
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
11/16
Kenya ranks 137 out of 180 countries in the 2019 Corruption
Perception Index according to Transparency International which
indicates that integrity and ethical values still require strengthening.
Risks related to Accountability and Transparency include: slow
procurement processing and decision making with potential
implementation delays; unclear defined roles in contract management
system with potential time and cost overrun and poor-quality
deliverable; increased risk of F&C (abuse of simplified procurement
procedures, false delivery certification, inflated invoices).
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, all procuring entities as well as bidders
and service providers, that is: suppliers, contractors, and consultants
shall observe the highest standard of ethics during the procurement
and execution of contracts financed under the IFAD funded Projects
in accordance with paragraph 84 of the Procurement Guidelines and
the relevant Articles of the Kenya Public Procurement Act and other
national legislation which refers to corrupt practices. The Revised
IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and
Operations shall apply to the project, Compliance with IFAD Policy on
Preventing Fraud and Corruption including without limiting the IFAD’s
right to sanction and the IFAD’s inspection and audit rights.
Maintaining accountability for following the expedited approval
processes; assigning staff with responsibility of managing each
contract; and ensuring oversight by IFAD teams in close coordination
with the borrower’s oversight agencies.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
State Department for Livestock (SDL) staff have limited experience in
using Donors Procurement Regulations and Procedures and have a
heavy workload.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, KeLCoP will recruit two qualified and
experienced procurement staff to carry out procurement activities and
provide focused training and hand-holding for capacity building of the
PMCU staff and other implementing partners. Individual consultant
may be recruited on retainer basis to support the implementation of
the planned activities whenever needed.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risks include: delay in initiating completing the planned activities;
inadequate Technical Specifications and evaluation criteria;
incomplete records keeping and filing; excessive use of non-
competitive procurement methods, without proper justification;
weakness in ensuring contract management
(supervision)/administration (monitoring) during contract
implementation to completion that may result into cost overruns.
Mitigations:
12/16
In order to mitigate this risk, IFAD’s oversight of procurement will be
done through increased implementation support missions, and will
provide procurement hands-on expanded implementation support to
help expedite all stages of procurement and ensure compliance.
Procurement and technical staff of the PMU to undergo focused
training on procurement process best practices.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
The risk that the project may cause significant threats to or the loss of
biodiversity, availability of diversified nutritious food, ecosystems and
ecosystem services, territories of the indigenous peoples, or the
unsustainable use/production of living natural resources.
Mitigations:
The project will not have adverse impacts on biodiversity in the area.
On the contrary, the project will invest in the rehabilitation of degraded
rangelands and pasturelands, support hay and silage making for use
during the dry season, promote agroforestry, improve livestock breeds
and management, and promote efficient feeding practices. As some
project sites maybe close to protected areas such as game reserves,
the project will ensure that a 5km buffer zone is adhered to and these
areas screened out of the project sites. Deforestation will be controlled
through agroforestry and afforestation efforts. Communities will be
consulted and sensitised on the need to conserve biodiversity and
engaged in all such efforts.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The risk that the project may cause pollution to air, water, and land,
and inefficient use of finite resources that may threaten people,
ecosystem services and the environment at the local, regional, and
global levels.
Mitigations:
To mitigate this risk, the project plans to invest in various measures
that will promote resource efficiency. These include breed
improvement, development of community based water infrastructure,
animal health, upgrading and climate proofing marketing and
processing facilities, and, implementation of proposed environment,
climate and social risks mitigation actions. Measures to prevent
pollution of water, soil and air through effluent discharge, e-waste,
solid waste, among others have been articulated in the ESMF and in
the SECAP and the project is expected to implement them to minimise
pollution levels.
Cultural Heritage
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
13/16
Firstly, patriarchal norms may prevent women from participating and
benefitting from project activities. 
In order to mitigate the risk, the project proposes the extensive use of
GALS methodology to empower women and make women’s roles,
needs and aspirations visible; and sensitizing smallholder farmers,
women, men and youth to the need of gender justice to increase well-
being. Moreover, the KeLCoP will increase women’s self-efficacy,
access to knowledge, skills, ICT, capital through training, grants,
exposure visits and GALS fairs. Finally, KeLCoP activities will increase
women’s visibility as actors in the value chain in the Master Plan for
Livestock and County Livestock strategies and Behaviour Change
Communication Campaign. The SECAP and the ESMF also identify
potential social risks and proposes mitigation actions that the project
should implement to address them. 
Secondly, there may be a risk of men taking over if women’s
economic activities increase in value and/or become more profitable.
The same situation may lead to adults taking over youth assets and
economic activities.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, group ownership of assets will be
promoted, particularly to support women, in ensuring that no male
member of any one household may be able to appropriate the
woman’s assets. GALS training will also be used to empower women
to take up leadership positions. Simultaneously, mentors will be in
close contact with beneficiaries to monitor use of asset and economic
activity. The project has developed a grievance redress mechanism
(GRM) to address conflicts and grievances that may arise from project
interventions. Moreover, indigenous peoples will be engaged in a
consultative and participatory manner through the FPIC process,
whilst ensuring that they provide consent to all interventions included
in their action plans.
Indigenous People
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Inequitable participation and delivery mechanisms insufficiently
sensitive to the specific requirements and culture of IPs are possible
risk.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, quotas for the inclusion of IPs have been
set at 10% across project components. The project has developed
and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework that articulates the
processes and procedures through which the FPIC will be undertaken
and the Indigenous Peoples Action Plans developed. The FPIC will
ensure that IPs are engaged through a participatory, consultative and
transparent process and that they provide consent for all interventions
that are proposed in their action plans. Moreover, the project will take
the do-no-harm approach in ensuring that interventions proposed are
not harmful to their cultural norms and indigenous way of life. The
project has also developed a GRM, which the IPs will be made aware
of, and through which they can lodge complaints so that corrective
measures can be made.
Labour and Working Conditions
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
The risk that the project may cause exploitative labour practices (e.g.
forced or child labour), gender based violence, discriminatory and
unsafe/unhealthy working conditions for people employed to work
specifically in relation to the project, including third parties and primary
suppliers.
14/16
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, the project will include in its ESMP
safeguards to ensure that each technical lead and service provider
ensures that there are no exploitative labour practices (e.g. forced or
child labour), gender based violence, discriminatory and
unsafe/unhealthy working conditions for people employed to work
specifically in relation to the project. The beneficiary feedback surveys
will also include feedback on these aspects and a GRM mechanism
will also be in place to ensure this risk is minimized.
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Community health and safety risks are likely to result from exposure to
agrochemicals, zoonotic diseases, COVID 19, and pollution resulting
from some project interventions.
Mitigations:
To mitigate this risk, the SECAP, ESMF and the integrated pesticides
management plan have identified these risks and proposed
mitigations actions that will be implemented to minimise or reverse
these risks. For COVID 19, some of the measures include awareness
creation and sensitisation on social distancing, wearing of masks,
washing/sanitising hands, and use of M-Pesa/digital money
transactions. M
Physical and Economic Resettlement
No risk envisaged
Project interventions will not lead to physical or economic resettlement
of project beneficiaries or communities in the project areas. The
ESMF provides an exclusion list of interventions that will not be
supported by the project and indicates that resettlement of more than
20 persons will not be supported by the project.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The risk that the project may significantly increase greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions and thereby contribute to anthropogenic climate
change.
Mitigations:
15/16
KeLCoP is investing in small ruminants (goats and sheep), poultry and
bee value chains, which are expected to have very minimal
contributions to GHGs emissions. Interventions to promote
sustainable rangeland and pasture management, efficient feeding
practices, breed improvement etc., are likely to further reduce GHG
emissions into the atmosphere. Moreover, the project will benefit from
a pilot being done by IFAD in collaboration with FAO on GHGs
emissions reduction in the livestock sector, through the use of Global
Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM. The latter will
provide a baseline and an end-line progress assessment in reduction
of GHGs emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The marginalization of women and youth beneficiaries. Women are
more vulnerable to climate change and environmental degradation
because of their triple role in society, and also because they face
discrimination and inequalities in accessing land and water, markets,
technologies and credit.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, the project will establish a strong quota
and target with explicit budget lines for women youth and vulnerable
groups in selected value chains for each training, grant and
investment opportunity. The needs of the IPs will also be addressed
through the FPIC process and the development of IPs action plans.
Furthermore, the SECAP, in-depth climate risks analysis and the
ESMF identify potential environmental, social and climate risks and
proposed mitigation actions that will be implemented to address them.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Firstly, County Governments or indigenous peoples may not feel
involved in project activities when they are being implemented.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, all investments plans and project activities
will be discussed and agreed upon with County Governments during
the AWP/B exercise to secure their commitment. IPs will be engaged
through the FPIC and the development of IPs actions plans.
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Secondly, smallholder farmers, particularly women, youth and poor
households may feel that the project activities are not relevant for
them, in spite of the wide consultations during the project design.
Mitigations:
In order to mitigate this risk, the project will adopt a participatory and
demand driven approach to assess community needs and develop
support packages in close partnership with them.
16/16
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
beneficiaries, target groups and stakeholders can lodge grievances
and have corrective measures taken by the project.
Mitigations:
The project has developed and will put in place a grievance redress
mechanism and a beneficiary feedback mechanism through which
beneficiaries, target groups and stakeholders can lodge grievances
and have corrective measures taken by the project.
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
The  overall  approach  in  the  KeLCoP  project  is  designed  to  embed  an  exit  and 
sustainability aspect in all key project components. One of the first activities at the 
national  level  is  to  assist  the  Government  with  a  National  level  Master  Plan  for 
Livestock.  This  is  likely  to  provide  an  overarching  strategic  framework  to  the 
Government and sharpen its investment focus. The Government of Kenya passed 
a  Livestock  Bill  in  January  2020.  The  project  will  assist  the  country  to  develop 
associated regulations for the value chains in which the project is investing. It is 
likely that the County Governments will emulate the National Bill and its associated 
regulations. This is likely to add to the long-term strategic and regulatory capacity 
at the national and county level. This may not need any further support at the end 
of the six-year project.  
The  project  will  assist  in  providing  a  comprehensive  package  of  support  to 
vulnerable  households,  women-headed  households  and  young  men  and  women. 
The  approach  of  the  project  will  be  to  graduate  households  to  higher  levels  of 
income  as  well  as  transform  subsistence  producers  to  commercial  producers. 
Strong  mentoring  support  will  be  provided  within  the  framework  of  the  Gender 
Action  Learning  System.  This  approach  empowers  the  individual,  enhances  their 
vision about their future and has proved to be a transformative approach. When it 
is  combined  with  a  graduation  approach  and  asset  transfers,  skills  training  and 
access  to  key  inputs  and  markets  it  is  a  powerful  mechanism  for  households  to 
enhance  their  resilience  to  risks  and  improve  their  livelihoods  in  a  sustainable 
manner. Each household will be provided the support for 18 months and thus there 
is an automatic exit built into the approach. 
The  project  will  help  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  county  governments  and 
smallholder  livestock  producers  especially  women  and  youth  in  key  aspects  of 
livestock  production.  This  is  expected  to  improve  breeds  and  their  productivity, 
reduce  morbidity  and  mortality  rates  as  well  as  the  capacity  for  disease 
surveillance,  treatment  and  control  in  all  three  key  value  chains  namely  small 
ruminants, poultry and honey production. All investments in County Infrastructure 
such  as  breed  multiplication  centres  will  be  undertaken  after  ensuring  that  the 
county governments have the technical staff and allocated sufficient operating and 
maintenance  funds  for  these  facilities.  No  investment  will  be  made  without  this 
assurance  in  a  written  MOU  between  the  County  Government  and  the  PMCU, 
thereby enhancing the chances of sustainability of the investments. Similarly, the 
investments in community hay sheds, community seed banks, water infrastructure 
will  all  be  demand  driven  schemes  which  will  be  designed  keeping  in  mind  the 
capacity of the community to manage them.  
The approach of the project towards the marketing component is also designed in 
a manner that is cognisant of sustainability. The project approach to only finance 
those markets which follow the sustainability criteria outlined in the project design 
such  as  the  presence  of  a  Livestock  Market  Association  with  clear  rules  for  co-
management and investing part of the revenue back into market investment also 
strengthens the sustainability of the markets. The project is not planning to invest 
in any other large infrastructure which should fall in the domain of the private sector 
and  is  actually  following  an  approach  that  would  help  the  County  Government 
attract the private sector to negotiate lease rights for many of the defunct or newly 
constructed  abattoirs,  dairy  plants,  poultry  processing  centres  for  which  they  do 
  1 
not have any partners currently.  
The  project  will  follow  a  market  and  private  sector  led  approach  in  which  all 
marketing groups will be facilitated to link with markets and understand the types 
of volumes, quantity and other product attributes and specifications are required 
before any investments are made in enhancing production. The investment in the 
Producer  Groups  and  Associations  is  expected  to  be  based  on  proper  feasibility 
assessment and market demand in partnership with key market drivers and private 
sector entities. The capacity of the producer groups will be strengthened to enable 
them to partner effectively with private sector agencies who will ensure that the 
partnership is professionally managed and is linked to markets. The partnerships 
and  working  arrangements  are  expected  to  be  designed  in  a  manner  that  is 
sustainable and the project will exit from these arrangements once the partnerships 
are successful. 
The  project  will  address  key  constraints  in  the  value  chain  and  support  input 
suppliers, processing groups, transporters and innovative start-ups that add value 
to the producers in the selected value chains. As a value chain development project, 
KeLCoP,  will  require  setting  up  transparent  business  arrangements,  in  which 
enterprises  of  participating  upstream  and  downstream  actors  are  commercially 
viable. Careful selection of beneficiaries, comprehensive business plans, rigorous 
assessment  to  ensure  sound  investments,  cost  sharing,  participation  of  local 
financial  institutions,  and  coaching  and  mentoring  of  grantees  will  increase  the 
likelihood of sustainability.  
The project is designed to use a range of ICT4D such as through e-extension, e-
finance and  e-marketing arrangements. The project is not providing any lines of 
credit to commercial banks but will replicate the arrangements under the e-finance 
voucher scheme which was successfully used by KCEP. It is expected that the use 
of digital technologies will make the use of services, inputs and information much 
more efficient and cost-effective and if these arrangements are carefully designed 
to meet the needs of the smallholders, they will be much more sustainable in the 
long-run. Their sustainability will depend upon the utility and value they generate 
for  the  end-user  smallholder  and  their  willingness  to  pay  the  private  sector 
providers for these services.
  2 
  3 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/2
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$22,906,000
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$22,906,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
2/2
The project is gender transformative and provides a situational analysis of gender issues in the PDR and PIM. Women empowerment will be informed by the WEIA and
the GEWE analysis and application, as well as through household level activities that empower women.The logframe has gender and pro-WEIA indicators. These
include promotion of labour saving technologies and the use of the GALs methodology to promote joint household resource planning and household mentorship.
Women's capacities and economic position will also be enhanced through provision of assets, improved access to quality inputs, business skills, access to market; all
of which will increase their productivity and participation in the selected value chains. The cost tabs provide an outline of the budget allocations that have been made to
gender. An estimated 27% of the total project costs have gone to gender transformation.
Nutrition
The project is nutrition sensitive. The situational analysis looks into policy issues, actors, nutritional strategies, and underlying challenges faced in the nutrition sector,
especially among the vulnerable. The log frame has a nutrition indicator. Nutritional interventions will primarily target women, persons with disabilities and persons with
HIV/AIDs. Value chains with potential to increase nutrition such as poultry and shoats will be promoted. Nutrition will also be promoted during the actual production of
livestock by ensuring fodder and feed are nutritious. Community mobilizers and mentors will be mobilised to promote key nutrition messages and strategies based on
county and area-specific nutritional challenges and strategies to improve nutrition, including promoting bio-fortification of kitchen gardens. Nutrition is budgeted for in the
cost-tabs and takes up 4% of the total project costs.
Youth
The project is youth sensitive. A situational analysis of the existing youth related policies, strategies, including youth challenges and opportunities is done. The project
has youth related indicators. Youth will be gainfully engaged in value chains such as small ruminants, local improved breed poultry and bee-keeping in aspects of the
value chains that generate income and quick returns. The project has set quotas for inclusion of youth and ensure their aspirations and opportunities are captured in the
development of County Livestock Strategies, which will also identify opportunities for youth engagement. Youth will be supported through business skills,
entrepreneurial skills and matching grants towards production and marketing activities. The cost tabs provide a budget for youth related activities and take up 16% of
the total project costs.
 No social inclusion themes
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex 12: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 12: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS 
From implementation of investment projects financed by IFAD and also by other Development 
Partners,  there  are  implementations  delays  occasioned  by  start-up  delays  before  all 
disbursements conditions are fulfilled. To mitigate on this, the project would utilize facility for 
faster  implementation  of  project  start-up  (FIPS)  to  implement  key  start-up  activities 
immediately after the project effectiveness. 
A start up advance of US$ 500,000 has been proposed which will cater for the following: 
(i)  Recruitment of the PMCU staff and setting up of the PMCU Offices. Project staff would be 
recruited through competitive process and key staff hired as soon as possible so as to 
start implementing the start-up activities in readiness for project implementation.  
(ii) Procurement of Financial Management Software and training staff on how to use it. 
There has been issue of full adoption and delays in implementation of accounting system 
in other projects. Financial Management Software will be acquired immediately after 
hiring of key PMCU staff. Kenya IFAD portfolio is moving towards having a harmonized 
financial management software for all upcoming projects. Sun system ERP has been 
selected as the best accounting system for the portfolio and will be adopted for this 
project. It is being used by the other portfolio projects. 
(iii) Initial baseline survey activities. Delays in carrying out baseline surveys has been one of 
the leading causes in implementation delays. Key baseline preparation activities will be 
commenced using the start-up advance. 
(iv) Salaries for the key PMCU staff. This will cater for the key PMCU staff to be hired 
immediately to assist in project set-up and start-up. These includes Project Coordinator, 
Financial Controller, Procurement Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, a 
Driver and an Administrative Assistant. The rest of the PMCU staff will be recruited but 
would be expected to join the project after the initial start-up activities have been 
carried out. 
(v) Operating costs during the start-up period – This would cater for key operations costs at 
the start-up phase including mobility for the PMCU staff.  
(vi)  Setting up of the M&E Systems and training project staff on M&E processes.  
Any amounts that remains unutilized from the start-up advance will be passed on to the 
main credit after authorization from FMD.  
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Supply chain analysis
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 13: Supply Chain Analysis (Working Paper in progress 
developed by HELP Logistics) 
The Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KeLCoP): a supply chain 
management approach 
Executive Summary 
Executive Summary 
The Indian Ocean Commission’s (IOC) 31st Council of Ministers adopted in February 2016 the 
The Overall goal of the Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project (KeLCoP) project is to 
Regional  Program  for  Food  and  Nutrition  Security  2016-2020  (PRESAN).  The  objective  of 
contribute to the government’s agriculture transformation agenda of increasing household 
PRESAN, is to contribute to the promotion of food and nutrition security in all IOC  member 
incomes, food and nutrition security of poor rural small-scale farmers. However, farmers 
islands  (Comoros,  Madagascar,  Mauritius,  Reunion  and  Seychelles)  by  stimulating  regional 
need to readjust their practices in order to meet the needs of large scale buyers who have 
agricultural production and intraregional trade. However, significant investments have to be 
restructured food systems to favor consistency in volumes, quality and reliability. Failure 
made to achieve this regional trade. In the upstream (rural farm lands) segment of the supply 
in market mechanisms (coordination and information) that should ordinarily enhance input 
chain,  improvement  in  infrastructure  and  contractual  arrangements  will  be  well  placed  to 
and output linkages across the supply chain have excluded smallholder livestock and honey 
achieve efficiency improvements. In the midstream (processing and wholesale), storage and 
producers  from  profitability.  For  smallholder  farmers  to  fit  into  these  profitable  food 
processing units for food produce will assist in food loss reduction and enhance operational 
systems,  they  should  be  encouraged  to  take  advantage  of  collective  action,  either  as 
efficiency of firms. In the downstream (retail), improving coordination across the supply chain 
cooperatives,  producer  organizations  or  other  forms  of  associations.  Collective  action 
will  assist  in  demand  planning,  food  loss  reduction  and  reduce  food  safety  risks.  All  these 
enables  individual  poor  farmers  to  attain  economies  of  scale  in  terms  of  size  of  supply 
strategies on investment and improvement of various sectors of this cross-border food supply 
whilst improving quality and scope of produce, which will allow them to engage on a level 
chain will require high political goodwill to foster trade and concerted efforts from all actors 
negotiation platform as an individual large scale producer would. In order, to enhance this 
in the supply chain.  
collective  action,  a  multi-stakeholder  platform  approach  is  necessary  for  the  successful 
participation  of  these  groups  in  the  supply  chain  through  vertical  and  horizontal  direct 
linkages to other actors in an economizing way. Cooperation and timely interchange of data 
reduces transaction costs for actors in a supply chain. 
Preface 
The  Overall  goal  of  the  Kenya  Livestock  Commercialization  Project  (KeLCoP)  project  is  to 
contribute  to  the  government’s  agriculture  transformation  agenda  of  increasing  household 
(HH) incomes, food and nutrition security of poor rural small-scale farmers. The development 
objective is to increase incomes of rural small scale poor livestock farmers and pastoralists in 
parts  of  Western,  the  Rift  Valley  and  the  Northern  regions  of  Kenya.  This  will  be  achieved 
through: (i) increased productivity and enhanced commercialization of three main livestock 
value  chains,  small  ruminants,  poultry  and  honey  (ii)  Increased  competitiveness  and 
profitability of the targeted value chains to access lucrative local, national and international 
markets;  (iii)  empowered  smallholders  and  pastoralists  for  active  participation;  and  (iv) 
Promote  livestock  development  in  an  environmentally  sustainable  manner.  To  improve 
components of this design related to supply chains IFAD Kenya partnered with HELP Logistics 
to  conduct  a  supply  chain  assessment  to  complement  the  commercialization  agenda  of 
KeLCoP. 
1.  Introduction 
Population increase, urbanization and increased income in Africa has enhanced pressure on 
its food system. Among the food commodities entrenched in these crucial food supply chains, 
research  shows  the  meat  sector  has  a  positive  correlation  with  increase  in  population, 
urbanization  and  income.  Kenya  is  among  the  sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA)  countries  that 
matches  up  to  these  population  statistics  with  an  expected  increase  of  1  million  people 
annually up to 20501. In the same vein, livestock and poultry products consumption in the 
Kenyan urban cities of Nairobi and Mombasa (which serve as key terminal markets) account 
for  75%  of  the  country’s  meat  consumption.  This  livestock  sector  contributes  40%  to  the 
agricultural  GDP,  employs  around  90%  of  the  ASAL  workforce,  and  contributes  95%  of 
household income for people living in the ASAL areas2. However, there is a meat supply deficit 
of 300,000 Metric Tons (MT) in Kenya coupled with ASAL regions having some of the highest 
poverty indices in the country. This gap requires a deductive approach in understanding why 
this food system is unresponsive to demand. What bottlenecks exist in this supply chain that 
hinders efficient movement of livestock and its product downstream thus preventing reciprocal 
livelihood improvement for people in the rural ASAL areas? 
With  a  higher  increase  in  meat  demand  from  urban  areas  across  Kenya,  most  large  scale 
buyers have undertaken restructuring of not only the commodity procurement and sourcing 
arrangements in the supply chain but also the financial channels3. Large scale meat buyers 
like  supermarkets,  high-end  butcheries  and  big  livestock  terminal  markets  have  adopted 
various forms of vertical coordination to meet their supply needs. These varieties of supply 
chain  engagement  are  characterized  by  their  end-market  needs  and  may  have  hybrid 
arrangements.  For  example,  high-end  butcheries,  hotels  and  supermarkets  keen  on  high 
quality  niche  meat  products  (e.g.  grain  fed  or  grass  fed  livestock)  will  prefer  contractual 
arrangements with big livestock ranches who have the capacity to meet this tailored need. 
Similarly, urban large scale meat traders prefer strategic alliances with trusted aggregators 
in  secondary  markets  up  in  the  chain  as  they  are  more  interested  in  volumes  rather  than 
quality.  Other  large  scale  meat  processors  supplying  urban  hotels  may  prefer  vertical 
integration to ensure better command of supply channels and in other cases opt for strategic 
alliances  with  aggregators.  These  urban  buyers  who  are  keen  on  reducing  their  market 
transaction costs4 have  preferred working with large scale farmers and aggregators due to 
reliability in terms of consistent volumes, quality, and responsiveness to demand. Based on 
our field assessment characterization of small scale livestock farmers, a farmer averages a 
herd of 15 sheep and goats, and between 50-70 chicken5. Assuming tradable volumes as the 
only constraint to smallholder livestock farmers participating in the supply chain, their stock 
size are quite low for any individual farmer in the rural ASAL6 to attract a rational large scale 
meat buyer who meets supply needs of an urban market that consumes 440,811 MT7 of sheep 
and goat annually. The result of low stock size, which is a function of harsh climate, unreliable 
input support, market failure among others is a considerable number of smallholder livestock 
farmers being locked out of these lucrative chains and instead have to rely on spot markets 
for their transactions.  
1 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2010/04/28/demographic-transition-growth-kenya 
2 Ministry of Livestock Development, 2010; Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAL&F), 2015. 
3 The embedded financial flow of supply chains also determines an urban large scale buyer’s procurement strategy. Delayed 
payment periods as preferred by large scale urban buyers locks out cash strapped smallholder farmers who prefer cash on delivery 
arrangements for their market transaction. 
4 Information, negotiation/bargaining, and monitoring/enforcement costs. 
5 Numbers may be less depending on the severity of poverty. 
6 Pastoralists keep 70% of Kenya’s national livestock herd (KMT, 2019). 
7 https://www.kenyamarkets.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Meat-End-Market-Trends-in-Kenya.pdf 
2.  Results 
When starting a supply chain improvement process one needs a clear picture of how it works. 
Consequently, a detailed analysis of operations and processes constituting the supply chain 
is necessary. Through the field assessments conducted by HELP Logistics, several barriers in 
both  the  input  and  output  commodity  supply  chain  of  small  ruminants,  poultry  and  honey 
were identified. For small scale livestock farmers to have considerable bargaining power and 
attain  improved  livelihoods,  several  supply  chain  interventions  need  to  be  introduced  to 
strengthen their place and position in market transactions. The results of these assessments 
will be disaggregated as per the specific value chain. 
2.1 Small ruminants (sheep and goats) 
The counties of Marsabit, Samburu and Baringo are among the highest contributors of small 
ruminants  to  urban  terminal  markets  in  Kenya.  However,  for  an  agricultural  output  supply 
chain to be attractive in terms of its consistency and reliability, the input supply chain needs 
to  have  similar  qualities.  In  the  ASAL  counties,  smallholder  livestock  farmers  rely  on 
understaffed county governments and an inadequate number of private agro vets to provide 
veterinary  and  extension  services.  Further,  inadequate  pasture  during  the  dry  season  and 
inability to source for high quality breeding stock especially for dairy goat farmers is also a 
significant constraint to productivity objectives. These factors militate against better farmer 
livelihood  thus  resulting  in  high  livestock  mortality  rates,  poor  animal  husbandry  and  low 
tradable inventory for most farmers.  
When  farmers  are  ready  to  sell  their  stock,  market  channel  choice  is  based  on  expected 
revenue, ease of access/location and stock inventory level. Primary markets and farm-gate 
are  the  main  selling  points  preferred  by  smallholder  livestock  farmers  across  the  ASAL 
regions.  These  selling  points  are  also  more  common  with  women  farmers.  In  most  SSA 
societal settings, women are tasked with several household duties that ideally render them 
time  constrained.  Subsequently,  the  fear  of  losing  more  time  travelling  to  markets  may 
compel  them  to  make  price  concessions  by  the  first  day  which  may  be  lower  than  the 
households’ price expectation8 especially during lean seasons. Moreover, with most of them 
having low stock count, preference to sell at farm-gate or primary markets is normally the 
most rational. Through field observation, women livestock traders9 contrarily recounted that 
it  may  take  up  to  5  days  to  sell  their  stock  in  primary  markets  during  the  lean  season. 
Additionally, women traders admitted knowing prices in Secondary markets  e.g. Rumuruti, 
were higher than in the primary market but they would not sell their stocks there as the costs 
of movement were high. Transportation of sheep and goats to Rumuruti by vehicle incurs a 
cost of KES 700 per goat from Maralal. If a farmer does not have enough goats or sheep to 
achieve full carrying capacity of the vehicle, the only viable option remains selling their stock 
from a primary market albeit at a lower price. Field interviews revealed men are more likely 
to aggregate their stock and transport it to better paying secondary market when prices are 
high as, individually, they have more stock than women thus it takes less time and effort to 
consolidate a full truck load of livestock. 
In  Baringo  County,  auction  markets  were  quite  common.  Unlike  spot  markets  in  the  other 
counties  with  no  grading  mechanism,  auction  markets  are  characterized  by  reliance  on 
livestock physical attributes to attract the highest price from various competing buyers. Such 
incentives, spur farmers to invest in improving their livestock as profits in these markets can 
8 This may affect household food and nutrition security. 
9 Unlike women farmers who may sell their livestock to offset household needs, women traders are full time traders who may buy 
goats and sheep for fattening and will actively go to markets severally until they find the best price.  
be 3 times as high for the same size of sheep or goat in a different spot market in another 
county. Another notable feature of these auction markets involved listing of buyers and sellers 
with their respective animals who traded there. This governance mechanism allowed buyers 
to have traceability thus return and seek a refund if the goat or sheep they procured at the 
market  had  unfavorable  qualities  (e.g.  illness)  that  the  seller  had  not  disclosed  pre 
transaction.  
For dairy goat farmers, demand for milk was readily available from their villages and they did 
not mention any challenges selling it. However, getting markets to sell and buy high yielding 
dairy  goats  seemed  to  be  the  biggest  problem.  For  the  former  challenge,  most  livestock 
markets have no grading mechanism hence dairy goat farmers had  difficulties selling their 
bucks at spot markets since they would fetch similar prices to local variety meat goats. For 
the latter problem, farmers incurred high search transaction costs looking for breeding bucks 
and  does.  For  those  fortunate  to  find  a  seller,  farmers  had  to  incur  costs  (e.g.  veterinary 
doctor) ascertaining the level of valuable attributes of the animal. Nevertheless, there were 
cases  whereby  farmers  claimed  that  despite  paying  for  professional  veterinary  doctors  to 
ascertain their preferred attributes e.g. calving doe, they would end up buying does that were 
not expectant. It was also noted that farmers may have horizontal coordination challenges. 
This was observed in Siaya where one farmer had a buck for sale and as she could not get a 
buyer, she ended up slaughtering it. Concurrently another farmer group had been searching 
for 4 months for a buck through a national association in the same county yet they were not 
able to find one by the time of the field visit. 
Across  all  counties,  several  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  various  markets  were 
witnessed. Primary markets were smaller in terms of volumes of animals sold (70-200 heads 
of sheep and goats), number of actors present and number of animals per farmer. Further, 
these markets were closer to major infrastructure such as tarmac roads. Presence of market 
traders mostly men, was also common. These traders bought stock from smallholder farmers 
to  resale in larger  secondary markets. Secondary  markets  on the other hand had a higher 
volume  of  animals  sold  (2000  heads  of  sheep  and  goats),  they  were  located  along  major 
routes that led to urban towns, had a higher livestock count per individual seller, relied on 
vehicle transportation of livestock to tertiary markets, and had a higher presence of women 
traders who bought livestock for the urban markets.  
With  regards  to  livestock  transportation,  sheep  and  goats  being  taken  to  primary  markets 
were mainly given to walkers who took them from the villages. This choice was mainly driven 
by: a) low numbers of livestock per farmer thus hiring a vehicle is not feasible, b) assuming 
a farmer has enough stock size to economize on vehicle transportation, missing access roads 
for vehicles from villages to primary markets were a deterrent for transporters. In some cases 
in these vast counties, sheep and goats have to be walked for long distances, risking animal 
live weight reduction, loss and death. In Baringo, for example, farmer would sell their livestock 
at farm-gate to avoid such risks10 thereby forgoing an additional KES 1,400 profit per animal. 
On the other hand, transportation of livestock from primary markets to secondary markets 
had increased observation of vehicles being used due to higher numbers of animals moving 
to the latter market and presence of better infrastructure. In Samburu, vehicle transportation 
reduces lead times significantly from as much as 3 days using walkers to up to 2 hours when 
accessing secondary markets. Notwithstanding a higher price differential of Kenya Shillings 
50 per livestock head when using vehicles, the significantly reduced risk of loss and death, 
loss of weight and increase in the internal efficiency of the supply chain, the opportunity cost 
of using vehicles as opposed to walkers is low. 
10 Especially during seasons when cattle rustling is high. 
Farmers like any rational economic being are keen on maximizing on their economies of scope 
through the sale of hides and skins. Nonetheless, during our field visits, there were outcries 
from farmers and hides traders on the poor buying price of hides and skin (KES 5 per KG). 
Research from secondary data shows this poor performance to be a macro issue. Kenya used 
to  be  a  leather  and  footwear  hub  of  East  Africa  two  decades  ago  but  over  time  this  lead 
declined11. Issues such as losing our competitive index to other countries like China, Italy and 
Vietnam in all indicators of competitiveness  except availability and access  of  raw materials 
were central. Further, cheaper imports of low-cost shoes and other finished products primarily 
led  large  scale  local  leather  producers  to  down-size.  As  international  trade  is  based  on 
transactions  driven  by  competitive  advantage  of  production  of  a  good  or  service,  Kenya 
focused on exporting semi-processed and raw hides and skin which we continue to maintain 
a competitive edge albeit at low prices12. Unfortunately, this trade in semi-processed hides 
and skin only generates marginal trickle down in the supply chain, most of which is absorbed 
by processing companies, aggregators and very little by farmers. 
2.2 Poultry 
Similar to the input supply chain for sheep and goat, poultry farmers observed challenges in 
accessing  extension  and  veterinary  services.  This  resulted  in  reported  cases  of  high  chick 
mortality  that  averaged  50%  and  in  other  extreme  cases  exceeded  this  figure.  However, 
several large scale hatcheries and brooders have evolved their business services to farmers 
by  offering  extension  services  on  animal  husbandry  and  poultry  management  to  farmers 
purchasing their chicks. In other instances, despite farmers having access to vaccination, their 
chicks would die due to misdiagnosis or late treatment. Inadequate cold chain facilities were 
also  noted  as  being  a  huge  hindrance  to  effective  inventory  storage.  In  addition, issues  of 
adverse selection were highlighted through agro vets selling expired or ineffective vaccination 
to unaware farmers. 
Most  output  market  channels  especially  for  individual  farmers  relied  on  spot  markets  and 
selling in community gatherings such as funerals. For the poultry value chain, farmer groups 
were more  common among poultry  farmers than small ruminants. However, urban market 
and large scale buyer linkage issues were still rife as farmers were unable to meet inventory 
thresholds and this was further exacerbated by missing capacity for value addition (large scale 
buyers  e.g.  supermarkets  prefer  processed  chicken)  to  their  poultry.  On  the  other  hand, 
through  field  visits  it  was  evident  that  quasi-backward  integration  and  off-taking  mature 
chicken from farmers as implemented by a large scale processor in Kisumu County that sold 
chicks, feeds and inputs such as vaccines to farmers and bought the matured poultry at the 
prevailing market price to be a profitable venture for all members of the chain.  
Missing actors in the mid-stream of this poultry supply chain was also a bottleneck that was 
brought forth. In Bungoma, a slaughter house facility built by the County Government with 
an operational capacity of 4,000 chicken a day lies unused due to missing private actors to 
lease it. Such a scenario may be interpreted to  existence  of an unreliable upstream  of the 
supply chain (production) in terms of delivery of required quantities of chicken to ensure the 
efficiency of this facility.  
11https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/22779/Kenya000Leathe0egy00and0action0plan.pdf?sequence=6&
isAllowed=y 
12 Based on https://comtrade.un.org/data/ 1KG of semi-processed hides and skin (wet state) had a selling price of USD 2; while 
that exported in dry state was USD 13.  
2.3 Honey 
Honey production in Kenya is deemed not efficient as most of the honey processed in-country 
is from Tanzania yet data estimates there is approximately 80%  of untapped nectar every 
flowering season. Reasons for this inefficiency may vary from lack of inputs most important 
beehives,  and  lack  of  credit  facilities  among  honey  producers  to  expand  their  apiaries  by 
procuring more hives.  Honey is quite a profitable business with a  kilo selling between KES 
500-1000  depending  on  production  region  and  end  market.  Nonetheless,  honey  marketing 
had two main channels. Farmers would sell it locally to other community members or package 
it and sell to supermarkets. However, those selling through the latter channel were quite few 
with  the  majority  especially  in  Baringo  county  struggling  with  getting  profitable  consistent 
market linkages.  
3.  Recommendations 
Supply  chain  costs  can  range  from  50-80%  of  a  company’s  sales  with  the  bulk  spent  on 
sourcing  for  commodities.  Thus  with  increased  participation  of  supermarket  chains  and 
restaurants in the food system to cater for urbanized cities and towns of Kenya it is rational 
for these large scale buyers to adjust into leaner procurement strategies. Individually, most 
smallholder farmers targeted by KeLCoP may not achieve the tradable volumes and quality 
requirements preferred by buyers however several best practices can be employed to achieve 
this desired transition for these group of farmers into this profitable network. 
To allow these smallholder farmers fit into the preferred roles sought by urban buyers, farmers 
should be in groups to help them consolidate their orders in terms of quantities and quality. 
Collective action, either as cooperatives, producer organizations or other forms of associations 
have a central role to play in strengthening farmers’ position in the supply chain with tradable 
volumes.  Collective  action  enables  individual  poor  farmers  to  attain  economies  of  scale  in 
terms  of  size  of  supply  and  scope  of  produce,  which  will  allow  them  to  engage  on  a  level 
negotiation  platform.  Once  this  has  been  achieved,  by  use  of  multi-stakeholder  platforms 
(MSPs) farmer groups can be linked to large scale buyers, distributors, input suppliers and 
other actors13 in the supply chain. This platforms will provide avenues for reduction of costs 
of economic activities as firms become vertically coordinated and activities previously left for 
market mechanisms (perfect market information and coordination) can be tackled effectively 
and efficiently through this platforms. MSPs if well implemented will reduce transaction costs 
related to sourcing for commodity for both farmers and buyers. To facilitate farmer groups 
participation  in  these  MSPs,  every  farmer  group  in  each  county  will  be  in  a  database  that 
details the production volumes, breed of livestock, type of livestock, location of group, contact 
information  and  approved  vaccination  timesheets.  This  information  which  can  be  put  on 
sharable excel files and e-Marketing mobile applications is crucial as it allows most large scale 
buyers in urban centers to reach out easily to farmer groups of interest after the initial round 
of MSPs. For this link to be sustainable, these small-scale producers should be able to adapt 
in terms of the operations (volumes, quality, food safety systems, consistency and year round 
supply) involved as well as the financial resources14 required and continuous changes in the 
supply chains. Further, MSPs will also assist in firming up horizontal linkages between farmer 
groups and this encourages another level of order consolidation and data interchange among 
groups as need dictates. 
13 County governments should have situational awareness of their supply chains. For example in Samburu, small truck operators 
should be encouraged to attend MSPs as women with lower stock count can be able to achieve economies of scale with a smaller 
capacity vehicle as opposed to large trucks. 
14 Contracts with large scale buyers that show commitment to buy farmer produce can be used where applicable by farmer groups to 
borrow financing from banks, SACCOs among others. 
Source 
Findings 
Recommendations 
Low 
volumes 
Farmers have low 
volumes that limits 
their 
commercialization 
endeavours. 
Farmers to join 
registered groups and 
use them for order 
consolidation. 
Quality 
assurance 
Inadequate 
mechanisms exist 
that may assure 
buyers of quality of 
livestock or honey.  
Information 
management 
Gaps in information 
across the supply 
chain. 
Coordination 
management 
Poor coordination 
and linkages both 
vertically and 
horizontally. 
Input and 
supporting 
environment 
Inadequate inputs 
such as pasture, 
improved breeds, 
and vaccination and 
support services 
such as veterinary 
doctors.  
Uniformity in livestock 
and honey quality should 
be affirmed to ensure 
end buyers are confident 
of a long term reliable 
partnership as farmers 
get premium prices. 
Buyer requirements, and 
production and any other 
information that is 
required to ensure supply 
matches demand 
throughout the supply 
chain should be 
achieved. 
MSPs can be used to 
improve coordination 
vertically and horizontally 
provided information 
management is well 
captured. 
Provision of e-extension 
systems can be used to 
deliver animal husbandry 
services to farmers. 
Further, through farmer 
groups and MSPs farmers 
can use them as 
negotiation and 
bargaining platforms with 
input providers such as 
feed companies for lower 
prices. 
Owner 
MALFC, 
PMCU, 
CGs. 
MALFC, 
PMCU, 
CGs. 
MALFC&T, 
PMCU, 
CGs. 
MALFC&T, 
PMCU, 
CGs. 
MALFC&T, 
PMCU, 
CGs. 
Suggested 
Actions 
Through KeLCoP 
farmers should be 
encouraged to join 
groups so as to 
meet production 
requirements of 
buyers. 
Capacity 
improvement 
through farmer 
groups will assist 
farmers to be at the 
same quality level. 
Through 
participation in 
MSPs, sourcing for 
information by 
buyers will be faster 
and cheaper as all 
farmer groups in a 
county will be 
represented in 
these platforms. 
Participation of 
actors in MSPs. 
E-extension 
systems to be 
developed. 
Farmers to be 
trained on using 
such systems and 
delivering some 
basic health 
services without 
reliance on 
veterinary doctors. 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Interactive Theory of Change
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 14: Interactive ToC (currently partially completed for poultry and bee 
keeping value chains)- work in progress 
Sent by separate link due to size restrictions.  
  1 
  2 
Kenya
Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Score sheet participating counties
Document Date:
06/07/2020
Project No.
2000002339
Report No.
5382-KE
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 15: KelCoP Score Sheet for Participating Counties Selection 
Siaya 
Busia 
Kakamega 
Vihiga 
Bungoma 
Trans 
Nzoia 
Elgeyo 
Marakwet 
West 
Pokot 
Baringo 
Samburu 
Isiolo  Marsabit 
Criteria/Counties  
1 
2 
3 
Security 
Rural Poverty levels (Index 
2018) 
Predominance of small 
ruminants 
4  Predominance of Poultry 
5  Dairy milk - nutrition 
6  ASAL-ARID-Semi-Arid-Other 
7  Rural Population 
8  Potential commercialization 
9  ENABLING ENVIRONMENT 
Total Score 
Ranking 
5 
2 
3 
4 
5 
3 
4 
5 
31 
1 
5 
4 
2 
4 
4 
3 
3 
3 
28 
4 
5 
3 
2 
5 
5 
2 
5 
3 
30 
2 
5 
2 
1 
3 
5 
2 
3 
3 
24 
8 
5 
2 
2 
5 
5 
2 
5 
5 
31 
1 
5 
3 
2 
3 
3 
2 
4 
5 
YES 
27 
5 
5 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
3 
4 
26 
6 
2 
5 
4 
3 
1 
4 
3 
3 
25 
7 
3 
2 
4 
4 
4 
4 
3 
5 
YES 
29 
3 
3 
5 
4 
2 
2 
5 
2 
3 
26 
6 
3 
4 
3 
1 
2 
5 
1 
4 
23 
9 
3 
5 
5 
1 
2 
5 
2 
4 
27 
5 
SR 
1
1  Value Chains by County 
Poultry/SR
*/Honey 
Poultry 
Poultry 
Poultry/SR/
Honey 
Poultry/SR 
SR/Honey 
SR/Honey/
Poultry 
SR/Honey 
* SR Stans for Small Ruminants 
  1 
