Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and 
Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date:  2-February 2018 
Project No. 
Document No. 
2000001501 
4699-MW 
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Fiscal Year 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the Programme area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
B.  Rationale 
II.  Programme description 
A. 
Programme area and target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Outcomes/Components 
D. 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies 
III.  Programme implementation 
A. 
Approach 
B.  Organizational framework 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
D. 
E. 
Financial management, procurement and governance 
Supervision 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Programme costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A. 
B. 
Programme costs 
Programme financing 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.  Sustainability 
iv 
iv 
iv 
v 
vii 
viii 
xvii 
1 
1 
7 
9 
9 
12 
12 
21 
26 
26 
26 
29 
31 
32 
33 
34 
34 
34 
35 
39 
List of Figures 
Figure 1: FARMSE management structure                                                                                  27 
i 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Poverty in Malawi by socio-economic strata 
Table 2: FARMSE target beneficiaries 
Table 3: FARMSE component and outcomes 
Table 4: Risk identification and mitigation matrix 
Table 5: Summary of target beneficiaries 
Table 6: Summary of with and without programme situations per household type 
Table 7: Summary of Profitability Indicators - Household Models 
Table 8: Household Financing 
Table 9: Beneficiary Phasing and Adoption 
Table 10: Sensitivity Analysis 
Table 11: Switching Values 
1 
8 
12 
33 
35 
36 
37 
37 
38 
38 
38 
ii 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: 
Appendix 2: 
Appendix 3: 
Appendix 4: 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Appendix 7: 
Appendix 8: 
Appendix 9: 
Appendix 10: 
Appendix 11: 
Appendix 12: 
Appendix 13: 
Appendix 14: 
Country and rural context background 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Detailed Programme Description 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Procurement  Arrangements 
Programme cost and financing 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Programme Implementation Manual 
Compliance with IFAD policies 
Contents of the Project Life File 
SECAP 
41 
53 
65 
71 
89 
113 
117 
132 
137 
155 
165 
223 
225 
235 
iii 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
USD 1.0 
MWK 1.0 
Fiscal Year 
01 July – June 30 
= 
= 
= 
Malawi Kwacha (MWK) 
MWK 723 
USD .0014 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iv 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Agricultural Finance Working Group  
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Bankers Association of Malawi  
Community Based Financial Organization 
Chief Executive Officer 
Country Strategic Opportunities Paper 
Country and Policy Institutional Assessment  
Chief Technical Advisor  
Economic internal rate of return  
Economic net present value 
Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Programme 
Farm Input Subsidy Programme  
Financial Management Assessment  
Financial Management Division  
Financial Service Providers 
Food agricultural practice  
Gross Domestic Product 
Government of Malawi 
Human Centered Design  
Human Development Index 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Internal Procurement Committee  
Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods, and Agricultural Development Programme  
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II  
Management Information System 
Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development  
Malawi Micro-Finance Network  
Mobile Network Operators  
Ministry Agriculture  
AFWG  
AWP&B 
BAM  
CBFO  
CEO 
COSOP 
CPIA  
CTA 
EIRR  
ENPV  
FARMSE 
FISP  
FMA  
FMD  
FSP 
GAP 
GDP 
GOM 
HCD  
HDI 
IFAD  
IPC 
IRLADP  
M&E 
MGDS  
MIS 
MLGRD  
MAMN  
MNO 
MOA 
MoFEPD   Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning, and Development  
Multidimensional Poverty Assessment Tool  
MPAT  
MSMEs 
Micro, small and medium, sized enterprise 
MUSCCO  Malawi Union of Savings and Credit  Cooperatives  
Malawian Kwacha (unit of currency)  
MWK 
National Agriculture Policy  
NAP 
Non-governmental organisation 
NGOs 
National Social Support Programme 
NSSP  
Opportunity International Bank of Malawi 
OIBM 
Project Concept Note 
PCN 
Pension and Financial Sector Policy Division   
PFSPD 
Programme Implementation Manual  
PIM 
Payday lending companies  
PLC 
Programme Management Unit 
PMU 
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development 
PRIDE  
PSC 
Programme Steering Committee 
RB-AWPB  Results Based Annual Work plan and Budget   
RBM 
RIMS 
RLEEP 
SACCO 
SAPP  
SECAP  
SME 
Reserve Bank of Malawi   
Results and Impact Management System  
Rural Livelihoods and Economic Enhancement Programme 
Savings and Credit Cooperative     
Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Small and medium sized enterprise 
v 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
TA 
TOR 
TSPs  
USD 
VSLAs  
Technical Assistance 
Terms of Reference 
Technical Service Providers 
Unites States Denominated currency 
Village Savings and Loans Association  
vi 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Map of the Programme area  
vii 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Executive Summary1 
Background. Malawi’s population is 16.7 million people, out of which 85 per cent is rural. Two 
1. 
out  of  three  people  are  under  age  25.  Poverty  headcount  stands  at  50.7  per  cent,  with  30  per  cent 
being  severe  poor.  Poverty  is  most  pronounced  in  rural  areas  with  high  rates  of  malnutrition  and 
HIV/AIDS  pandemic,  and  these  hamper  the  country’s  productivity  and  require  high  care  efforts  by 
family  members,  especially  women.  Like  in  many  developing  countries  Micro  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs) sector in Malawi is seen as the engine for economic growth and development 
because it supports and forms the productive base of the economy through production and supply of 
raw  materials  for  value  addition,  job  creation  production  of  food,  revenue  generation  and  ability  to 
create  a  resilient  economy.  GOM  collaborates  with  various  development  partners  to  address  these 
challenges, and FARMSE  has been designed to support  GOM’s efforts in poverty reduction through 
implementation  of  concerted  poverty  graduation  programme/s  and  enhancement  of  rural  financial 
inclusion, with a special focus on women and youth. GOM’s graduation concept is about concentrated 
and  coordinated  efforts  to  move  households  out  of  poverty  on  a  sustainable  basis  based  on  global 
evidence  that  such  graduation  approaches  have  shown  positive  impact  and  can  achieve  long  term 
positive effects, putting beneficiary households on a productive pathway. Rural financial inclusion will 
be  achieved through support and strengthening  of existing community  based financial organizations 
(CBFOs) to a limited extent formation of new CBFOs and lastly through support of innovative financial 
approaches. 
2. 
Economic  context.  Malawi  has  experienced  difficult  economic  conditions  with  recurring 
draughts  affecting  agriculture  production  over  the  past  several  years.  The  sector  is  responsible  for 
33%  of  the  country’s  gross  domestic  product  of  USD  4.3  billion  (2014),  with  industry  contributing 
17.0%  and  services  49.7%.  Real  GDP  growth  in  2014  was  estimated  at  5.7%,  with  official 
unemployment at 6.6%, and youth unemployment over 40%. Inflation has remained above 20% since 
2013 (up from 4.1% in 2007), driven by low crop harvests and subsequent surges in food prices. In 
2016,  food  price  inflation  was  28.4%,  affecting  net-food  buyers  and  posing  a  risk  of  increased  child 
malnutrition. Annual interest rates for credit are around 27% (13.2% on savings deposits).  However, 
following  a  bumper  harvest  in  the  2016/17  farming  season  the  country  has  experienced  some 
improvement  in  some  macroeconomic  indicators  with  inflation  decelerating  to  single  digit  levels, 
reaching  9.3%  and  8.4%  in August  and  September  2017  respectively.  The  exchange  rate  has  also 
remained stable for the past one year. 
3. 
Poverty.  Malawi  is  a  Least  Developed  Country  with  a  2015  Human  Development  Index  of 
0.445, ranking it 173rd out of 182 countries. The gross national income per capita fell from USD 370 in 
2011  to  USD  250  in  2015,  mainly  due  to  a  drop-in  income  from  export  crops.  Despite  progress  in 
HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment, 9.1% of the adult population is infected (2010). Poor nutrition and 
HIV/AIDS  prevalence  aggravate  the  low  rural  productivity,  and  caring  for  family  members  puts  an 
extra burden on women. About 51% of Malawians live below the national poverty line, with 30% living 
in severe poverty. Some 25% of the poor are considered ultra-poor, another 50% are food secure but 
vulnerable to slipping back into ultra-poverty. Another 25% are poor and resilient to falling into poverty. 
Poverty is predominantly rural, with a higher prevalence in the south and north of the country. Female-
headed  households  represent  about  25%  of  households  in  the  country;  57%  of  women  headed 
households live under the poverty line. Also, these households are more affected by food insecurity as 
they usually have smaller resources endowments.2 
Food  security.  Recurrent  droughts  and  food  insecurity  conditions  in  Malawi  have  remained 
4. 
dire over the past decade. With the  El Niño  weather  phenomenon  - associated  with severe  drought 
exposes  some  80%  of  Malawians  to  food  security  risk  or  having  insufficient  means  to  meet  their 
1Final  design  team  included  Abla  Benhammouche,  Country  Director  ,Teresa  Maru-Munlo,  Team  Leader  and  Rural  Finance 
Specialist;  Michael  Mbulo,  Institutions/Partnership  Specialist;  Kwibisa  Liywalii,  Agriculture  Value  Chains  Specialist;  Dixon 
Ngwende,  Value  Chain  Specialist;  Richard  Batamanye,  Financial  Management  and  Procurement  Specialist;  Kunduz 
Masylkanova, Programme Economist; and Oscar Atiim Anaadumba, IFAD Portfolio Support Consultant. 
2 Kassie et al. (2015) Gendered Food Security in Rural Malawi, Springer. 
viii 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
minimum  food  needs  in  any  given  year.  Statistics  for  rural  food  and  nutrition  security  are  alarming. 
Stunting  among  children  averages  42%,  and  in  some  districts  over  60%.  Again,  female-headed 
households are more affected by food insecurity as they usually have smaller resources endowments. 
5. 
Agriculture provides for the direct and indirect livelihoods of over 80% of Malawi’s population, 
the bulk of the raw materials required by the manufacturing industry, and 40% of total export earnings. 
Agriculture is the main foreign exchange earner primarily from tobacco, sugar, tea, coffee, and cotton. 
In  Malawi,  small  and  large  livestock  play  an  important  role  in  the  rural  economy,  used  as  a  form  of 
savings in times of economic shock. Most rural households are net food buyers and do not produce 
sufficient  food  to  meet  their  needs.  Consequently,  households  must  rely  on  markets  and  other  non-
farm sources, such as casual labour, remittances, and humanitarian assistance to cover all their food 
needs.  
6. 
Financial  Sector.  Macro-economic  volatility  in  Malawi  creates  substantial  financial  and  non-
financial  market  uncertainty  and  risk.  The  economy  is  largely  reliant  on  primary  commodities 
vulnerable  to  exogenous  price  shocks  and  natural  disasters,  impart  significant  negative  impact  on 
financial services providers’ (FSPs) performance and their outreach. Inflation undermines the value of 
savings and contributes to high lending rates. This makes credit, particularly long-term asset lending, 
unaffordable  for  most  Malawians,  but  for  the  low-income  and  rural  population  particularly.  Poor 
contract resolution and infrastructure further exacerbate lending expansion in rural Malawi.  
7. 
There  are  10  commercial  banks  in  Malawi,  six  of  which  account  for  over  50%  of  institutional 
financial  assets.  Commercial  banks  serve  corporate  clients,  government,  and  27%  of  Malawian 
(salary  employed)  adults.  There  are  30  Savings  and  Credit  Cooperatives  (SACCOs),  of  which  10 
operate in rural towns. There are 14 registered microfinance institutions (MFIs) and 8 payday lending 
companies (PLCs) serving 17% of adults. There are  two mobile network operators (TNM and Airtel) 
offering basic money transfer and no interest savings services. Informal Community Based Financial 
Organizations (CBFOs) have  an estimated 1.1 million members from all  income strata, of  which, an 
estimated 47% are women. An estimated 42% and 12% of urban and rural adults respectively (most 
salaried employees) use formal financial services. Farmers are amongst the least banked.  
8. 
The main barriers to financial service use  include transaction costs (including cost of travel to 
FSPs), lack of identification, ill-suited financial products, limited income, unavailability/insufficient loan 
collateral.  These  constraints  are  exacerbated  by  relatively  high  banking  costs,  low  financial  literacy, 
and a “fear” among the poor of using formal financial services. On the supply side, commercial banks 
have little incentive to serve the poor as they earn 60% of their revenue from loans to large corporate 
clients; 22% from foreign exchange; 15% from investments (mostly treasury bills) and 6% from fees 
and commissions. In MFIs  and  SACCOs, 100% and  85% of revenue respectively comes from high-
interest rate group and/ or individual loans to low income clients. CBFOs offer even smaller loans with 
higher  interest  rates,  but  distribute  generous  annual  retained  earnings  to  members.  Mobile  money 
developments show promise for rural service provision, to both individuals and groups, such as MFIs 
and CBFO groups/members. For the most part, MFIs, CBFOs, and mobile providers offer very small 
loans  for  consumer  or  working  capital  needs.  Larger  asset  development  loans  are  typically  only 
available from commercial banks. 
The  financial  sector  regulatory  and  policy  in  Malawi  is  relatively  sound.  Financial  inclusion  is 
9. 
guided  by  a  national  inclusive  financial  strategy  elaborated  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  and  host  of 
other  good  practice  regulatory  structures  and  policy  commitments.  Banks,  SACCOs  and  the 
microfinance  sector  have  established  apex  organizations,  and  payment  and  clearing  systems  are 
automated providing safe and efficient inter-operability.  
10.  Policy  and  Institutional  Framework.  The  Malawi  Vision  2020  outlines  the  country’s 
development  vision  which  aims  to  make  Malawi  “secure,  democratically  mature,  environmentally 
sustainable, self-reliant with equal opportunities for and active participation by all”. The theme for the 
Malawi  Growth  and  Development  Strategy  III  (MGDS  III,  2017-2022),  the  country’s  medium  term 
development strategy, is building a productive,  competitive and resilient nation. This theme is in line 
ix 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
with FARMSE objectives. Agriculture and skills development, which are integral to FARMSE, feature 
in  the  five  key  priority  areas  of  the  strategy.  MGDS  III  also  specifically  recognizes  the  need  for  a 
vibrant,  efficient,  stable  and  inclusive  financial  sector  to  service  its  key  priority  areas.The  National 
Agriculture  Policy  (NAP  2016-2020)  outlines  eight  priority  areas  (agricultural  production  and 
productivity;  irrigation  development;  mechanisation  of  agriculture;  agriculture  market  development, 
agro-processing  and  value  addition;  food  and  nutrition  security;  agricultural  risk management;  youth 
and  women  empowerment  in  agriculture;  institutional  development,  coordination  and  capacity 
strengthening). Building on this vision, the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning, and Development 
(MoFEPD)  financial  inclusion  strategy  includes  support  for:  digital  payments,  informal  savings,  rural 
financial  services,  insurance,  consumer  empowerment  and  education.  Other  ministries  including  the 
Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development and the Ministry of Agriculture also include rural 
finance in their strategic planning. 
11.  Rationale.  The  journey  from  poverty  to  prosperity  is  not  a  singular  accomplishment,  but 
continual  evolution  towards  greater  household  food  security,  income  and  asset  accumulation,  and 
livelihood  opportunities.  FARMSE  intends  to  help  graduate  poor  Malawians  along  the  poverty 
spectrum  from  ultra-poor  to  a  productive  pathway  on  a  sustainable  basis.  FARMSE  will  work  to 
support household economic development through access to financial services that are appropriate to 
each socio-economic level of poverty, including social  payment graduation programmes, community-
based  financial  organizations,  financial  cooperatives,  MFIs,  and  commercial  banks.  Meeting  the 
needs  of  rural  households  will  require  new  and  innovative  products,  services,  and  delivery 
mechanisms beyond what the financial sector currently offers. Supporting emerging and encouraging 
new  institutional  efforts  and  partnerships  is  required  to  overcome  the  multiple  costs,  volume,  and 
product/service  design  constraints  facing  sector  development,  as  well  as  overcoming  the  sector’s 
relative lack of experience and unclear risk perception of rural markets. FARMSE will support FSPs to 
develop  demand-driven,  simple  to  use,  low  monetary  value,  low  transaction  cost  savings  and  loans 
products  highly  suitable  for  low  income  rural  households. With  a  focus  on  formal  financial  services, 
FARMSE  supported  value  chains  will  fuel  economic  opportunity  for  smallholder  rural  enterprise/ 
households  on  and/or  off-farm  enterprises,  creating  employment  and  rural  economic  multipliers 
effects.  Support  to  improved  rural  financial  infrastructure  (e.g.,  sector  associations),  policy,  and 
regulation is also required. 
12.  Programme  Area  and  Targeting  strategy.  FARMSE  will  be  a  nation-wide  programme,  its 
geographic  coverage  will  be  clustered  based  on  two  distinct  targeting  mechanisms.  As  such,  the 
programme  will  combine  localized  and  national  geographic  targeting  approaches.  For  activities 
involving  demand  driven  implementing  agencies,  particularly  FSPs,  care  will  be  taken  to  select 
partners  with  a  combined  geographic  footprint  as  broad  as  possible.  The  FARMSE  will  adopt  two 
targeting strategies. 
13.  Target  population.  A  socio-economic  analysis  of  available  data  served  to  broadly  categorize 
poor rural Malawian households into five categories: i) ultra-poor labour constrained; ii) ultra-poor but 
non-labour constrained; iii) poor but food-secure; iv) vulnerable to poverty; and v) resilient to poverty. 
This is the definition adopted by GOM’s National Social Protection Programme.     
14.  The first targeting strategy is socio-economic based. Component 1.0 will support graduation of 
the poor from poverty by targeting both categories of ultra-poor households. The component is based 
on GOM existing graduation model which focuses on concentrating and coordinating efforts to move 
households  out  of  poverty  on  a  sustainable  basis.  The  programme  together  with  the  implementing 
partner/s  will focus initially  on a few  districts  where, based on a criteria to be agreed upon  between 
the  implementing  agency,  MoFEPD/FARMSE,  and  later  scale  up  by  introducing  additional  districts 
x 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
within  the  three  regions  based  on  need  and  cost  efficiencies.  This  component  will  target  15,0003 
households and, 30% will be women headed households and 20%4 youth5.  
15.  The second targeting strategy relies on self-selection through use of financial services and will 
be the anchor for component 2.1. This approach  will tap  on existing and new financial services that 
meet  the  needs  of  target  poor  households  (except  ultra-poor  labour  constrained  which  is  served  by 
graduation),  but  are  largely  unattractive  to  higher  income  households.  This  targeting  strategy  is  not 
exclusive  of  other  socio-economic  strata.  Selection  of  programme  partner  FSPs  will  seek  to  ensure 
the greatest geographic coverage possible.  Proposed financial sector projects will be  encouraged to 
consider  linkages  with  existing  IFAD  programmes  Sustainable  Agricultural  Production  Programme 
(SAPP)  and  Programme  for  Rural  Irrigation  Development  (PRIDE)  or  operate  in  past  programme 
areas Rural Livelihoods and Economic Enhancement Programme. This component will reach 380,574 
target beneficiaries, of which 30% will be adult women6, and 20% will be youth respectively, and will 
primarily target the ultra-poor non-labour constrained through to vulnerable to poverty socio-economic 
stratum. 
16.  Component  2.2  will  focus  on  financial  sector  innovation,  and  outreach  through  targeted  value 
chains,  and  will  reach  an  estimated  37,200  beneficiaries.  Activities  under  this  subcomponent  will 
support FSPs wishing to enter and expand outreach in rural areas and address their (FSP’s) lack of 
experience  in  rural  financial  markets  and  limited  expertise  in  designing  and  delivering  products/ 
services targeting low-income rural clients and MSMEs. 
17.  Total programme beneficiaries will number 432,774, of which, an estimated 30% will be women, 
and at least 20% will be youth. 
18.  Programme Objectives. The overall goal of FARMSE is to reduce poverty, improve livelihoods 
and  enhance  the  resilience  of  rural  households  on  a  sustainable  basis.  The  programme’s 
development objective is to increase access to, and use of, a range of sustainable financial services 
by rural households and micro, small, and medium enterprises.  
19.  Main programme indicators. It is expected that the programme will result in: i) a graduation of 
15000  households  from  ultra-poverty;  ii)  outreach  of  rural  financial  services  serving  380,574 
individuals  with  sustainable  financial  services;  and  iii)  sustainable  financial  services  innovation 
introducing and/or improving five new sustainable financial products, services or delivery mechanisms 
targeting rural beneficiaries. This is expected to contribute to improved resilience and improved food 
security and nutrition to 37,200 beneficiaries. 
20.  Component 1: Ultra-poor graduation model development and scaling up. This component 
will  support  on-going  government  efforts 
in  developing  and  delivering  effective  graduation 
programmes in rural areas to reduce extreme poverty levels among both ultra-poor labour constrained 
and  non-labour  constrained  households.  The  component  will  be  based  on  the  current  GOM 
graduation  concept,  and  will  be  delivered  by  competent  service  providers  identified  through  a 
competitive  process.  In  order  to  leverage  resources  and  development  partnerships,  this  component 
may  also  be  delivered  by  strategic  partners  that  will  be  willing  to  introduce  additional  funding.  The 
National Social Protection Division of MoFEPD who are custodians of the Policy and Malawi National 
Social Support Programme (MNSSP) have been piloting a graduation programme in Mwanza District 
southern  Malawi  and  will  continue  to  explore  as  well  as  build  on  existing  synergies.  The  graduation 
concept  adopted  by  the  GOM  is  aligned  to  the  BRAC  model  that  has  been  universally  tested  by 
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP)/Ford Foundation model. This model essentially has 5 
steps  targeting:  consumption  support,  savings,  technical  skills  transfer  and  asset  transfer.  IFAD 
support will only be applied from stage 2 to stage 5 of the graduation stages while GOM and its other 
3 This number is indicative and achievements and/or challenges will be monitored closely during implementation and action 
taken if or when need arises 
4 This will comprise 10% women youth and 10% male youth. 
5 Even though the official definition of youth in Malawi is 15-35, youth in the context of FARMSE is 16-25. 16 is the legal adult 
age in Malawi. 
6 Above the age of 25. Inclusive of male and female youth 
xi 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
partners will support the stage 1 which mainly comprises cash transfer for consumption support. For 
the  past  few  years,  GOM  has  worked  with  various  partners  including  European  Union  (EU),  the 
German  government  owned  investment  bank  KfW,  Irish Aid  and  the  World  Bank  among  others  on 
stage 1 (social cash transfers). FARMSE is therefore coming at opportune time to build on what these 
partners have done. 
21.  Component 2: Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach. This component will seek to 
overcome numerous barriers to financial services to the rural poor. It will support the development of 
informal and formal financial services best suited to ultra-poor non-labour constrained, poor but food-
secure,  vulnerable  to  poverty,  and  low  income  but  resilient  to  poverty  households,  emphasizing 
savings  and  credit  for  on  and  off  farm  enterprise.  This  component  will  also  employ  financial 
interventions within select value chains to enhance economic returns to smallholder participation and 
value chain efficiency. The component has two subcomponents and will reach 37,200. 
22.  Subcomponent 2.1 - Community based financial organization support (CBFO). Given the 
existence  of about 65000  village savings and  loans  associations (VSLAs) with  a membership of 1.1 
million, this subcomponent will support the strengthening and consolidation of existing VSLAs, and to 
a lesser extent the formation of new VSLAs/CBFOs.  The programme will promote group  lending for 
value  chains  and  use  RLEEP’s  successful  elements  and  partnerships  as  a  starting  point  among 
others with similar experience. The sub component has three activities i) Mapping of existing CBFOs 
and  assessing  maturity  or  state  of  development;  ii)  Building  capacity  of  CBFOs  to  provide 
opportunities  for  additional  skills  and  linking  CBFOs  and/or  their  members  to  formal  financial 
institutions and high value markets. This will enhance smallholder income, asset and some livelihood/ 
enterprise development opportunities; iii) Formation of new Groups. 
23.  Some  16,143  existing  and  5,000  new  groups,  reaching  380,574  households  and  2,587,903 
household  members  will  be  supported,  with  a  minimum  of  30%  and  20%  of  group  members  being 
women and youth respectively. CBFOs support groups/consortia will be awarded performance based, 
multi-year, multi-phased service contracts on a competitive basis. 
24.  Subcomponent  2.2  –  Innovation  and  Outreach  Facility  (IOF).  Activities  under  this 
subcomponent will support FSPs wishing to enter and expand outreach in rural areas. Support will be 
provided  on  a  demand-driven  and  cost-sharing  basis  through  the  Rural  Finance  Innovation  and 
Outreach  Facility  (IOF).  The  IOF  would  address  FSP’s  lack  of  experience  in  rural  financial  markets 
and limited expertise in designing and delivering products/services targeting low-income rural clients 
and MSMEs. This subcomponent will: i) increase access to new and innovative financial services and 
low-cost delivery mechanisms for poor rural households and MSMEs; and ii) support the scaling up of 
proven  financial  services  and  delivery  mechanisms.  The  IOF  will  have  three  funding  windows: 
i) market  research  and  feasibility  studies  to  support  FSP  market  opportunities  identification,  risks, 
market entry costs and revenues; ii) pilot testing of product innovations and/ or delivery mechanisms; 
and  iii)  expanding  outreach  of  piloted  products/services  and/or  delivery  mechanisms.  Prospective 
partners  can  choose  to  apply  to  the  window  that  best  suits  the  nature  of  development  needs.  All 
projects will be cost shared with FSP partners and chosen on a competitive basis. 
25.  Component 3 – Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy.  The outcome 
of  this  component  is  to  increase  the  capacity  and  knowledge  bases  of  rural  financial  sector  support 
organizations,  and  has  three  objectives:  i)  strengthen  macro  level  regulatory  and  financial  sector 
policy  and  institutional  capacity;  ii)  strengthen  financial  sector  organizations/  infrastructure;  and 
iii) produce  and  distribute  rural  finance  sector  knowledge  products  which  enhance  the  outreach  and 
innovation potential of sector stakeholders. The component has two subcomponents. 
26.  Subcomponent  3.1  –  Support  for  Poverty  Graduation  Policy  and  Systems.  The  activities 
will  support  efforts  at  MoFEPD  and  the  respective  divisions  the  Division  of  Poverty  Reduction  and 
Social  Protection  in  Ministry  of  Finance  to  develop  and  implement  coordination  policy,  and  capacity 
related  to  reviews  of  graduation  models  adoption,  and  dissemination  of  best  graduation  practices 
within the GOM and to other stakeholders.  
xii 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
27.  Subcomponent  3.2  –  Support  for  development  and/or  review  of  broader  and  inclusive 
Rural Finance Policies/Strategy. Taking cognizance of the existing policies, the first activity will be 
support for rural finance sector development by way of policy development/review, and research with 
the  goal  of  improving  FARMSE  and  other  development  partner  target  group  access  to  and  benefits 
derived from structured rural finance including greater links between CBFOs and the formal financial 
sector. It will also facilitate formal GOM recognition of good rural finance practices This will be done in 
partnership with the MoFEPD, the Reserve Bank of Malawi and industry stakeholders such as MAMN, 
the Bankers Association of Malawi (BAM) and the Malawi Union of Savings and Credit Cooperatives 
(MUSCCO)  Other  activities  would 
innovations/lessons  knowledge 
management,  financial  training  modules,  feasibility  study  for  a  micro-finance  apex  fund,  and  rural 
financial literacy.  
include,  support 
for  key 
28.  Programme 
programme design are as follows: 
Implementation  approach.  The  proposed  principles  of  engagement 
for 
i)  While not exclusive to any target socio-economic household, some financial tools are more 
appropriate  for  one  than  others.  Graduation  will  target  the  ultra-poor,  while  informal  financial 
organizations such as CBFOs are better suited to the ultra-poor but non-labour constrained and 
poor but food-secure. Financial services offered by formal FSPs are most effective for households 
vulnerable  to  poverty  and  resilient  households.  The  FARMSE  design  will  provide  the  most 
appropriate intervention for each group, including youth, with gender sensitive approaches; 
ii) 
The  programme  will  be  national  in  scope  with  some  interventions  targeting  strategically 
identified districts to test concentrate resources and test/identify effective, efficient, and replicable 
interventions  for  scaling  up.  Where  possible,  components/activities  will  overlap  geographically 
and with IFAD programme areas, to maximize impact and potential for scaling up; 
iii) 
The  programme  will  support  private  and  not-for-profit  organizations  individually  or  in 
consortia,  often  in  long-term,  multi-phased  and  performance-based  partnerships.  Private  sector 
participation will be on a cost sharing basis; 
iv) 
To ensure the GOM’s ability to successfully manage and provide oversight for programme 
implementation, a competitively selected Programme Management Unit (PMU) team, technically 
qualified to manage a financial inclusion programme will be supported with training and long term 
technical  capacity  support;  as  well  as  the  policy  related  activities  in  Component  3,  and  Where 
needed  the  programme  partners  will  be  required  to  employ  high-calibre  international,  regional, 
and national financial sector experts as required to ensure effective project implementation. 
29.  Programme  oversight.  The  implementation  of  FARMSE  would  be  jointly  undertaken  by 
several  agencies  and  organizations  working  within  their  specialised  fields  of  competence. This  calls 
for sound coordination of the different agencies and  stakeholders, which would be achieved through 
the establishment of the Programme Steering Committee (PSC) and the PMU.  
30.  Programme  Steering  Committee  (PSC).  A  multi-sector  stakeholder  PSC,  chaired  by  the 
Secretary to the Treasury, will be established to provide overall programme oversight, direction, and 
guidance.  The  PSC  will  have  representatives  of  key  stakeholders  including,  inter-alia,  government 
ministries,  farmer  organisations,  APEX  bodies,  the  private  sector,  and  development  partners.  The 
PSC would meet on every six months basis to review work plans and budgets, financial and progress 
reports, receive draft annual reports and approve all major programme decisions. The multi-sectorial 
composition  of  the  PSC  will  ensure  FARMSE’s  implementation  complements  rather  than  duplicates 
other  government  interventions  and  encourages  private  sector  participation,  harmonizing  the 
programme’s  contribution  with  the  GOM’s  strategic  priorities  and  development  objectives  for  the 
sector. 
31.  To provide technical support to the PSC a programme technical committee (PTC) will be set up, 
and will comprise the departments concerned with the programme implementation including Pension 
and  Financial  Sector  Policy  Division,  Poverty  Reduction  and  Social  Protection  Division,  Ministry  of 
xiii 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Local Government and Rural Development and any other relevant department/agency. The committee 
should meet every six months just before the PSC or ad hoc if a situation so requires. 
32.  The  Programme  Management  Unit  would  be  hosted  by  the  Department  of  Pensions  and 
Financial Sector Policy Division (DPFSPD), at the Ministry of Finance. It would be responsible for day 
to day management, consolidation of AWPBs, Procurement Plans, Progress, and Financial Reports, 
and will co-ordinate the procurement of goods, works and services. The PMU will manage monitoring 
and evaluation, and provide support to implementation and supervision missions.  
33.  The  PMU  will  be  staffed  with:  i)  Programme  Coordinator;  ii)  National  Rural  Finance/ 
Microfinance Specialist; iii) Financial Controller; iv) Procurement Officer; v) Monitoring and Evaluation 
Officer; vi) Knowledge Management & Communications Officer; and vii) Accountant. Additionally, the 
PMU  will  have  a  long-term  rural  finance  Chief  Technical  Advisor  (CTA)  contracted  to  support 
implementation of Component 2 and 3, paid through the IOF (subcomponent 2.2). The CTA will work 
closely  with  the  National  Rural  Finance/Microfinance  Specialist,  and  together  with  the  Programme 
Coordinator, will develop the AWP&B for Component 2 and component 3. 
34.  Programme 
implementation.  Component  1  will  be  delivered  by  different  specialist 
agencies/providers  and/or  development  partners  in  collaboration  with  Poverty  Reduction  and  Social 
Protection (PRSP) Division of MoFEPD. Component 2 will be led by PMU and supported by the CTA, 
with CBFO promoter organizations, value chain stakeholder organizations and FSPs as implementing 
partners. Component 3 will be led and managed by the PMU with support from the CTA. Overall, the 
FARMSE  institutional  and  implementation  arrangements  will  build  on  existing  structures  and 
mechanisms  of  RLEEP  in  order  to  minimize  start  up  delays  as  has  been  experienced  by  other 
projects like PRIDE. In this regard a maximum of four key staff will transition from RLEEP to FARMSE 
under  new  work  contracts.  The  staff  being  transitioned  will  be  subjected  to  assessment  as  may  be 
required to determine their suitability for the positions. 
35.  Supervision.  The  FARMSE  would  be  directly  supervised  by  IFAD.  Direct  supervision  would 
encompass four processes: i) loan and grant administration; ii) procurement review; iii) audit review; 
and iv) supervision and implementation support. Direct supervision would be applied as a continuous 
process  which  requires  on-going  communication  and  engagement  with  the  GOM  and  PMU.  Key 
supervision processes include: i) ensuring fiduciary compliance with the loan and grant administration; 
ii)  assessing  programme  performance;  iii)  guidance  towards  the  achievement  of  the  programme’s 
strategic objectives; and iv) conducting supervisory missions. 
36.  Programme Costs. Programme costs are organized into three technical and one non-technical 
components:  (i)  Graduation  of  Ultra-Poor  Households;  (ii)  Support  to  Financial  Innovation  and 
Outreach;  and  (iii)  Strategic  Partnerships,  Knowledge  Generation  and  Policy;  and  (iv)  Programme 
Management and Coordination. A summary breakdown of programme costs by components and their 
respective sub-components is shown in Table 2.   
37.  Total  programme  costs  to  be  incurred  during  the  seven-year  implementation  period,  including 
price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at USD 57.7 million. This includes a 
base  cost  of  USD  54.8  million  and  physical  and  price  contingencies  of  USD  2.9  million.  Estimated 
foreign  exchange  expenditure  is  about  USD  28.2  million,  local  cost  is  about  USD  20.7  million  and 
duties and taxes  amount to USD  8.8 million. Investment costs represent 93  per cent,  with recurrent 
costs  accounting  for  the  remaining  7  per  cent  of  the  total  cost.  Programme  management  and 
coordination costs account 10 per cent of total programme costs.   
xiv 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Table 1: Programme Cost Summary by Component & Year (US$’000) 
38. 
Programme Financing. FARMSE will be financed by the Government of Malawi (GOM), 
IFAD, and private sector participants. IFAD will finance 73 per cent (USD 42 million) of the programme 
costs. Half of IFAD funding will be provided on loan at highly concessional terms, while the other half 
of IFAD funds will be provided as a grant. The Government will contribute USD 9.6 million (17%) out 
of which about USD 3.1 million (5%) will be financed from its Social Cash Transfer fund and USD 6.5 
million (11%) will finance taxes and some duties7. Domestic private sector will contribute 11 percent of 
total  project  costs,  USD  6.1  million  through  in-kind  and  cash  contributions  to  sub-projects  financed 
under the Innovation and Outreach Facility. The programme cost does not include contributions of any 
potential strategic partners in the Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households component as this contribution 
will be implemented as parallel financing by the specific partners as when they are brought on board.   
Table 2: Programme Financing Plan by Component (US$ ‘000) 
39.  Financial analysis. Incremental costs and benefits accruing at the household level are based 
on  anticipated  increased  access  to  and  productive  use  of  sustainable  formal  and  informal  financial 
services and are based on prevailing farming practices of eight crop/activity models. On-farm models 
(per  ha)  include:  i)  Maize;  ii)  Groundnuts;  iii)  Soya  bean;  iv)  Rain-fed  Potato;  v)  Irrigated  potato 
w/investment in a  low-cost treadle pump); and vi) Maize on rented  land. Livestock activities include: 
i) goat rearing with an initial investment of two goats, reaching a maximum stock of nine;  and ii) one 
dairy cow. Five Household models were developed to represent expected FARMSE beneficiaries. For 
the  purposes  of  analysis,  households  are  classified  as  being  either:  i)  Ultra  Poor;  ii)  Poor,  or 
iii) Vulnerable.  These  household  types  are  differentiated  by:  i)  land  holding;  and  ii)  livestock 
ownership.  Beneficiary  household  cash  flow  analysis  was  undertaken  and  estimated  capacity  to 
borrow ranged from USD 81 for ultra-poor households to USD 796 for vulnerable households. 
40.  Economic  analysis.  A  base  case  economic  internal  rate  of  return  (EIRR)  for  FAMRSE  is 
estimated at 19.4%. The benefit/cost ratio  is estimated at 2.08. The Economic Net  Present Value is 
estimated at USD 29 million for the programme. A sensitivity analysis was conducted on the EIRR and 
ENPV  to  determine  the  effect  that  reduced  programme  benefits.  The  analysis  indicates  that  the 
programme’s  profitability  is  robust  and  its  main  economic  profitability  indicators  do  not  change 
significantly in response to changes in the expected benefits or costs. The EIRR remains acceptable 
in all calculated scenarios. Switching values were calculated for incremental benefits and incremental 
7 Under the current practice, portions of taxes and duties in the programme costs are reimbursed by the government. However, 
duties and import excises are not reimbursed. This has been taken into account when preparing financing plan.  
xv 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD '000) Totals Including Contingencies18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 8992,4063,7064,3553,2621,1782315,8292. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 1536,2504,6885,8985,7487,0084,44934,1953. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 292193547393345751,6484. Programme Management and Coordination 8527978498238988559846,057Total PROJECT COSTS 1,9069,5459,43511,62310,3019,3865,53157,728Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Components by Financiers GovtGovt cashIFADPrivate(USD '000) taxestransferIFAD LoanGrantSectorTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmount1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 2,0943,0595,3375,337-15,8292. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 3,316-12,28312,2836,15134,0323. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 289-763763-1,8144. Programme Management and Coordination 822-2,6182,618-6,057Total PROJECT COSTS 6,5203,05921,00021,0006,15157,731 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
costs.8  Benefits  would  have  to  be  reduced  by  60%  or  cost  increased  by  166%  for  SIRP  to  become 
economically unviable.  
41.  Programme  Risks.  While  FARMSE  planned  interventions  and  implementation  anticipates 
some  of  the  challenges  facing  rural  financial  sector  development,  macro-economic,  climatic 
conditions,  along  with  unfavourable  political  events  could  have  unexpected  impacts  beyond  the 
control of the programme and/or the financial services/ products developed from programme support. 
Beyond exogenous risks, principle programme risks include: i) slow programme start up jeopardizes 
implementation plan; ii) lack of interest by FSPs and agricultural value chain businesses/organizations 
to participate in the IOF; iii) FSPs/agriculture value chain actors do not source appropriate technical 
assistance; and iv) GOM policy deviates from good practice inclusive finance. 
42.  Sustainability.  The  long-term  success  of  rural  finance  sector  development  is  largely 
determined by how  well the needs of supply  and demand are met. For suppliers, a reasonable and 
long-term  profit  must  be  realizable.  For  demand,  products  and  services  must  meet  a  practical 
household/enterprise  needs  at  an  acceptable  cost.  Moreover,  these  conditions  must  be  met  under 
prevailing  macro-economic  and  environmental  conditions,  both  of  which  present  ongoing  and  future 
challenges for financial sector stability. Investment also requires a stable and good practice regulatory 
and  policy  environment.  Each  FARMSE  component  recognizes  these  challenges  and  has  built  in 
mechanisms to ensure sustainability of outcomes and impacts are guarded to the extent possible.  
43.  Component 1.0 will build on current work being done by GOM and will be outsourced to various 
specialized  agencies  and  development  partners  based  on  their  experience  with  graduation,  and 
where applicable amount of additional funding and/or parallel financing. This arrangement will ensure 
strong  programmatic  processes  and  procedures,  and  will  also  maximize  sustainable  outcome 
potential.  Subcomponent  2.1  will  support  CBFO  consolidation  and  linkages,  and  to  a  lesser  extent 
formation  of  new  groups  based  on  the  substantial  and  proven  good  practices  in  Malawi  and  the 
region. Subcomponent 2.2 proposes a diligent adoption of innovative financial products and practices 
including up to date delivery systems and mechanisms. Expert technical assistance will be provided to 
Components  2  and  3  by  the  chief  technical  advisor  (CTA)  and  where  required  internationally/ 
regionally qualified financial service experts working with partner FSPs. FSP partner participation will 
be consistent with their established business strategy and contingent on co-financing. Component 3.0 
activities  are  critical  to  the  long-term  stability  of  the  financial  sector.  Key  concrete  outputs,  such  as 
inclusive or broader rural finance policy/strategies, coordination strategies, policy awareness and rural 
financial literacy will have direct and tangible sustainability impacts, and improving stakeholder good 
practice knowledge is equally, important to the long-term leadership influence on sector development. 
8 The switching value of a variable is that value that it would have to attain for the outcome of the project to fall below the 
minimum level of acceptability (net present value of the project equal to zero). 
xvi 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Logical Framework 
Narrative Summary 
Performance Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets 
Year 1  Midterm  
End 
Programme 
Means of 
verification 
MoV 
Frequency 
MoV 
responsibility 
Assumptions (A)/Risks (R) 
GOAL 
To reduce poverty, improve livelihoods and 
enhance the resilience of rural households on a 
sustainable basis. 
DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 
Increased access to and use of a range of 
sustainable financial services by rural 
households and micro, small, and medium 
enterprises. 
Reduced prevalence of chronic 
malnutrition in children under five by 
at least 15% (RIMS III) 
Improved household assets 
ownership index by at least 20% 
(RIMS III) 
TBD 
N/A 
TBD 
N/A 
Graduation strategy and systems 
developed, tested at scale, and 
approved by GOM. 
Improved outreach of sustainable 
rural financial services to rural poor. 
 TBD 
0 
0 
OUTCOMES 
Component 1.0 - Ultra-poor graduation model development and scaling up. 
Outcome 1.1 - the capacity of ultra-poor 
households to graduate from poverty, improve 
food security and secure livelihood 
opportunities is improved. 
  At least 80% of targeted 
household attaining food 
security. 
N/A 
0 
167,110 
6,000 
1 
1 
PMU Progress 
reports. 
Annual 
PMU 
PMU Progress 
reports. 
Annual 
PMU 
417,774 of 
which 125,332 
will be adult 
women, and 
83,555 will be 
youth 
Stable political and macroeconomic 
environment. 
GOM monetary/fiscal policies and macro-
economic reforms are conducive to 
poverty reduction.  
Commitment of stakeholders (GOM, 
donors, private sector) to participate in 
poverty reduction efforts.  
Absence of political interference into the 
autonomy financial sector. 
Semi-
annual. 
PMU. 
Models  can  be  developed  to  roll  out 
successful  graduation  at 
(A) 
Stakeholders  cannot  agree  on  graduation 
model. 
scale 
PMU Progress 
reports with 
input from any 
potential 
partner(s). 
15,000 of 
which 4,500 
will be women 
headed 
households 
and 3,000 
youth headed 
households 
Component 2.0 - Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 
Outcome  2.1  Improved  access  to  structured 
and sustainable CFBO financial services. 
  Number of retrained CBFO 
0 
0 
members 
152,223 
(30% 
women & 
20% youth 
380,574 (30% 
women & 20% 
youth) 
PMU progress 
reports. 
Monthly. 
PMU/CBFO 
support 
organizations 
service 
providers.  
Sufficient demand from CBFO support.  
organization (A) Client take up (R). 
  Number of increment rural CBFO 
members. 
0 
0 
90,000 (30% 
women & 20% 
youth) 
36,000 (30% 
women & 
20% youth) 
xvii 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Narrative Summary 
Performance Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets 
Year 1  Midterm  
Outcome 2.2 Enhanced capacity of 
FSPs to deliver demand-driven 
services in rural areas. 
  Number of incremental rural 
clients of partner FSPs.  
  Number of products 
developed/revised 
  Number of linked CBFOs linked 
to markets/FSPs 
Component 3.0 – Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
End 
Programme 
37,200 (30% 
women & 20% 
youth) 
Means of 
verification 
MoV 
Frequency 
MoV 
responsibility 
Assumptions (A)/Risks (R) 
PMU progress 
reports. 
Annual. 
PMU/Facility 
Manager. 
Sufficient demand from FSP with quality 
proposals (A) Macroeconomic stability (R), 
client demand (R) 
PMU progress 
reports 
Annual 
11,160 
((30% 
women & 
20% youth) 
2 
5 
6000 
13000 
PMU Progress 
reports 
Outcome  3.1  Rural  finance  sector  support 
knowledge 
organizations 
increased. 
capacity 
and 
  Number of rural finance support 
organizations supported with 
rural inclusive finance good 
practice knowledge. 
N/A 
2 
5 
10 
PMU progress 
reports. 
Annual. 
PMU/M&E 
specialist. 
Support organizations effectively support 
sector (A) Support organizations do not 
work to maintain balance between 
guidance and commercial dynamism (R) 
OUTPUTS 
Component 1.0  
New graduation model selected for rollout.  
  Number households reached with 
0 
6,500 
15,000 
Subcomponent 2.1 
graduation activities. 
CFBO support organizations expand network of 
CFBO groups. 
  No of groups restructure  & 
consolidated 
  No of groups linked to FSPs 
  Number groups formed 
  No of value chain groups linked to 
markets 
Subcomponent 2.2  
Designing, innovating, and rolling out demand 
driven rural financial products/ services for targeted 
low income households. 
 
Introduction of five new/Improved 
sustainable financial products, 
services or delivery mechanisms 
targeting rural beneficiaries. 
Component 3.0 
Good practice financial inclusion knowledge and 
operating environment provided. 
  Approved Rural Finance 
Policy/Strategy 
  Number of rural finance 
awareness/knowledge 
forums/platforms 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8,000 
2,000 
2,000 
20,000 
10,000 
5,000 
1,000 
2,000 
2 
5 
PMU progress 
reports. 
Quarterly 
PMU/M&E 
specialist. 
Models amenable to scaling up (A) Cost of 
scaling up high (R) 
PMU/CBFO 
support 
organizations 
progress 
reports. 
Quarterly 
PMU/CBFO 
support 
organizations 
service providers. 
Sufficient demand from CBFO support 
organization (A) Client take up (R) 
Quarterly. 
Progress reports 
TSP reports 
FSP MIS 
|PMU/Facility 
Manager 
Sufficient demand from FSP (A) Not enough 
qualified proposals (R) High quality TA not 
available (R) 
1 
4 
2 
PMU Progress 
reports. 
Quarterly. 
PMU. 
PMU Progress 
reports. 
Quarterly 
PMU 
Organizations with key contributions can be 
identified and have sufficient capacity to 
undertake assignments (A) Stakeholder 
unwilling to work cooperatively (R). 
xviii 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
1. 
Country  context.  Malawi  is  a  small,  densely  populated  land  locked  country  located  between 
Zambia, Mozambique, and Tanzania. Its climate is tropical, with a rainy season from October to April 
and a mean annual rainfall ranging between 500 and 3,000 mm. Malawi’s population  increased from 
four million in 1966 to 16.7 million people in 2014; and is expected to grow to 26 million in 2030. Two 
out  of  three  people  are  under  25  years  of  age.9  Life  expectancy  has  improved  to  62.8  years.10 The 
average population density is 177 persons per km² (2014), with some areas in the south having over 
300 people per km². 
2. 
Malawi is a Least Developed Country with a 2015 Human Development Index of 0.445, ranking 
it 173rd out of 182 countries. The gross national income per capita fell from USD 370 in 2011 to USD 
250  in  2015,  mainly  due  to  a  drop-in  income  from  export  crops.11  Despite  progress  in  HIV/AIDS 
prevention  and  treatment,  9.1%  of  the  adult  population  is  infected  (2010).12  Poor  nutrition  and 
HIV/AIDS  prevalence  aggravate  the  low  rural  productivity.  Caring  for  family  members  also  puts  an 
extra burden on household members, especially on women. About 51% of the population live below 
the  national  poverty  line,  with  about  25%  living  in  ultra-poor,  labour  and  non-labour  constrained 
poverty  in  2010,  and  another  50%  are  food  secure  but  still  quite  vulnerable  to  slipping  back  into 
poverty or ultra-poverty, and another 25% are poor but resilient.13 Poverty is predominantly rural, with 
the  south  and  north  of  the  country  having  the  highest 
incidence.  Statistics  for  rural  food  and  nutrition  security 
are  alarming.  Stunting  among  children  averages  42%, 
in  some  districts  over  60%.14  Female-headed 
and 
households  represent  about  25%  of  households  in  the 
country;  57%  of  women  headed  households  live  under 
the  poverty  line.  Also,  these  households  are  more 
affected  by  food  insecurity  as  they  usually  have  smaller 
resources endowments.15  
Table  1:  Poverty  in  Malawi  by  socio-
economic strata 
Ultra-poor Labor Constrained 
Ultra-poor 
Constrained 
Socio-Economic Strata 
Poor but Food Secure 
Vulnerable to Poverty 
Non-Labour 
% of Poor 
10% 
25% 
15% 
25% 
Resilient to Poverty 
25% 
The 2014 gross domestic product (GDP) of Malawi 
3. 
was  USD  4.258  billion  of  which  17.0%  derives  from  industry  and  49.65%  from  services. Agriculture 
provides the remaining 33.3% and plays a key role in the economy. The sector employs 80% of the 
workforce and is the main foreign exchange earner, through export of tobacco, sugar, tea, coffee, and 
cotton. Real GDP growth in 2014 was 5.7%, driven largely by agriculture, with significant contributions 
from manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, and services.16 Unemployment stands at 6.6% (2014). 
Youth unemployment is strikingly high at 40%. Inflation has remained above 20% since 2013 (up from 
4.1% in 2007), driven by low crop harvests and subsequent surges in food prices. In 2016 food price 
inflation was at 28.4% affecting net-food buyers and posing a risk of increased child malnutrition.17  
4. 
Rural livelihoods. Eighty-five per cent (ca.11 million) of the Malawian population lives in rural 
areas  and  almost  all  engage  in  crop  and  livestock  production.  Some  88%  of  Malawian  adults  are 
involved  in  farming.  Whilst  for  many  this  is  primarily  subsistence  farming,  for  33%  farming  is  their 
9 Population Reference Bureau of Malawi (2014). 
10 UNDP 2015 Human Development Report 2014, Malawi summary. 
11 See WDI at: 
http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?q=gni+per+capita+malawi&d=WDI&f=Indicator_Code%3aNY.GNP.PCAP.CD%3bCountry_Code%
3aMWI#WDI. 
12 See UNAIDS at: http://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/malawi. 
13  Labour  constrained  indicates  one  or  more  household  member  is  unable  to  perform  productive  labour.  See  also: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/MWI.pdf. 
14 IFAD (2016) Baseline Report on Food Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice (KAP); and Scaling-up Nutrition Malawi. 
15 Kassie et al. (2015) Gendered Food Security in Rural Malawi, Springer. 
16 Africa Economic Outlook (2015). 
17 Cornia, Doti, Sassi, (2016), Source of food price volatility and child malnutrition in Niger and Malawi, Food Policy; Harttgen, 
Klasen, Rischke (2016), Analyzing nutritional impacts of price and income related shocks in Malawi, Food Policy. 
1 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
primary source of income. Women provide a large proportion of the labour in smallholder agriculture 
but  often  do  not  have  control  over  productive  assets  and  the  benefits  of  their  labour.  The  gender 
productivity gap between female and male managed agricultural plots is of 28%. This is because 70% 
of  women  managing  agricultural  plots  are  widowed,  divorced,  or  separated.  Key  factors  explaining 
reduced  agricultural productivity  are limited access to male labour,  limited involvement in high  value 
crops, and limited access to agricultural tools and machinery. 
Land holding averages 0.8 hectares (Smallholder farmers cultivate on average 1.2 hectares of 
5. 
land  –  30%  cultivate  less  than  half  a  hectare),  with  maize  being  the  dominant  crop  (66%)  for 
smallholders,  followed  by  pigeon  peas  and  groundnuts  (16%  each)  and  tobacco  (8%).  Agriculture 
export  account  for  85%  of  the  country’s  exports,  of  which  tobacco  comprises  55%.  Other  major 
exports  products  are  uranium,  sugar,  tea,  maize  and  cotton.  Imports  are  dominated  by  oil,  coal, 
consumer goods and fertilizers. 
Rapid  population  growth  reduces  family  landholdings.  Land  degradation,18  deforestation,  and 
6. 
climate change all exacerbate food and nutrition insecurity.19 Agriculture is increasingly vulnerable to 
natural shocks. Climate change will cause temperatures to increase by 1.1-3.0°C by the 2060s, and 
the intensity of dry and wet seasons will increase resulting in longer dry spells and more floods. Heavy 
rains followed by the 2015/16 drought related to El Niño left 2.8 million Malawians dependent on food 
aid. Agricultural practices are inadequately adapted to intensive land use and weather extremes. Loss 
of topsoil from agricultural lands is substantial, largely because of inappropriate management. Almost 
all  rural  households  in  Malawi  participate  in  on-farm  activities,  with  more  than  60%  of  their  income 
coming from these activities. Agriculture relies heavily on rains and is dominated by two crops: maize 
and  tobacco.  Most  Malawian  farmers  are  smallholder  producers,  characterised  by  use  of  traditional 
agrarian  tools  and  limited  adequate  technologies.  More  than  80%  of  rural  land  is  under  customary 
tenure. Livestock rearing is dominated by small stocks, mostly owned by small holder farmers.  
7. 
Poor  rural  households  but  especially  the  ultra-poor,  provide  agricultural  labour,  which  is 
seasonal  and  poorly  paid,  especially  for  women.  Women  nonetheless  play  a  leading  role  in 
agricultural production but they suffer the sector's structural deficiencies more acutely than men. Rural 
women´s  potential  participation  in  paid  employment  is  hampered  by  a  significant  domestic  work 
burden, and systemic bias in the market place (e.g., for formal credit). There is limited diversification 
into  off-farm  activities,  through  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)  for  agricultural  product  value 
addition,  employment,  trading,  and  services,  offer  some  opportunity  to  improve  livelihoods,  reduce 
vulnerability for both men and women of different ages, including youth.20 
Youth, defined as those aged 10-35, in Malawi constitute over 40% of the population.21 Custom 
8. 
and tradition entail the submission of youth to parents and other (older) adults. Youth do not generally 
participate  in  household  or  community  level  decision-making  processes  and  their  views  are 
unrepresented in society. In rural areas, youth and younger households tend to be poorer than those 
headed  by  adults  not  only  due  to  the  limited  accumulation  of  assets,  but  also  because  youth  have 
limited  access  to  productive  assets  such  as  land.  This  leaves  youth  in  Malawi  locked  in  unpaid  or 
subsistence farming and poverty.22   
9. 
Trends  observed  in  national  growth  and  development  are:  (i)  increase  in  average  per  capita 
income  is  driven  by  growth  in  the  rural  non-farm  sector;  (ii)  urban  population  growth  exceeds  rural 
18 Land degradation and subsequent change in land use is estimated to cause economic costs in range of 6-7% of Malawi’s 
GDP (Kirui 2016 Economics of Land Degradation and Improvements in Tanzania and Malawi, Springer). 
19 Draft National Forest Policy of Malawi, 2013; see Appendix VI. 
20 SMEs include micro-enterprises and homestead production as well as minor rural processors and agro-dealers that employ 
up to 30 people. 
21 National Statistical Office, September 2008. 2008 Population and Housing Census. 
22  National  Statistical  Office,  September  2012.  Integrated  Household  Survey  2010-2011:  Household  Socio-Economic 
Characteristics Report. 
2 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
population  growth,  but  Malawi  will  remain  predominantly  rural  for  the  coming  decade;  (iii)  urban 
poverty rates increase slightly showing the limited absorption capacity of the urban economy23. 
10.  Financial sector context. There are 10 commercial banks in Malawi, six of which account for 
over 50% of institutional financial assets. Commercial banks served most corporate and government 
clients  in  the  country,  as  well  as  27%  of  Malawian  adults,  among  them  most  salaried  employees. 
Commercial  banks  hold  92%  of  credit  and  89%  of  deposits,  and  are  generally  profitable,  though 
several have relatively high non-performing loans portfolios (some > 20%). There are 34 Savings and 
Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs), down from a recent high of 48 due to mergers and closures. Of them, 
10  operate  in  smaller  towns  in  rural  areas,  but  none  have  notable  agricultural  products  offered  at 
scale.  Most have  community,  or open bonds, but salaried employees form the core membership for 
most SACCOs. There are 41 licensed microfinance institutions (MFIs) classified as follows; (i) Deposit 
taking  (1)  (ii)  Non  deposit  taking  (9)  (iii)  Microcredit  agencies  (31).  Out  of  these  there  are  8  payday 
lending  companies  (PLCs).  There  are  34  licensed  savings  and  credit  cooperatives  (SACCOs). 
Together MFIs and PLCs serve about 17% of adults in Malawi.24 SACCOs provide basic savings and 
small  working  capital/consumer  loan  products,  while  MFIs  and  PLCs  provide  small  credit  only.  Two 
mobile  network  operators  (TNM  and  Airtel)  offer  basic  mobile  money  services,  particularly  money 
transfers and a no interest savings vehicle (short-term, low-value). Informal financial service providers 
such as community based  financial organizations (CBFOs) have an estimated 1.1 million urban and 
rural  members  from  all  income  strata,  of  which,  an  estimated  47%  are  women.  While  CBFOs  are 
informal  some  models  have  proven  durable  with  over  80%  group  formation  sustainability  over  five 
years. Fewer than 2% of Malawian use insurance products and there is almost no insurance available 
for the rural economy or small scale agricultural production.  
11.  A recent FinScope study showed gradual improvement of access to financial services in Malawi 
over  the  last  several  years.  Still,  only  42%  and  12%  of  urban  and  rural  adults  respectively  (most 
salaried  employees)  use  formal  financial  services,  with  only  2.6%  regularly  using  more  than  two 
financial products. In total, some one third of the adult population has access formal financial services 
and an additional 25% make use of informal financial services. Farmers are amongst the least banked 
on  a  percentage  basis,  even  as  they  constitute  the  largest  portion  of  formal  financial  sector  clients. 
They are the largest users of informal financial services, and account for the largest number of adults 
without  access  to  financial  services  (35%).  Savings  and  money  transfers  constitute  most  products 
employed, with credit and insurance use is very limited. 
12.  Financial Sector Business Model Constraints. The main general barriers to formal financial 
sector  use  are  affordability,  including  the  cost  of  travel  to  financial  service  providers  (FSPs  - 
particularly in rural areas), lack of reliable identification, ill-suited financial products, particularly for the 
rural poor, and limited income and collateral for loans. These constraints are exacerbated by relatively 
high  banking  costs,  low  financial  literacy,  and  a  “fear”  among  the  poor  of  using  formal  financial 
services. On the supply side, commercial banks in Malawi earn about 60% of their revenue from loans 
mostly to large corporate clients; 22% from foreign exchange; 15% from investments (mostly treasury 
bills) and 6% from fees and commissions. Operating in this comfort zone, most commercial banks are 
profitable  despite  relatively  high  non-performing  loans,  and,  thus,  have  little  institutional  experience 
and/or  limited  interest  in  new  market  development.  This  is  not  the  case  in  the  microfinance  sector 
where  almost  100%  of  MFI  revenue  comes  from  high-interest  group  and/or  individual  loans  serving 
both  salaried  and  low  income  clients.  Approximately  85%  of  revenues  from  SACCOs  comes  from 
credit  services  and  smaller  amount  from  investments,  fees,  and  commissions.  CBFOs  do  not  retain 
earnings, rather profits earned on high interest loans are distributed annually to group members’ pro 
rata to their savings accounts.   
13.  Savings.  Formal  savings  in  Malawi  decreased  from  3.8  million  adults  saving  in  2008  to  3.4 
million in 2014 (an 11% decline). Banks hold MWK 190.3 billion (USD 456.5 million), retirement funds 
23  Thurlow  et  al  (2015)  Contribution  of  Cities  and Towns  to  National  Growth  and  Development  in  Malawi; World Bank  Urban 
Review. 
24 Note that many adults use multiple formal and informal service providers. 
3 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
K 17.6 billion (USD 42.3 million), SACCOs MWK 3.7 billion (USD 8.8 million), and CFBOs less than 
2%.25  An  estimated  27%,  mostly  urban  Malawians,  save  in  a  financial  service  provider  (including 
SACCOs). This compares to CBFOs which have an estimated 1.1 million members, up from 80,000 in 
2011. Just over 38% of farmers in Malawi save informal institutions compared to 36% in CBFOs, over 
50% do not save in an institution. Some 20% of MSMEs use CBFOs, and 24% and 17% use banks 
and/or  SACCOs  respectively. There  are  over  1  million  subscribers  to Airtel  and  TNM mobile  money 
services, many in rural areas, however, only 25% of accounts are active (used within last 45 days).  
14.  The  hassle,  distance,  and  cost  of  saving,  lack  of  attractive  savings  products  and  inadequate 
electronic  payments  infrastructure  are  the  main  constraints  to  more  formal  savings  in  rural  areas. 
Many poor also simply do not have the money to save, or if they do, they require highly liquid vehicles 
most  formal  and  informal  sources  cannot  provide.  CBFOs  and  Mobile  Network  Operators  (MNOs) 
provide  low  value  savings  products  suited  to  lower  income  peoples’  needs,  while  banks  saving 
products  for  wealthier  clients.26  Rapid  inflation  ensures  short-term  savings  in  any  institution  offer 
negative  real  returns,  particularly  when  fees,  and  transportation  costs  are  included.  CBFOs  offer 
potentially  positive  interest  when  low  transaction  costs  and  profit  distributions  are  considered.  MNO 
services are not legally allowed to pay interest on savings.  
15.  Credit.  Commercial  banks  loans  totalled  MWK  234  billion,  compared  to  CBFOs,  PDLs,  and 
MFIs  whose  loans  totalled  between  MWK  5  and  MWK  6  billion,  and  SACCOs  with  MWK  3  billion. 
Banks hold 91% of total credit (mostly large corporate clients, SMEs, and high-net worth individuals). 
Just  270,000,  or  4%  of  Malawians,  took  credit  from  a  formal  FSP  in  2014,  compared  to  480,000  in 
2008. The average formal sector interest rate is 30% to 45%, with 90% of loans at terms less than a 
year.  Some  21.5%  of  bank  credit  was  directed  to  large  commercial  agriculture,  forestry,  and  fishing 
enterprises, particularly in the tobacco sector. Just 4% of farmers have formal credit, most in tobacco. 
Use of informal credit by contrast has increased significantly in Malawi up from 80,000 users in 2008 
to  over  1.1  million  in  2014.  CBFOs  are  the  most  common  informal  supplier,  providing  small,  one 
month loans with interest rates over 200% on averages loans of MWK 8,250 or USD 15. Some 8% to 
12% of Malawians borrow in-kind inputs from agricultural suppliers.  MNOs have recently developed 
small value loan products, using SIM cards as guarantees and payment history for credit risk analysis 
but are still in pilot mode.  
16.  The cost of formal credit, including transportation, fee, and other related expenses are onerous 
for  all  Malawians  but  the  rural  poor  particularly.  Beyond  these  cost,  collateral  and  identification 
restrictions  also  constrain  access.  On  the  supply  side,  formal  lenders  ration  credit  to  lower  income 
markets and the poor. There are many reasons for this. An inefficient judicial system, preparations for 
Basel II compliance, high costs of administering small loans, and a lack of credit history information all 
conspire  to  reduce  interest  in  inclusive  credit  products.27  FSPs  enjoy  profitable  lending  to  large 
commercial  clients  and  investing  saving  deposits  in  GOM  treasury  bills/bonds. A  small  and  medium 
size enterprise (SME) lending bubble ten years ago, further fuels current conservative lending. Formal 
FSPs  also  have  limited  experience  in  developing  inclusive  financial  services  in  rural  areas,  even  as 
competition in traditional markets is creating some interest in new market development. 
17.  Despite high interest, CBFO credit is highly accessible (e.g., low transaction costs, no collateral 
or  identification  requirements).  Many  CBFO  group  members,  however,  do  not  want/  need  credit, 
because  they  have  no  productive  uses  for  it,  or  because  amounts  available  are  too  small  for 
productive  purposes  beyond  petty  trade  or  partial  agricultural  input  payment.  Moreover,  loans  are 
made available to only few members monthly, so loan timing may not coincide with household needs 
(e.g., pre-harvest, re-school year, and pre-planting). This limitation can be overcome with training and 
25 RBM, 2014. USD currency conversions are from 2014. CBFOs include Village Savings and Loan Association, Village Banks, 
and other types of informal financial cooperatives. 
26  Only  Village  Savings  and  Loans  Associations  (VSLAs)  currently  serve  clients  at  or  below  Malawi’s  average  income. 
Alternative  informal savings  group  options serve  a  range  of  incomes  (averaging  from  MWK  8,403  (USD  20)  to  MWK  32,836 
(USD 79)). 
27  Basel  II  is  an  international  financial  systems  protocol  designed  to  bring  consistency  to  national  financial  systems  and 
regulatory regimes.  
4 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
capacity building. A major benefit of CBFOs, particularly Village  and  Savings and Loans Association 
(VSLAs),  is  not  the  credit  per  se,  but  the  annual  profit  distribution  (typically  in  December).28  Many 
members  participate  in  VSLAs  for  this  reason  alone  as  the  distribution  can  reach  MWK  30,000  to 
MWK 70,000 (USD 60 to USD 100).29 The size of distributions, like the size of loans, is insufficient to 
meet the needs of most emerging high-performing households and MSMEs. Finally, as CBFOs do not 
have  formal  registration,  linking  them  and  their  members  to  formal  institutions  is  challenging. While 
some groups have formal bank accounts, use of CBFO membership for credit risk assessment, group 
collateral, or for group savings remains a potential filled exception rather than the rule. CFBOs offer 
women and youth affordable participation, but do not resolve other challenges such as access to male 
labour, involvement in cash cropping, or access to agricultural inputs, equipment, and machinery. 
18.  Payments and Transfers. About 80% of adults receive their income in cash and 5% through a 
commercial  bank.  Some  95%  of  people  use  cash  for  most  of  their  consumer  purchases  which, 
accounts for an estimated  75% of the value  of all  payments in the country. Only  4% of transactions 
are cashless.  
19.  While cash predominates, the number and vehicles for electronic payments and fund transfers 
are rapidly growing in Malawi. Some 24% of adults use mobile transactions, though most still involve 
cash (e.g. ATM and mobile money agent cash withdrawals). Fewer than 15% of adults in Malawi have 
bank  cards,  used  almost  exclusively  for  ATM  withdrawals  and  accounting  for  13%  of  non-cash 
transactions. Some, 0.8% have debit cards and 0.2% credit cards. This is probably because the debit 
and  credit  card  phenomenon  is  fairly  nascent  in  Malawi.  Six  banks  offer  mobile  services  and  four 
internet banking, but there are fewer than 50,000 subscribers accounting for 4% of payments. Mobile 
money  offered  by  Airtel  and  TNM  account  for  half  of  all  non-cash  transactions  with  3.8  million 
transactions  per  month  for  MKW  8.6  billion  in  2014  (MKW  3.4  billion  in  2013). About  34%  of  urban 
adults,  compared  to  15%  in  all  areas  use  mobile  money,  mostly  the  salaried  and  higher  income 
farmers.  Furthermore,  compared  to  East  African  where  the  mobile  payment  system  is  really 
advanced,  the  potential  payment  windows  provided  by  the  MNOs  is  still  very  limited.  Current  uses 
include: value transfer, airtime purchases, and bill payments. Cashing mobile money value in and out 
at agents constitutes for cash is the largest mobile money transactions, sharing airtime is second. The 
MNO agent network remains small with fewer than 18,000 agents, of which 50% are inactive. The low 
number is attributed to low awareness of potential enterprise of agents. In this regard, the MNOs have 
developed  and  rolled  out  sensitization  strategies  in  order  to  attract  new  agents.  Network  growth  is 
needed  to  attract  more  clients,  but  suffers  from  poor  agent  commissions  and  unresolved  liquidity 
issues, a challenge particularly acute in rural areas as people often travel some distance to get cash. 
One  MNO  is  trying  to  combat  this  liquidity  challenge  by  creating  a  higher  level  of  agent  known  as 
“super agents” and these provide support to first level agents. That only 40% of adults in Malawi have 
access to a mobile phone despite relatively good penetration of cellular infrastructure in the country, is 
another constraint.   
20.  About 1.4 million Malawian send or receive money through formal or informal channels. Use of 
formal  financial  systems  for  transferred  doubled  from  2008  to  2014  but  still  count  for  only  12%  all 
transfers. Family and friends are the most common means of fund transfer primarily for cost reasons. 
Non-formal  service  providers  such  as  Peoples  Trading  Centre,  Zoona  and  the  Malawi  Post  provide 
fund transfer services. The Malawi Post alone had 60,000 transfers monthly, up 45% from 2013, with 
an average transaction value of MWK 7,800 (USD 18.7).  
21.  The success of the electronic payment eco-systems remains constrained by physical access to 
electronic  payment  vehicles,  limited  agent  cash,  poor  commissions  to  agents,  and  limited,  though 
improving  interbank/organizational  operability. The  GOM  has  recently  digitized  salary  payments  and 
will  digitize  social  cash  transfer  payments  and  this  will  help  to  expand  the  electronic  payments 
systems. The  2011  Mobile  Payments  System  Guidelines  from  the  RBM,  which  restricts  MNOs  from 
28 The lump sum payment consists of a member’s savings plus proportional share of accumulated profits from loan income. The 
share is based on the amount of each members’ savings. 
29 This assumes a 15-member group saving between MWK 400 and MWK 700 per week. 
5 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
paying  savings  interest  and  from  investing  aggregate  stored  value,  is  under  review,  as  is  the  MWK 
200,000 (USD 276) per account cap on mobile money value.30   
22.  The  Way  Forward  for  Inclusive  Finance.  Macro-economic  volatility  in  Malawi  creates 
substantial financial and non-financial market uncertainty and risk, affecting the financial system. The 
economy is largely reliant on primary commodities vulnerable to exogenous price shocks and natural 
disasters, impart significant negative impact on FSP performance and outreach. Inflation undermines 
the  value  of  savings  and  contributes  to  high  lending  rates  and  increase  loan  non-payments.  This 
makes credit, particularly long-term asset lending,  unaffordable for most Malawians, but for the  low-
income and rural population particularly. Poor contract resolution and infrastructure further exacerbate 
lending expansion in rural Malawi.  
23.  The development of an inclusive financial sector has been underway for some time in Malawi. 
And  while  strides  towards  greater  access  by  the  poor  to  formal  finance  have  been  made,  sector 
building efforts have created far more access for urban than rural households. The advent of mobile 
banking  and  mobile  money  will  change  this,  and  building  on  gains  made  in  urban  microfinance  and 
CBFOs, substantial potential for  inclusive finance in rural  areas  is  possible  in the medium-term. For 
this  to  be  happen,  however,  the  ecosystem  of  FSPs,  products,  and  services,  as  well  a  more 
comprehensive supporting regulatory and policy environment must be supported to overcome the low 
value, high transaction volume cost constraints to greater rural financial service provision.  
24.  The  demand  for  savings  for  consumption  smoothing  and  unanticipated  economic  and/or 
household  events  is  a  first  order  priority  for  most  rural  households.  Money  transfers  services  (or 
mobile  value  transfer)  is  an  important  complementary  means  to  meeting  the  same  needs.  Working 
capital  loans  for  agricultural  inputs,  as  well  as  small  consumption  loans  are  also  vital  for  managing 
household economic cycles and unexpected events. Demand for larger loans, primarily for productive 
assets, is limited due to both the unfavourable macro-economic context and a typically low household 
repayment capacity.  
25.  Sustainably  serving  high-volume,  low-value  savings  and  transfer  services  rural  demand  has 
proven challenging. Use of the formal financial sector’s branch network and electronic banking service 
is limited and better designed to serve high-net  worth and corporate clients. Banks are  well-trusted, 
but  they  have  a  limited  distribution  footprint  and  are  a  costly  option  for  most  Malawians.  Banks 
strategy also focuses on a small number of corporate clients who take larger, higher-margin loans or 
make larger,  lower administration cost saving  deposits (leading to relatively higher financial margins 
on fund intermediation). The incentive for most commercial banks to expand services to lower income 
client markets is limited given the inevitable smaller per client contribution to revenue. Banking agents 
have the potential to increase formal financial sector outreach at a lower cost, but the relative comfort 
of existing revenue models, as well as a hangover from over lending to SMEs, makes banks adverse 
to  new  market  development.  Opportunity  International  Bank  of  Malawi  (OIBM),  with  its  microfinance 
roots has a range of products and reaches beyond the traditional commercial bank market, yet it too 
has limited scale. 
26.  MFIs  and  SACCOs  have  penetrated  low  income  markets  and  rural  areas,  but  are  limited  by 
internal management and human resource capacities, technology, and capital for on-lending (with the 
exception of FINCA, MFIs cannot legally collect deposits). As with banks, MFIs have not expanded a 
network of lower cost local agents and their product product/service offer is relatively expensive, but 
more  accessible.  Even  given  higher  costs,  these  formal  financial  organizations  provide  low-value 
products  well-suited  to  poor  households.  This  said,  MFIs’  low  value,  weekly  or  monthly  repayment 
group  credit  product  is  not  always  well  tuned  to  the  agricultural  economic  cycle  of  most  rural 
households.  There  are  some  innovations  however.  Rural  Livelihoods  and  Economic  Enhancement 
Programme,  an  IFAD  funded  programmes  in  collaboration  with  MUSSCO,  demonstrated  that 
30 Interest earned or otherwise accrued to balances in the trust account shall not be to the benefit of or otherwise paid to the 
Mobile  Payment  Service  Provider.  Instead,  mobile  money  providers  have  used  any  interest  accrued  on  corporate  social 
responsibility projects. The guidelines also stipulate that the mobile money float should be kept in a trust account with a bank 
“whose usage shall be restricted to facilitating mobile payment transactions.  
6 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
clustering rural VSLAs can lead to the creation of low-income member driven rural SACCOs. Similarly, 
CUMO   links motorbike outreach to individual and VSLA group clients to overcome transaction costs 
in rural areas. The scalability of both approaches remains untested. 
27.  Clearly  there  are  substantial  challenges  to  serving  the  low-income  market  generally,  and  the 
rural  low  income  market  specifically.  These  constraints  and  formal  financial  sector  business  models 
have  precluded  much  outreach  and  innovation  to  rural  markets,  leading  to  a  generally  poor 
understanding of and experience in these markets. This has  constrained the development of optimal 
expertise in designing and delivering products and services beyond the large commercial and salaried 
employee  markets.  Commercial  banks,  SACCOs,  and  MFIs  have  limited  exposure  to,  and 
understanding  of  rural  markets  which  can  elevate  risk  perceptions  and  dampen  views  of  market 
potential, which further decreases perceived commercial attractiveness. 
28.  Community  based  financial  organizations  such  as  VSLAs,  by  contrast,  have  proven  pivotal  in 
the  growth  of  inclusive  finance  in  rural  Malawi.  Providing  low-value  products  well  suited  to  poorer 
households,  CBFOs  have  effectively  penetrated  both  urban  and  rural  markets.  They  are  not  a 
panacea however. The scale of outreach and sustainability of CBFO methodologies can be limited by 
group  capacities  and  on-lending  liquidity,  particularly  in  those  cases  where  group  formation  is 
unstructured  and informal. Those groups receiving support from international/national  agencies tend 
to  do  better.  However,  relatively  small  loans  and  savings  provided  by  CBFOs  limit  household 
economic  impacts  to  consumption  smoothing  and  small,  expensive  working  capital  loans.  Annual 
profit  distribution  provides  larger  sums,  but  not  large  enough  for  asset  purchase.  Moreover,  and 
despite emerging innovations, most CBFO models could be better synchronized with the agricultural-
based economic cycle of rural households. 
29.  Mobile  network  operators  have  the  potential  to  serve  the  low  value,  high  transaction  rural 
market. Mobile money initial rapid expansion was stalled as MNO business models did not incentivize 
a  vibrant  agent  network.  That  MNOs  cannot  legally  offer  interest  on  savings  or  invest  aggregate 
stored  value  to  make  money,  and  this  is  a  significant  barrier  to  the  system’s  expansion.  Lack  of 
products  beyond  short  term  low-value,  value  storage,  bill  and  air  time  payments  hinders  the  growth 
and  economic  benefits  of  mobile  money.  Growth  of  affordable,  accessible  micro  and  small  credit 
products  that  can  be  originated  and  serviced  on-line,  and  limited  use  of  e-money  for  goods  and 
service  payment  similarly  constrains  mobile  money  uptake,  and  economic  impact  as  does  poor 
access  to  mobile  phones.  A  strong  preference  for  cash  transactions  in  Malawi,  and  relatively  low 
levels of financial literacy exacerbate challenges.  
30.  Finding the balance between low cost and agents is the most critical piece to solving the rural 
market financial service puzzle: provision of other services, particularly credit  - both short and longer 
term  larger  value  asset  building  credit  –  is  another.  At  present,  no  single  FSP  offers  either  the 
accessibility  or  the  products  required  to  sustainability  meet  the  needs  or  rural  households. A  small 
number  of  ongoing,  innovative  partnership  initiatives,  many  centred  on  linking  CFBOs  to  the  formal 
financial  system,  suggests  scalable,  cost-effective,  and  profitable  financial  services  are  possible  in 
rural areas. Rural financial service development, as a result, must be viewed in transition from fewer 
physical financial transaction points, to more mobile service delivery.  
B.  Rationale 
31.  The  rationale  behind  FARMSE  design  is  one  of  continual  graduation.  This  implies  that  the 
journey from poverty  to prosperity is not a singular accomplishment, but continual evolution towards 
greater food security, higher income, and asset accumulation. 
32.  FARMSE  will  support  service  providers  as  they  find  sustainable  paths  to  delivering  a  greater 
range  of  low  value,  high  transaction  volume,  and  low  cost  service  solutions  in  rural  areas.  Tapping 
CBFOs’ demand driven popularity is key to growing rural outreach, as they are to creating attractive 
savings/credit markets for formal FSPs.  Meeting the  needs  of rural  households however  will require 
new  and  innovative  products,  services,  and  delivery  mechanisms  beyond  what  the  financial  sector 
7 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
currently  offers.  Supporting  emerging  and  encouraging  new  institutional  efforts  and  partnerships  is 
required  to  overcome  the  multiple  costs,  volume  and  product  design  constraints  facing  sector 
development,  as  well  as  overcoming  the  sectors  relative  lack  of  experience  and  risk  perception  of 
rural  markets.  Collective  meso  and  macro  level  support  will  improve  rural  financial  infrastructure, 
policy, and regulation, and information dissemination.  
33.  Component  1.0  intends  to  promote  a  context  specific  intervention  model  to  help  graduate 
Malawians  living  in  ultra-poverty  to  a  food  secure  existence  and  bring  them  out  of  poverty.  Without 
new opportunities, however, most that do graduate could continue to live in relative poverty, begging 
the question: what is the next step towards greater prosperity? Two key factors stand out. The first is 
access to improved livelihood opportunities and the second, is the capacity to take advantage of these 
opportunities. Access  to  financial  products  and  services  provides  part  of  the  capacity  required,  and 
CFBOs offer the most appropriate financing tools for newly graduated ultra-poor and for economically 
active poor alike.31 CFBOs provide simple to use, low-value, low transaction cost savings and loans 
products highly suitable for low income households. While GOM has already developed a graduation 
concept,  which  provides  guidelines  to  be  adopted  by  partners  implementing  this  intervention,  the 
systems  are  yet  to  be  fully  developed  and  FARMSE  will  therefore  support  development  of  such 
systems. 
Table 2: FARMSE target beneficiaries 
34.  As noted, these products primarily improve household consumption smoothing and minor asset 
building,  offering  less  a  pathway  to  greater  prosperity  than  to  improved  household  resilience.  If 
households  are  to  sustainably  lift  themselves  out  of  poverty  they  will  require  some  form  of  financial 
services. This is particularly  true for households able  to grow their farms and/or  enterprises through 
access to credit and positive interest rate savings. Not all households can or should be expected to 
take this step, yet the more households that can reach this stage, the more vibrant the local economy 
will  be  and  the  more  livelihood  opportunities  will  be  created.  Component  2.2  of  FARMSE  directly 
addresses the provision of formal sector financial products and services to fuel this type of growth. 
35.  The Malawian financial ecosystem is relatively stable and has broad product and service offer, 
but it is not yet willing or able to serve low value, low transaction cost rural demand. Not only does the 
formal financial system lack the products, services, and delivery mechanisms for rural markets, it must 
31  In  addition  to  financial  capacity,  the  economically  active  poor  must  also  have  the  capacity  to  successfully  engage  in  the 
commercial economy. FARMSE will provide support to enterprise or agricultural production development only as it necessary to 
advancing sustainable financial services. Where possible however the programme will work in areas with such support in place. 
8 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
also  overcome  inherent  risk  perceptions  before  it  can  realistically  commit  to  serving  them  on  a 
profitable  basis.  Component  2.2  seeks  to  address  these  twin  constraints  through  provision  of  highly 
qualified  technical  assistance  to  FSPs  willing  to  develop  appropriate  rural  products.  Select  non-
financial service agricultural value chain businesses can also offer financial services. 
36.  Given modest funding absorption capacity in Malawi and the innovative nature of its approach, 
FARMSE requires a seven -year programme horizon. 
Relevant GOM Strategies and Policies 
37.  Policies  and  programmes.  Malawi’s  development  vision  is  outlined  in  the  Malawi  Vision 
2020, which aims to make Malawi “secure, democratically mature, environmentally sustainable, self-
reliant with equal opportunities for and active participation by all”. The Malawi vision 2020 is translated 
into  several  strategies  and  sector  policies  and  implemented  by  programmes  which  are  relevant  to 
FARMSE.  They  include:  the  Malawi  Growth  and  Development  Strategy  III  (MGDS  III:  2017-2022) 
which is a medium-term strategy to attain long-term development. Its objective is to move Malawi to a 
productive,  competitive  and  resilient  nation  through  sustainable  agriculture  and  economic  growth, 
energy, 
infrastructure  development  while  addressing  water,  climate  change, 
environmental  management  and  population  challenges.  The  National Agriculture  Policy  (NAP  2016-
2020)  outlines  eight  priority  areas  that  correspond  directly  or  indirectly  with  FARMSE  (agricultural 
production  and  productivity;  irrigation  development;  mechanisation  of  agriculture;  agriculture  market 
development,  agro-processing  and  value  addition;  food  and  nutrition  security;  agricultural  risk 
management; youth and women empowerment in agriculture; institutional development, coordination 
and capacity strengthening).  
industrial  and 
38.  Consistent  with  Malawi  Vision  2020,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Economic  Planning  and 
Development  (MoFEPD)  set  out  a  six-point  financial  inclusion  strategy  to  address  which  includes: 
expanding  digital  payments  and  informal  savings,  targeting  financial  services  for  farmers  and  micro 
small  and  medium  sized  enterprise  (MSMEs),  use  of  niche  insurance  opportunities  to  reduce  client 
economic  vulnerability,  improving  consumer  empowerment  and  education,  and  finally,  facilitating 
national  coordination  of  financial  inclusion.  Other  ministries,  including  the  Ministry  of  Local 
Government and Rural Development and the Ministry of Agriculture also include rural finance in their 
strategic planning. 
II.  Programme description 
A.  Programme area and target group 
39.  Targeting  Strategy.  Although  FARMSE  will  be  a  nation-wide  programme,  its  geographic 
coverage will be clustered based on two distinct targeting mechanisms: i) selection of participants for 
Component  1  will  be  based  on  pre-identified  criteria  ensuring  that  targets  for  women  and  youth  are 
met; and ii) self-selection through use of low income appropriate financial services for Component 2. 
40.  The FARMSE targeting strategy is socio-economic based as different programme components 
will  target  households  with  different  socio-economic  characteristics  to  meet  their  specific  needs. 
Specific  geographic  areas  (e.g.,  districts  with  clusters  of  villages)  will  be  selected  based  on 
concentrations  of  ultra-poor  households  as  already  mapped  out  by  GOM  for  component  1,  and  for 
component  2,  selection  of  community  group  service  providers  will  be  based  on;  rural  orientation, 
women/youth participation in the groups and low financially included areas. Preference will be given to 
areas  which  overlap  with  other  FARMSE  components,  and/or  other  complementary  government/ 
donor  activities,  and  in  areas  where  some  livelihood  opportunities  for  the  poor  exist  (e.g.,  growing 
agricultural  product  value  chain).  Sites  in  North  and  Central  Malawi  are  of  interest  given  that  most 
similar graduation programming efforts have concentrated in the South.  
41.  Component  1.0  is  based  on  GOM  existing  graduation  model  which  focuses  on  concentrating 
and coordinating  efforts to move households out of poverty on a sustainable basis. The programme 
together  with  the  implementing  partner/s  will  focus  initially  on  a  few  districts,  and  later  scale  up  by 
9 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
introducing  additional  districts  within  the  same  region  and  other  regions  based  on  need  and  cost 
efficiencies. The  component  will  build  on  works  currently  done  by  GOM  through  MoFEPD’s  Poverty 
Reduction  and  Social  Protection  Division  and  Public  Works  Division  within  the  Ministry  of  local 
government  and  rural  development  (MLGRD).  The  former  coordinates  support  that  to  ultra-poor 
labour constrained, while Public Works coordinates support to ultra-poor but non labour constrained. 
This component will target 15,000 households and, 30% will be women headed households and 20% 
youth. Participating households will be selected based on GOM pre-identified criteria. 
42.  Component  2.0  will  focus  on  financial  service  provision,  targeting  poor  but  food  secure 
households, households vulnerable to poverty, and resilient households through organized community 
groups. The programme will facilitate access to financial with a focus in rural outreach, women/youth 
participation  and  on  underserved  or  highly  financially  excluded  areas.  This  approach  relies  on  the 
expansion  of  existing  and  new  financial  services  and/or  related  interventions  that  meet  target 
households needs/demands, but are largely unattractive to higher income households. This targeting 
strategy  is not exclusive to reaching households in other socio-economic strata with  lower or higher 
income. Many financial sector interventions also have geographic limitations based on implementing 
FSP’s  area  of  operations  (e.g.,  location  of  branch/agent  network),  which  can  introduce  some  bias 
towards urban areas. Measures to ensure programme benefits are as widely distributed nationally as 
possible.  Partner  financial  service  sector  operating  areas  will  be  selected  based  on:  i)  commercial 
ii)  agricultural  product  value  chains  with 
activity  potential  (agriculture  and 
development potential; iii) poverty reduction and employment creation potential; iv) financial services 
demand,  particularly  among  target  socio-economic  households;  and  v)  existence  of  complementary 
government/  donor  programmes.  The  programme  could  support  value  chain  financing  interventions 
located  in  urban  areas  if  benefits  of  interventions  flow  substantially  to  target  rural  households. 
Proposed  financial  sector  projects  will  be  encouraged  to  consider  linkages  with  existing  IFAD 
programmes  (Sustainable  Agricultural  Production  Programme  -  SAPP,  and  Programme  for  Rural 
Irrigation Development - PRIDE) or operate in past programme areas Rural Livelihoods and Economic 
Enhancement Programme (RLEEP). 
trade/services); 
43.  Gender and youth mainstreaming strategy. A key element in FARMSE’s targeting strategy is 
inclusion.  Success  in  gender  mainstreaming  and  social  inclusion  at  the  programme  level  will  be 
possible  through  appropriate  FARMSE  management/staff  capacitation  and  operational  policies. 
Women will be proactively offered equal opportunities to participate in programme management and 
gaining access to training and promotions. The programme will adopt a non-harassment policy. PMU 
staff members  will  be  trained  on  gender  issues,  socio-economic  analysis,  household  methodologies 
and HIV/AIDS. Compliance with the programme’s gender and  youth strategy will be required among 
organizations/individuals  contracted  to  undertake  programme  activities.  Likewise,  the  PMU  will  be 
mandated to proactively raise the awareness of partners and contractors to use pro-poor development 
methods sensitive to gender and youth needs/ interests.   
44.  The programme will proactively reach out to individuals, households or groups/associations to 
ensure  women  and  youth  have  access  to  opportunities  offered  by  FARMSE,  including  mechanisms 
integrated  in  programme  design  facilitating  their  access  to  information,  engagement,  representation 
and participation in programme activities and interventions. At programme level, FARMSE will identify 
measurable  indicators  for  women  and  youth  for  each  programme  component  and  sub-component. 
The  programme  will  actively  engage  and  enable  women  and  youth  to  participate  in  programme 
planning  and  monitoring  activities.  The  programme  will  also  ensure  intervention  opportunities  are 
sensitive  to  the  needs  and  preferences  of  women  and  youth.  A  gender  analysis  of  all  financial 
products  and  services  will  be  made  to  ensure  to  the  extent  possible,  the  financial,  economic,  and 
social  impacts  of  services  are  gender  positive.  Partner  financial  and  non-financial  organizations  will 
also be assessed for their gender sensitivity and their awareness on different types of youth groups. 
FARMSE will monitor targeting effectiveness (planned vs. actual men and women reached – including 
young  males  and  females)  using  gender  and  youth-disaggregated,  participatory  monitoring  and 
evaluation  (M&E).  FARMSE  will  monitor  the  impact  of  products  and  services  on  target  groups, 
together  with  key  gender  equality  outcomes  which  will  include  inter  alia:  improved  intra-household 
10 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
relations;  improved  sharing  of  tasks  between  household  members;  and  participation  of  women  in 
decision-making related to use of land for productive purposes. Use of data will fine tune operational/ 
intervention strategies. 
45.  Gender  and  youth  strategy.  A  key  element  of  inclusion  and  targeting  is  the  application  of 
mechanisms  to  facilitate  the  involvement  of  youth  and  women  in  programme  interventions.  A 
Household Methodology adapted for the Malawian context will be employed for Components 1.0. This 
approach  will  equip  targeted  households  to  elaborate,  execute,  and  monitor  a  realistic  household 
development  plan  to  become  more  resilient.32    The  programme  will  borrow  best  practice  strategies 
from other successful IFAD programmes, especially SAPP. The use of household methodologies aims 
to  unlock  households´  economic  potential  and  promote  gender  equality  from  within.  As  such,  the 
approach addresses structural factors hindering the long term sustainability of interventions, including: 
i)  participation  of  men,  women  and  youth  in  household  and  community  decisions  related  to  access, 
control  and use  of productive  assets; ii) promote more equal access, control  and use  of assets and 
benefits  derived  from  household  livelihood  activities;  and  iii)  promote  equal  enjoyment  of  benefits 
associated to programme interventions. Component 2.1 will also encourage  active inclusion through 
household  methodologies  and/or  similar  approaches  via  CBFO  group  selection/formation  methods 
employed by CBFO support organizations. As this subcomponent, will be demand driven, there is no 
guarantee as to the nature of such targeting, though inclusion strategies will be strongly encouraged. 
46.  Target  groups.  FARMSE  categorizes  rural  households  as:  i)  labour  constrained  ultra-poor; 
ii) non-labour constrained ultra-poor; iii) food secure but poor; iv) vulnerable; and v) resilient.33   
47.  The  groups  represent  a  continuum,  characterized  by  diverging  levels  of  poverty/  wealth, 
vulnerability  and  resilience.  The  first  two  categories  (ultra-poor,  labour  constrained  and  non-labour 
constrained households) represent those living under extreme/severe food poverty as they are unable 
to  meet  basic  food  needs.  The  third  category,  food  secure  but  poor  households,  represents 
households living under the poverty line that are food secure but unable to meet all other basic needs. 
Together, these three categories represent 50.7% of the Malawian population living under the national 
poverty  line.  Vulnerable  households  are  the  economically  active,  whose  performance  in  agricultural 
activity  allows  for  the  regular  sale  of  produce  in  markets  and  the  use  of  cheap  labour  from  poorer 
households.  These  economically  active  households  tend  to  have  additional  small  complementary 
sources of income. While over the poverty line, these households are vulnerable to shocks which can 
result in loss of assets and falling back into poverty. 
48.  Recognizing the role played by financial inclusion in poverty alleviation, FARMSE was designed 
to  meet  the  financial  inclusion  needs  of  the  first  four  categories  of  poor  and  vulnerable  households, 
and  within  these,  the  condition  of  women  and  youth  who  are  more  likely  to  be  excluded  without 
specific targeting efforts.   
49. 
In  addition  to  needing  to  meet  food  consumption  needs,  very  poor  households  require 
productive assets to develop livelihood activities. Savings and access to small credit supports such a 
transition.  CFBOs play  a crucial role  in supporting  households  living under the  poverty  line  who are 
food secure and vulnerable to poverty for consumption needs, livelihoods enhancement, and meeting 
foreseen  and  unforeseen  education  or  health  related  expenses.  Credit  and  savings  also  enables 
these  households,  as  well  as  households  vulnerable  to  poverty,  to  strengthen  their  livelihood 
strategies.  Formal  FSPs,  such  as  SACCOs  and  MFIs,  offer  more  economically  active  and  resilient 
households the possibility of accessing funds to  build stronger and or diversified livelihood activities, 
including those in agricultural or micro/small enterprise.   
50.  Component 1.0 will target, 15,000 ultra-poor households, of these 30% will be women headed 
households and 20%  youth. Component 2.1 focuses on CBFO group expansion and innovation and 
will  reach  380,574  target  beneficiaries  through  4-5  support/promoter  institutions.  20%  of  target 
32 IFAD, October 2014. Household Methodologies: Harnessing the Family´s Potential for Change. Gender, Targeting and Social 
Inclusion. 
33  While  similar,  these  five  categories  cannot  be  strictly  equated  to  the  five  socio-economic  quintiles  used  in  national  level 
household surveys. 
11 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
beneficiaries will be youth and 30% women. Component 2.2 will through more formal financial service 
providers reach an estimated 37,200 target beneficiaries of which an estimated  30% will be women, 
and at least 20% will be youth. 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
51.  The  overall  goal  of  FARMSE  is  to  reduce  poverty,  improve  livelihoods  and  enhance  the 
resilience of rural households on a sustainable basis.  
52.  The  programme’s  development  objective  is  to  increase  access  to  and  use  of  a  range  of 
sustainable  financial  services  by  rural  households  and  micro,  small,  and  medium  enterprises.  This 
programme development objective will be assessed through two indicators:  
i)  A graduation model adopted, rolled out at scale, and approved by GOM. 
ii) 
Improved outreach of sustainable rural financial services to rural poor.  
C.  Outcomes/Components 
Outcomes 
53.  FARMSE has three components and related outcomes as set out in Table 3 below.  
54.  Main indicators would include: 
i)  At impact level: Reduced prevalence of chronic malnutrition in children under five (RIMS III); 
Improved household assets ownership index (RIMS III); Smallholder households report to cope 
with effects of climate change (RIMS 1.8.5); 
ii)  At the output level: graduation strategy and system, adopted and implemented; restructured/ 
strengthened  community  based  financial  organizations,  introduction  of  sustainable  financial 
products,  services  or  delivery  mechanisms  targeting  rural  beneficiaries,  number  of  individuals 
served  with  sustainable  financial  services,  increase  in  savings  and  increase  in  income 
generating activities. 
Table 3: FARMSE component and outcomes 
Component 
Component 1.0 
Outcome 
1.1  The  capacity  of  ultra-poor  households  to  graduate  from  poverty, 
improve  food  security  and  secure  livelihood  opportunities  is 
improved. 
1.2  The  capacity  of  ultra-poor  women  headed  households  and  youth 
graduate from poverty is improved. 
2.1 
Improved  access  to  structured  and  sustainable  CBFO  financial 
services.  
2.2  Enhanced  capacity  of  FSPs  to  deliver  demand-driven  services  in 
Component 2.0 
rural areas.  
2.3 
Improved  access  to  sustainable  financial  services  to  women  and 
youth. 
3.1  New rural policy framework developed. 
Component 3.0 
3.2  Rural 
finance  sector  support  organizations  capacity  and 
knowledge increased. 
iii)  At outcome levels:  
(i)  Component  1.0:  i)  number  of  targeted  household  attaining  food  security;  ii)  number  of 
women headed households and youth attaining food security;  
12 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
(ii)  Component  2.0:  i)  number  of  increment  rural  CBFO  members;  ii)  number  of  CBFO 
members  linked  to  FSP  services;  iii)  incremental  rural  clients  of  partner  FSPs; 
iv) increased  CBFO  and  FSP  savings;  v)  increase  in  number  of  income  generating 
activities and vi) improved access to sustainable financial services to women and youth.  
(iii)  Component 3: i) Number of policies and systems developed; ii) Number of rural finance 
support organizations supported with rural inclusive finance good practice knowledge. 
Components 
Component 1.0 - Ultra-poor graduation model development and scaling-up  
55.  The outcomes of this component are: i) the capacity of ultra-poor households to graduate from 
poverty, improve food security and secure livelihood opportunities is improved; and ii) the capacity of 
ultra-poor women headed households and youth graduate from poverty is improved. The objective of 
the  component  is  to  develop  and  test  at  scale  a  cost-effective,  replicable  model(s)  to  graduate 
households from ultra-poverty and food insecurity into sustainable, self-reliant livelihoods.  
56.  This component is divided into two stages: selection of operational districts, based on existing 
GOM poverty statistics, and in collaboration  with  EPD, selection  and assessment of qualifying  ultra-
poor households; Roll out the graduation process. Both stages of the component will be implemented 
by specialized agencies and/or strategic partners with oversight from of the PMU. 
57.  This  model  includes  elements  of  household  methodologies  to  address  inclusive  household 
planning  and  the  promotion  of  gender  equality  for  strengthen  economic  household  potential.  In  the 
course of implementation model will also seek to:  
improve  applicability 
i) 
households;  
for 
labour  constrained  and  non-labour  constrained  ultra-poor 
ii) encourage household planning and improvement of intra-household relations;  
iii)  incorporate  effective  livelihood  improvement  measures  or  establishing  effective  synergies 
with 
livelihood  programmes 
(e.g.,  value  chain  programmes 
in same area); and  
Key  Features  of  the  Graduation  Model  for  Ultra-Poor 
Households.  The  growing  levels  of  ultra-poverty  in  Malawi  calls 
for the need to find effective graduation pathways to sustainable 
livelihoods 
for  ultra-poor  households.  Consistent  with  best 
international practise, models developed for Malawi could include 
the following:  
address 
key 
iv) 
factors  affecting 
vulnerability 
household resilience to shocks.  
other 
in 
support 
implementation 
to markets, basic business skills;  
i)  Funds for meeting food security needs;  
ii)  Support for livelihood improvement such as training, linkages 
iii)  Support through regular household mentoring, including inter 
alia:  addressing  key  information  gaps  to  support  household 
behaviour  change 
to  reduce  vulnerability  and  support 
engagement  in  livelihood  activities  (e.g.,  HIV/AIDS,  food 
production  and/  or  security  issues,  nutrition,  linkages  to 
relevant or community groups); 
58.  The  specialized  implementing 
agencies  may  subcontract  qualified 
national  and/or  international  agencies 
to 
of 
graduation.  Applicants  will  have 
experience 
substantial 
the 
graduation/ 
of 
implementation 
community  development 
initiatives 
and  proven  operational  capacity  in 
Malawi.  Preference  will  be  given  to 
agencies  with  a  record  managing 
rigorous  community  level  processes 
and  household 
interventions. 
Experience  and  interest  in  enhancing 
capacities  around  gender  and  youth 
programming  will  also  be  required.  Alone,  or  in  partnership  with  another  organizations,  selected 
partner organizations’ will implement the proposed model approved by the programme.  
iv)  Providing  matching  grants/  capital  investment  to  enhance 
v)  Facilitating engagement in savings and credit groups or other 
realistic  and  viable  national 
development plan. 
financial services. 
livelihood activity; 
vi)  Support 
livelihood 
level 
for 
13 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
59.  A longitudinal survey with the baseline provided  at the start  will also be commissioned for the 
expansion/scaling  up  stage  based  on  what  GOM  and  its  partners  have  already  done  in  regard  to 
social  transfers.  The  study  will  measure  and  track  the  impact  of  the  graduation  model  both  during 
implementation and after. It will assess the degree to which household graduate from poverty and if 
changes are sustainable. A research team with competencies and experience like those outlined for 
the longitudinal study in the first stage will managed the research.  
60.  Roll  out  of  effective  graduation  model.  The  roll  out  will  deploy  the  approved  programme 
model at scale to expand programme benefits and test replicability in different districts and regions. A 
total  of  15,000  households  will  be  targeted,  of  which,  approximately  30%  will  be  women  and  20% 
youth headed households. Roll out sites will be selected based on representatively of large sections 
of  rural  Malawi  and  opportunities  for  household  livelihood  development.  The  implementation  of  this 
stage  will  be  contracted  to  service  providers  depending  on  the  different  stages  of  implementation. 
Grantees will be selected based on experience, their knowledge of gender and youth, and a special 
emphasis  on  a  capacity  to  manage  small  to  medium  community  programmes.  FARMSE  will 
commission  a  qualitative  study  during  the  roll  out  stage  to  assess  both  the  process  and  impact  of 
implementation. 
It  is  envisaged  that  households  will  graduate  between  36  months. A  qualitative  ex-post  study 
61. 
will  be  undertaken  among  the  graduating  households,  and  this  study  will  provide  an  opportunity  to 
learn  about  the  long-term  effects  and  sustainability  of  programme  interventions.  The  study  will  be 
implemented by a professional or firm with proven experience in qualitative inquiry and knowledge of 
the  Malawian  context.  They  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with  the  GOM  and  the  implementing 
agencies. As with all other service providers, candidates will be chosen through a competitive bidding 
process. 
Component 2.0 – Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 
Subcomponent 2.1 - Community based financial organization support 
62.  The  outcome  of  this  subcomponent  is  improved  rural  financial  access  through  existing,  new 
and  innovative  informal  community  based  financial  organizations  savings  and  loans  products.34 The 
objective is to support CFBOs expanded outreach to poor but food secure households, households 
vulnerable to poverty, and resilient households in rural Malawi.  
63.  This sub-component has three activities: i) Mapping of existing CBFOs and assessing maturity 
status;  ii)  restructuring  and  consolidation  of  CBFOs;  provide  opportunities  to  additional  skills  and 
linking CBFOs and/or their members to formal financial institutions and high value markets. This will 
enhance  smallholder  income,  asset  and  some  livelihood/enterprise  development  opportunities; 
iii) Formation of new Groups.  
64.  Activity  1:  VSLAs  have  had  great  success  in  Malawi,  promoting  savings  amongst  rural 
populations. According to the NSFI (MoF, 2017) the number of members have grown from 86,000 in 
2008 to 1.1 million in 2014. The first activity will take stock of the existing CBFOs (VSLAs, SILC, etc.), 
assess  their  capacity  and  their  spread.  This  will  include  641  VSLAs  mobilized  under  the  IFAD 
supported  RLEEP  with  10,684  members.  Those  groups  that  will  be  found  to  be  stable  will  receive 
support  to  improve  their  internal  capacity,  processes.  It  is  estimated  that  there  are  about  65000 
VSLAs in Malawi, which have been formed with support from various NGOs.  
65.  Activity 2: This activity will support the selection and restructuring and consolidation of CBFOs. 
In this activity, 4 to 5 VSLA/CBFO support organizations, will receive a matching grant to be used in 
for  selection  and  restructuring  of  16,143  VSLAs  with  a  membership  of  290,574  individual  members 
representing  households  with  1,975,903  people  of  which  30%  of  the  members  will  be  women  with 
34 Informal CBFOs are commonly referred to as Village Savings and Loan Associations. CBFOs have two defining characters. 
First, they  are  informal,  or  unregulated  by  a  government  agency. Second, they  are  formed  and managed  by  individuals  who 
come  together  voluntarily.  There  many  different  CBFO  models,  many  like  VSLAs,  and  can  include  informal  cooperative 
associations, village bank models, or variations of the VSLA model. See: IFAD, How to do Support community-based financial 
organizations, IFAD, 2014. 
14 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
20% youth. To ensure the aspect of women and youth is not subsumed in normal programming, the 
support  organizations  will  be  assessed  for  experience  and  knowledge  of  gender  and  youth 
differentiation. Also, in order to ensure a common approach by the selected institutions, FARMSE will 
support GOM in strengthening the mandate of the  VSLA sector-working group  to provide guidelines 
and realign formation and consolidation approaches. 
66.  The "VSLA plus" model will address inter alia agricultural and off-farm enterprise development, 
and  group  and  member  linkages  to  the  formal  financial  sector.  The  development  of  agricultural 
enterprises  will  build  on  the  experiences  and  lessons  from  RLEEP  through  the  value  chain 
development. RLEEP supported development of seven value chains namely: potato, groundnut, soya, 
dairy,  sunflower,  honey  and  beef.  Farmer  groups  supported  in  these  value  chains  have  also  been 
assisted to create  VSLAs.  Some VSLAs  have been successfully  linked to  MFIs  and formal financial 
markets while others have been consolidated to form SACCOs. These are the potential  farmer value 
chains to be supported under FARMSE in collaboration with other experienced lead agencies such as 
Canadian Cooperative Association (CCA) and Farmers Union of Malawi (FUM). The examples of the 
organizations  are  just  indicative  to  assist  the  PMU  look  in  the  right  direction  of  partnerships.  There 
could  also  be  many  other  experienced  agencies  that  FARMSE  can  consider  during  implementation, 
and  all  partnerships  will  be  subjected  to  the  due  process  and  considered  on  merit.  However,  there 
should  be  no  restrictions  on  selection  of  commodities  but  support  agriculture  enterprises  that  are 
relevant to the VSLAs.   
67.  This  activity  will  also  support  innovations  that  better  serve  the  needs  of  youth  and  address 
issues  of  gender  inequality.  Sub-activities  under  this  activity  will  be  i).  Consolidation  of  CBFOs  into 
Farmer and/or Financial Cooperatives and linkage to commodity markets; ii). Farmer groups linked to 
sustainable  markets  and  formal  Financial  Service  Providers  (FSPs).  Through  these  activities  the 
CBFO members will be provided with skills in marketing, agro enterprise and innovation (access and 
usage of new technologies and monitor markets). A number of NGOs are already implementing VSLA 
plus  models  e.g.  CRS’s  “Recover,  Build  and  Prosper”  model  and  Care  International’s  promotion  of 
value chains through Farmer Field and Business School Models.  
68.  Canadian Cooperative Association (CCA) has extensive experience in confederation of VSLAs 
into farmer and/or financial cooperatives, and is already partnering with  IFAD under a different grant 
agreement  in  this  regard  not  only  in  Malawi,  but  in  Ethiopia  and  Tanzania.  FARMSE  may  therefore 
explore  synergies  and  leverage  resources.  Care  International,  among  others,  have  been  providing 
technical  support  to  the  Community  Savings  and  Investment  Programme  (COMSIP)  for  the 
development  of  VSLAs.  In  addition,  they  have  linked  up  with  Airtel  and  OBM  to  explore  digital 
solutions. Airtel has developed the “Chikumbe”35 short message service.   
69.  The third activity  will comprise support for the mobilization and formation of new CBFOs. The 
objective  will  be  to  enhance  the  economic  and  social  benefits  accrued  to  members  through  CBFOs 
participation.  Two  or  three  CBFOs  model  innovations  will  be  supported  by  existing  CBFOs  support 
group/consortia,  which  could  be  different  or  same  promoters  undertaking  activity  2. This  activity  will 
target  the  formation  of  5000  new  groups,  reaching  90,000  members  with  612,000  household 
members,  of  which  a  targeted  minimum  of  30%  of  will  be  women  and  20%  will  be  youth.  These 
groups once established and mature will also undergo the capacity building to ensure sustainability.  
70.  For all the three activities, matching grants will be provided to experienced CBFO promoters for 
the preparation of a detailed proposal with multi-year project implementation plan. Selected proposals 
will  be  awarded  service  contracts  on  a  competitive  basis  for  multi-year,  multi-phased,  performance 
based contracts. Funding will be given to organizations with a proven track record in CBFO promotion 
or  to  a  consortia  capable  of  rapidly  and  sustainably  expanding  their  network  of  member  groups  in 
targeted rural areas with the Promoter contributing 40% of the cost and the Programme contributing 
60%.  
35 Chikumbe is a Chichewa word for farmer. 
15 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
71.  Funding  will  be  available  only  to  CBFO  promoters  with  proven  capacity  to  form  new,  good 
practice  CBFO  structured  groups  and/or 
formation  and 
methodologies.36  There  are  currently  as  many  as  ten  CBFO  promoters/support  organizations  in  the 
country,  the  largest  five  of  which  have  indicated  interest  in  the  programme,  either  alone  or  in 
association  with  smaller  organizations  and/or  mobile  phone  companies.  CBFO  will  respond  to  an 
expression of interest for two project types:  
innovate  at  scale  existing  group 
72.  CBFO promoters will request support to form between 800 and 5,000 new groups over a four to 
five-year  period,  with  a  focus  on  underserved  rural  areas  in  the  North,  Centre,  and  South  of  the 
country. Applicants can propose to incorporate up to 25% of existing informal groups into their network 
(i.e.,  not  supported  by  existing  CBFO  support  organization  structured  methodology).  CFBO  models 
must hold the potential to link with the formal financial sector including mobile money services, groups 
must  have  the  potential  for  80%  sustainability  rate  after  three  years  of  operation,  and  will  support 
FARMSE’s gender, youth, and environmental principles.  
73.  Financial  inclusion  and  nutrition.  Implementing  partners  for  Components  1  and  2.1  will  be 
encouraged  and  provided  with  relevant  literature  to  distribute  information  on  nutrition  related 
knowledge  such  as:  i)  clarifying  the  difference  between  food  consumption  and  adequate  nutrition; 
ii) prioritizing  food  safety  in  household  expenses;  iii)  supporting  healthy  food  options;  and 
iv) encouraging breastfeeding and good feeding practices for children aged 0-2 years (to contribute to 
stunting prevention efforts). Information will be distributed to implementing partner’s beneficiaries. 
Subcomponent 2.2 – Innovation and Outreach Facility (IOF) 
74.  The  outcome  for  this  subcomponent  is  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  FSPs  to  deliver  demand-
driven  services  in  rural  areas.  The  objectives  are  two:  i)  increase  access  to  new  and  innovative 
financial services and low-cost delivery mechanisms for poor rural households and MSMEs; and ii) to 
support the scaling up of proven financial services and delivery mechanisms. 
75.  The limited range and outreach of rural financial services is due to capacity constraints in both 
supply  and  demand.  Most  FIs  have  limited  physical  presence  in  rural  areas,  lack  a  proper 
understanding  of  rural  financial  markets,  and  have  inadequate  products  and  delivery  mechanisms. 
While some agribusiness companies support their commercial operations by providing input finance to 
smallholder  farmers,  they  grapple  with  farmer  side  selling  and  limited  sources  of  funds. As  a  result, 
financial services beyond basic VSLAs are scarce, expensive and inflexible. Demand-side constraints 
also  stifle  expansion  of  rural  financial  services.  Smallholders  and  rural  MSME  are  often  unable  to 
access and properly use financial services due to low levels of financial literacy and business skills. 
They  often  operate  in  unstructured  value  chains  and  have  no  track  record  with  formal  financial 
services or formal marketing outlets making them high-risk clients for FSPs. 
76.  Activities  under  this  subcomponent  will  be  managed  by  PMU,  led  by  the  Programme 
Coordinator who will receive support from the chief technical advisor to be hired for a limited duration. 
Activities  will  also  include,  support  to  FSPs  to  enter  and  expand  outreach  in  rural  areas  through 
financial products, services, and delivery mechanism innovations for a variety of client segments. The 
programme  will  first  undertake  information  dissemination  to  FSPs,  a  rolling  call  for  proposals  to  be 
followed  by  rapid  institutional  assessments  to  establish  capacity  gaps  relevant  for  provision  of  rural 
finance  services  and  support  to  FSPs  will  be  provided  on  a  demand-driven  and  cost-sharing  basis 
through the Rural Finance Innovation and Outreach Facility (IOF). The IOF would address the  some 
constraints undermining FSP willingness and ability to enter and expand rural finance. A fundamental 
lack of experience in rural financial markets coupled with limited expertise in designing and delivering 
products and service targeting low-income rural clients and MSMEs. Critically, a lack of exposure to 
rural  markets  leads  to  an  exaggerated  perception  of  risks  which  further  discourages  FSP  from 
entering  these  markets.  The  IOF  would  address  these  constraints  by  facilitating  FSP  exposure  to 
successful  international  best  practices/innovations  which  have  worked  in  other  African  countries, 
successful  international  best  practices/innovations  which  have  worked  in  other  African  countries, 
36 See: IFAD, How to do Support community-based financial organizations, IFAD, 2014. 
16 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
including  facilitating  the  access  and  maximizing  the  use  of  remittances,  especially  to  rural  areas, 
promoting  financial  inclusion  and  local  business  opportunities.  The  FSPs  will  be  able  to  access  to 
high-quality  technical  assistance  (TA)  to  identify  promising  approaches  and  adjust  models  to 
institutional  settings  and  market  environments.  Products  and  services  could  be  within  the  financial 
sector value chain or could be opportunities related to the development of an agricultural value chain. 
77.  The  IOF  would  co-finance:  i)  client-centred/  demand  driven  market  research  and  feasibility 
studies;  ii)  design  and  pilot  test  of  new  financial  products  and  low-cost  delivery  mechanisms;  and 
iii) provision of non-financial services (if critical for enhancing access to and use of financial services 
by the project’s target). Eligible non-financial services will include, for example, the establishment and 
strengthening  of  farmer  organizations;  financial  literacy,  management  and  business  development 
training;  establishment  of  market  linkages;  and  targeted  extension  services.  Partnerships  between 
financial institutions and other actors will be encouraged, as this approach often facilitates better risk 
management  and  reduction  of  transaction  costs.  Examples  of  such  partnerships  may  include: 
structured  value  chain 
input  suppliers, 
agribusiness  companies,  warehouse  operators  and  commodity  exchanges,  or  partnerships  with 
mobile  money  operators  for  digital  payment  solutions.  Funded  projects  should  enhance  sustainable 
access  to  rural  financial  services  contributing  to  growing  incomes,  assets,  and  resilience  of  the 
programme target groups. The IOF would be open to a broad range of FSPs including banks, MFIs, 
SACCOS, leasing companies, collective investment schemes and insurance providers. It would also 
be open to non-financial institutions such as mobile network operators, input suppliers, agribusiness 
companies, warehouse operators and commodity exchanges. 
finance  arrangements  between 
institutions, 
financial 
78.  The IOF would support a broad range of products meeting the needs of rural poor households 
and  MSMEs.  Example  savings  products  include  mobile-enabled  services,  commitment  savings 
products for agricultural inputs, investments or school fees, and specific products for VSLAs, women, 
youth.  Example  loan  products  would  include  inter  alia  cash  flow-based  multipurpose  loans, 
agricultural  production  loans,  postharvest  and  warehouse  receipt  financing.  Other  products  might 
include  crop  and  livestock  insurance.  Support  to  low-cost  delivery  mechanisms  (e.g.,  low-cost 
branches  and  agency  models),  as  well  as  structured  financing  arrangements  involving  value  chain 
partners  (e.g.,  off  takers,  input  providers,  commodity  exchanges)  will  also  be  considered.  RLEEP 
initiated  a  warehouse  receipt  system,  and  six  out  of  the  twenty  one  warehouses  were  linked  to 
agriculture  commodity  exchange.  It  is  expected  that  FARMSE  will  scale  up  the  warehouse  receipt 
system to reach the remaining warehouses and any other warehouse that may be certified by relevant 
warehouse  receipt  system  operators.  Given  the  impact  of  climate  change  on  target  group,  the 
programme will also support the development and roll out of innovative financial products that would 
contribute to enhance their resilience (e.g. micro insurance). 
79.  Non-Financial Sector Service Providers will also be eligible for support if they are engaged in 
financial service provision (or have the intention to do so), either directly or in partnership with FSPs. 
Partnerships  will be encouraged as they can often manage risk better and reduce transaction costs 
than a single institution alone. Examples of projects for non-financial service providers would include 
inter alia: value chain finance arrangements between FSPs, input suppliers, agribusiness companies, 
warehouse  operators  and  commodity  exchanges  or  partnerships  with  mobile  money  operators  for 
digital  payment  solutions.  Some  non-financial  services  activities  will  also  be  supported  if  deemed 
critical  to  enhance  beneficiaries’  capacity  to  access  and  use  financial  services  supported  under  the 
IOF,  such  as,  for  example,  strengthening  farmer  organizations  or  basic  financial  literacy  support, 
market linkages establishment, or targeted extension services.  
80.  The facility will have three broad funding windows guiding project selection: i) market research 
and feasibility studies; ii) pilot testing of innovative products and delivery mechanisms; and iii) scaling 
up  of  successful  financial  services.  The  funding  windows  together  will  offer  support  for  product 
development at any point between conceptualization to commercialization. Prospective partners can 
thus choose to apply to the window that best suits the nature of development needs. It is envisaged 
that  the  learning  curve  will  be  short  as  several  FSPs  and  MNOs  have  already  started  piloting 
17 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
innovative products to reach the rural areas. CUMO MFI in partnership with Discover International are 
exploring  working  with  VSLAs through  a  graduation  product. FINCA Malawi and Airtel and TNM are 
finalizing an MOU to launch mobile banking. FINCA has also started rolling out an agency model 
81.  Window  1:  Market  research  and  feasibility  studies.  This  section  will  support  FSPs  in 
identifying market opportunities, client needs, key product features and possible delivery mechanisms. 
It  will  also  identify  risks  and  risk  mitigation  measures,  costs  and  revenues  estimates,  and  possible 
partnerships  for  product  introduction  and  roll-out.  Research  could  provide  insights  into  the  reasons 
why  current  service  provider  products  and  services  are  not  being  used  and  how  they  could  be 
improved. Research will provide evidence to support a decision to move to a product/service to pilot 
stage,  upgrade  existing  products,  or  expand  successful  existing  products.  Research  outcomes  will 
also inform a proposal for window 2 and 3.   
82.  Support  under  this  window  will  made  available  to  applicants  for  hiring  specialized  Technical 
Service Providers (TSPs) well-versed in market research and client demand/needs assessment, and 
to conduct in depth market research, beyond what a FSP typically achieves with its own resources.37 
To ensure ownership and relevance of research, the FSP would designate a team that together with 
the TSP participate in the design and implementation of the fieldwork and interpretation of the results. 
In  addition  to  market  research,  the  TSP  will  conduct  an  institutional  assessment  of  the  FSP.  This 
assessment  would  examine  the  capacity  of  the  FSP  to  introduce  the  proposed  products/delivery 
mechanisms and identify key bottlenecks to be addressed in (e.g., training requirements, information 
technology  constraints,  other  operational/procedural  challenges).  This  assessment  is  a  necessary 
condition for a FSP to request funding under the other two Facility windows.  
83.  Depending  on  the  scope  of  research  and  its  relevance  to  FARMSE  objectives,  the  IOF  could 
provide  financing  of  up  to  USD  50,000.  Eligible  expenditures  include  TA  and  logistic  costs  for 
undertaking fieldwork. The applicant would cover at least 20% of total costs through cash and/or in-
kind  contribution  of  staff  time  and  transport.  The  window  would  also  co-finance  study  tours  and 
exchange  visits  enabling  FSP  decision-makers  and  operational  staff  to  get  first-hand  insights  into 
experiences  of  FSPs  with  successful  rural  products/services  in  other African  countries.  Study  tours 
would  be  eligible  if  there  is  a  clear  link  to  the  component  objective  and  if  the  FSP  can  make  a 
convincing  case  how  the  exchange  would  enhance  its  products  and  delivery  mechanisms  to 
FARMSE’s target  population. The IOF  would finance  50%  of the total costs for exposure tours, to  a 
ceiling of USD 10,000. 
84.  Window  2:  Pilot  Testing  and  Innovation  would  support  pilot-testing  of  product  innovations 
and new low-cost delivery mechanisms. Based on prior market research (via the Window 1 or credible 
internal research), funding would co-finance costs of piloting of researched product(s). It will finance 
the  recruitment  of  a  qualified  TSPs  to  work  with  a  dedicated  FSP  team.  Activities  would  include 
developing  and  piloting  product  prototypes,  conducting  pilot  tests,  adjusting  and  refining  product 
features. Subject to commercial viability, a roll-out plan and budget could be prepared. Eligible costs 
to  be  covered  by  this  window  would  include  TA,  some  fieldwork  costs,  staff  training,  management 
information systems/information (MIS) and information and communications technology (ICT) updates 
and equipment. Support could cover costs of developing training material for prospective clients. The 
FSP would be expected to contribute at least 30% of total project costs, in cash or kind. The FARMSE 
grant ceiling would be USD 70,000. 
85.  Window  3:  Expanding  Outreach.  This  window  will  support  scaling  up  of  proven  products/ 
services  and  delivery  mechanisms.  It  can  finance  rollout  of  products  and  services  piloted  under 
Window 2, but also existing products/services developed by the FSP.  Proposals would be based on: 
i) a  proven  product/delivery  mechanism  to  be  scaled  up  for  FARMSE  target  group;  and  ii)  a  well-
defined outreach strategy with clearly defined performance targets and milestones. Eligible expenses 
under  this  window  include  national  and  international  TA  for  staff  training,  draft  manuals,  and 
37 TSPs can be international, regional, or national. FARMSE will retain the right to approve the qualifications of selected TSP on 
a project by project basis. FARMSE will also develop a roster of qualified TSPs to help facilitate selection by FIs. Approval of 
TSP will be applied for all three Facility windows. 
18 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
institutional change. The IOF could co-finance physical investment costs related to the roll-out, such 
as ICT equipment, low-cost branches and agencies, vehicles, as well as incremental operating costs 
on  a  declining  basis.  Such  costs  will  be  directly  linked  to  outreach  targets.  Finally,  training  and 
capacity  development  of  prospective  clients  could  be  co-financed.  To  accommodate  high  impact 
projects  which  could  lead  to  transformative  change  and  reach  many  beneficiaries,  a  ceiling  for 
matching  grants  under  this  window  would  be  set  at  USD  1  million.  FSPs  would  be  required  to 
contribute to 30% of the total project costs of which at least 20% should be in cash and 10% in kind. 
86.  Eligibility and selection criteria for proposals under each of the three windows is detailed in 
the programme implementation manual (PIM) Annex 2. The criteria has considered: outreach to reach 
poor  households  (directly  or  indirectly  through  SMEs),38  outreach  to  women  and  youth,  commercial 
viability, expanded outreach, and/or  offer some form of beneficial  innovation. Projects must also “fit” 
the strategic plan and market positioning of proposing organization, and have the technical capacity or 
credibly to implement proposed project. FSPs and their partners can apply several times to the IOF. 
While  a  sequencing  of  applications  to  the  three  windows  will  be  encouraged  (i.e.,  market  research, 
pilot  testing,  followed  by  roll-out),  this  will  not  be  strictly  required.  Proposed  projects  which  can  be 
linked to existing IFAD programme (SAPP and PRIDE) or operate in past programme areas (RLEEP), 
will be encouraged.   
Component 3.0 – Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy  
87.  The outcome is to increase the capacity  and knowledge baes of rural financial  sector support 
organizations.  There  are  three  objectives:  i)  strengthen  macro  level  regulatory  and  financial  sector 
policy  guidance  and  institutional  capacity  and  rural  and  agriculture  finance  literacy;  ii)  strengthen 
meso level financial sector infrastructure organizations/enterprise; and iii) produce and distribute rural 
finance  sector  knowledge  products  which  enhance  the  outreach  and  innovation  potential  of  sector 
stakeholders. 
88.  This  component  will  support  a  range  of  macro  and  meso  level  interventions  supporting 
Components 1.0 and 2.0 and the development of the rural finance sector more generally. It will also 
fund  a  range  of  stakeholders  at  each  of  the  macro  and  meso  levels,  as  well  as  fund  several 
knowledge products.  Some sector development initiatives at these two  levels  are readily  identifiable 
while other will become apparent as the sector, the programme and institutions develop. 
Subcomponent 3.1 – Support for Poverty Graduation Policy/Strategy and Systems 
89.  Activities  for  this  subcomponent  will  support  on-going  efforts  at  the  Division  of  Poverty 
Reduction and Social Protection in MoFEPD to: i) develop the necessary policy, strategies, systems, l 
and tools related to the identification and implementation of effective graduation models for ultra-poor 
households; and ii) disseminate information among relevant GOM ministries and other stakeholders. 
Anticipated activities include technical assistance support for policy guidance and development. It will 
also include a participatory process to develop the capacity of the MoFEPD and other relevant GOM 
ministries  to  ensure  government  wide  buy-in  and  understanding  of  graduation  programmes  and 
models.  This  will  include  such  things  as  training  workshops  (both  national  and  international), 
commissioning  of  targeted  (participatory)  research,  and  development  of  knowledge  management 
diffusion tools to reach out key stakeholder groups. 
90.  The outcome of this subcomponent will be multi-ministerial support for good practice graduation 
approaches to poverty alleviation and enhanced capacity within the MoFEPD, MLGRD, MIT and other 
relevant  ministries  to  manage  good  practice  graduation  programmes.  These  ministries  already 
interface and collaborate on some thematic areas. 
38  By  addressing  key  bottlenecks  of  related  value  chain  actors  or  market  partners  resulting  in  increased  access  to  inputs, 
markets, and finance by the target group. 
19 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Subcomponent 3.2  – Support for development/review of Broader and inclusive Rural Finance 
Policies/Strategies  
This subcomponent has three broad activities:  
3.2.1  Development/Review  of  Broad/Inclusive  Rural  Finance  Policies,  Strategies  and 
Research support 
91.  This  subcomponent  will  support  the  Pensions  and  Financial  Sector  Policy  Division  to  develop 
and  or  review  policies  and  make  them  inclusive  of  rural  and  agricultural  finance  that  recognizes 
ongoing work in agency and mobile money, collective efforts to improve the CBFO sector in order to 
improve rural financial access through better structured CBFOs. Such structures will increase benefits 
of participation, group sustainability, and  linkages to the formal financial sector. The outcome of this 
sub component will be broad access to good practice rural  finance knowledge. It will also facilitate a 
formal GOM recognition of such practice. 
92.  Activities will support stakeholder consultation/efforts such as the VSLA stakeholder and digital 
finance working groups and other relevant sector groups to develop, create awareness, distribute and 
employ good rural finance practice guidelines (e.g., harmonized VSLA formation and structures, core 
good  practice  standards  that  are  realigned  to  global  best  practice  in  environment,  social  and 
governance (ESG) issues). It will work to develop mechanisms/tools for formal financial sector actors 
to  better  understanding  and  link  with  CBFO  groups  and  their  member  enterprise  on  a  commercially 
viable  basis  (e.g.,  assessing  group/individual  member  credit  risk  as  a function  of  adherence  to  core 
good practice standards). It will also support a rigorous qualitative and quantitative research effort to 
determine linkage strategies and the outcome and impact of different CBFO models.  
93.  Support  for  basic  CBFO  sector  data  aggregation  may  also  be  provided  (e.g.,  group  number, 
status,  location,  size,  etc.).  Funding  of  other  knowledge  products,  stakeholder  training  and 
dissemination  activities,  and  CBFO  sector  activities  will  be  considered.  To  implement  core  good 
practice  standards  and  risk  analysis,  the  programme  will  identify  and  support  an  appropriate 
organization(s)  able  to  convene  and  coordinate  CBFO  sector  leaders  and  stakeholders  (BAM, 
MAMN).  Such  organizations  will  provide  CBFO  and  other  rural  finance  thought  leadership  and 
guidance for selecting projects.  
94.  Specific activities of this subcomponent would include inter alia: i) development of good practice 
Rural  Finance  Policy;  ii)CBFO  guidelines;  iii)  formal  FSP  guide  to  CBFO  and  a  CBFO  credit  risk 
manual;  iv)  research  on  how  to  best  to  link  CBFOs  to  formal  financial  sector,  CBFO  impact 
assessment,  and  improving  CBFO  social  and  economic  impact;  v)  support  to  Reserve  Bank  of 
Malawi,  MoFEPD  and  other  relevant  GOM  stakeholders  capacity/knowledge  of  rural  finance  via 
workshops and trainings; and vi) support to informal CBFO working committee/s.  
3.2.2  Financial  service  providers  and  agro-Industry  sector  development,  policy,  and 
research support 
95.  To reach out to more FSPs than those directly supported under Component 2.2, the programme 
would  establish  partnerships  with  industry  associations  such  as  Malawi  Micro-Finance  Network 
(MAMN),  the  Bankers  Association  of  Malawi  (BAM)  and  the  Malawi  Union  of  Savings  and  Credit 
Cooperatives  (MUSSCO).  Specific  support  activities  will  be  defined  but  could  include  i)  knowledge 
management on key innovations/lessons from the field; ii) development of training modules related to 
rural  and  agricultural  finance  for  different  target  audiences  (e.g.,  loan  officers,  credit  committee 
members,  executives  and  board  members);  iii)  co-financing  a  feasibility  study  for  a  micro-finance 
Apex  fund  at  MAMN;  and  iv)  partnering  with  agricultural  product  input  suppliers  or  warehousing 
companies to provide innovative smallholder finance products. 
96.  Via  on-site  and  possible  regional/  international  trainings,  this  subcomponent  will  work  to 
strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  Pensions  and  Financial  Sector  Policy  Division  of  the  MoFEPD  in  the 
areas  of  rural  and  agricultural  finance.  To  enhance  policy  and  programmatic  coherence  among 
relevant GOM ministries and development partners, a high-level Agricultural Finance Working Group 
20 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
(AFWG) will be established and chaired by the MoFEPD. In addition, relevant public sector institutions 
and development partners, industry associations and FSPs engaged in rural agricultural finance could 
participate in the AFWG. Such a  group could  identify  and  address key policy  and regulatory  issues, 
and serve as a conduit for knowledge management and information sharing. 
97.  Potential activities will be further developed for all three subcomponents during  planning stage 
of  implementation.  Additional  activities  and/or  partnership  might  be  identified  during  program 
implementation on a demand driven basis. The Knowledge Management Officer of the PMU with the 
assistance of PMU rural financial specialists, would manage the partnerships. 
3.2.3 Rural Financial Literacy Expansion 
98.  According  to  RBM  studies,  financial  literacy  varies  considerably  depending  on  the  financial 
concept, and is still low (57%) and this could be much lower for the rural communities. RBM is in the 
process  of  finalizing  a  financial  literacy  strategy.  FARMSE  will  support  RBM  to  incorporate  specific 
rural  and  agricultural  finance  literacy  aspects  in  the  strategy  and  roll  out  specific  financial  literacy 
sessions  to  rural  communities,  and  revise  the  schools’  curricula  in  line  with  rural  and  agriculture 
financial literacy. 
D.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies 
Country performance 
99. 
IFAD’s  Country  Strategic  Opportunities  Programme  (COSOP)  2010-2015  supported  four 
investment  programmes:  the  Rural  Livelihood  Support  Programme  (RLSP);  the  Irrigation,  Rural 
Livelihoods and Agricultural Development Programme (IRLADP co-financed with the World Bank); the 
RLEEP,  and  the  SAP  programmes).  IFAD  has  also  funded/co-funded  12  regional  and  country  grant 
funded  programmes/projects  in  the  country.  A  new  programme  for  the  irrigation  sector,  the 
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development (PRIDE), is just now starting implementation.  
that  government  capacity 
implement 
100.  The  COSOP  2016-2022  notes 
programmes  is  stretched.  The  majority  of  government  budget  and  human  resources  for  the 
agricultural  sector  goes  to  the  Farm  Input  Subsidy  Programme  (FISP)  which  is  reaching  50%  of 
Malawi’s smallholders, but lacks incentives for farmers to boost productivity. The World Bank’s 2014 
Country  and  Policy  Institutional  Assessment  (CPIA)  shows  a  negative  trend  for  public  sector 
management  in  general  and  in  rural  development  specifically.  Government  decentralisation  efforts 
provides a network of local institutions and rural services, but the capacity to implement projects and 
programmes  remains  limited,  which  is  further  compromised  by  FISP  subsidies.  Private  sector 
engagement in the rural economy remains limited due to perceived high risks and limited returns. 
to  manage  and 
Lessons learned from IFAD past interventions in Malawi 
101.  The main lessons learnt from the IFAD funded programmes are summarized below: 
102.  Policy engagement. The COSOP 2010-2015 portfolio was well-aligned to the GOM’s policies, 
but  results  were  not  systematically  used  to  inform  policy  makers.  Donor  coordination  and  policy 
dialogue requires proactive support and facilitation if a constant transfer of programme knowledge to 
policy makers and development partners and desired outcomes are to be achieved. 
103.  Programme  management.  During  2010-2015,  programme  start-ups  were  slow,  due  to  late 
fulfilment of effectiveness criteria. The lesson learnt is that a fully dedicated management unit enables 
efficient programme implementation. 
104.  Good  Agricultural  Practices  (GAPs)  and  climate-smart  agriculture.  Proactive  good 
agricultural  practice  (GAP)  and  Climate-smart  agriculture  practice  promotion  is  required  to  boost 
smallholder  production,  as  is  the  need  for  better  post-harvest  practices.  Famers  should  also  be 
encouraged to think of farming as a business, which includes seeking to improve access to markets.  
105.  Rural  Finance.  Limited  access  to  rural  finance  services  constrains  agricultural  development. 
COSOP  2010-2015  provided  some  support  to  improve  access  to  rural  finance,  such  as  to  support 
21 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
village  savings  and  loan  associations.  Farmers’  demand  exceeds  however  available  services  and 
credit remains expensive. 
106.  Value chain development. Whereas once value chain assessments were undertaken primarily 
by  non-private  sector  actors,  an  innovative  process  has  started  recently  in  Malawi  where  private 
sector companies identify  value chains and their opportunities/restrictions. Some companies did this 
and  then  applied  to  RLEEP  for matching  grants  (like  IFAD’s  Public-Private-Producer  Partnership,  or 
4P approach). The lesson learned is that private sector profit motivation can contribute to addressing 
value chain opportunities and bottlenecks resulting in broader development benefits. 
107.  Gender  and  targeting.  In  IRLADP  and  SAPP,  the  Household  Methodology Approach  helped 
household members develop visions, plans, and make decisions on crops, revenues, and household 
resources. The household methodology is inclusive and addresses gender equality, while respecting 
household  diversity. As  demonstrated  by  SAPP,  the  household  methodology  is  most  effective  when 
widely  used  within  communities  as  changes  within  the  households  complement  broader  collective 
changes to socially acceptable norms.   
108.  Nutrition  and  food  security.  There  is  a  need  for  more  rigorous  nutrition  intervention  and 
districts with high rates of stunting should be targeted. All programme should be nutrition sensitive and 
promote  nutritious  plant  production,  good  post-harvest  and  food  processing  and  awareness  through 
campaigns and household level training. 
109.  Climate change and vulnerability to external shocks. Climate change has become a reality 
for  Malawi’s  largely  rain-fed  agriculture.  Smallholder  assets  bases  and  incomes  are  particularly 
vulnerable  to  climate  effects.  This  has  implication  for  how  farmers  should  produce,  but  vulnerability 
should  also  condition  smallholder  financing  arrangements  to  ensure  financial  services  maximize 
household economic development while, as far as possible, mitigating climate risks. 
Rural finance and graduation lessons learned relevant to FARMSE design 
110.  Lessons learned related to specific components from other IFAD rural finance investments 
in the region (e.g. PROFIT Kenya; RUFIP Ethiopia; FIRA Uganda; RUFEP Zambia) as well as other 
donor  interventions in the  sector are synthetized below and  will be further assessed during the next 
phase of the design process. 
111.  Geographic Distribution of Resources. While the programme will be national in scope, some 
interventions will target strategically identified districts. This will be done to concentrate resources for 
maximum impact of funds, and to  test/identify  effective, efficient, and replicable  interventions for the 
purposes  of  scaling  up.  Lessons  from  past  interventions  show  planned  overlap  with  complementary 
existing or new IFAD programmes and/or those of other donors can multiple target group benefits.  
112.  Each  socio-economic  stratum  requires  differentiated  interventions.  Within  each  socio-
economic  stratum,  people  of  different  ages  and  gender  require  a  specific  approach  to  attain  food 
security and to develop income, and assets. Similarly, some financial tools and interventions are more 
appropriate  for  one  group  than  others.  Graduation  models  will  target  the  ultra-poor,  while  informal 
financial organizations such as CBFOs are better suited to the ultra-poor but non-labour constrained 
and poor but food-secure. Financial services offered by formal financial services providers are often 
more effective households that are vulnerable to poverty and resilient households and MSMEs.  
113.  Private Sector Partners. Private sector partners require incentives to enter markets as well as 
attractive long-term profits to remain  in  them. Before  entering a  partnership for market development 
purposes, interventions must have credible market analysis which shows the commercial potential  of 
a venture. Programme partner enterprises must also have a demonstrated will and capacity to sustain 
the  market  intervention  over  the  time  required  to  achieve  profitability,  otherwise  the  sustainability  of 
proposed services/business activities will be at risk. Programmes working on a cost sharing basis with 
private enterprise can ensure long term partnership commitments.  
114.  Terms  of  Partnerships.  Longer-term  partnerships  are  commonly  appropriate  for  sector 
development programmes, particularly those in countries where relatively few market players exist. To 
22 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
ensure good partner performance and substantial sustainable benefits flow to target groups, longer-
term programmes must be multi-phased and performance-based. 
115.  Elite  Capture.  Entering  programmes  with  private  sector  enterprise  often  implies  benefits  will 
flow  to  high  income  beneficiaries.  While  this  is  practicably  unavoidable,  it  is  not  necessarily 
undesirable  as  private  enterprise  can  play  key  roles  in  developing  agricultural  and  finance  sector 
value  chains  to  the  benefit  of  the  rural  poor.  Working  with  the  private  sector  with  the  explicit  and 
measurable  intention  of  creating  substantial  benefits  to  low  income  populations  can  avoid 
unnecessary  elite  capture.  With  appropriate  processes  and  a  strong  targeting  strategy,  the  risk  of 
unnecessary elite capture or elite capture which does not translate into substantial target beneficiary 
impacts,  can  also  largely  be  avoided.  Programmes  working  on  a  cost  sharing  basis  with  private 
enterprise can minimize elite capture. 
116.  Product  market  analysis.  When  financial  service  providers  attempt  to  design,  or  adapt 
financial services products for low income and/or rural markets they often fail to undertake adequate 
market  research,  product  testing,  and/or  to  develop  the  delivery  capacity  required  to  reach/or  meet 
demand. The result is almost always poor product/service performance. Good practice product design 
requires an understanding of client needs which can be capture through a Human Centered Design 
(HCD) approach. HCD is an approach which recognized the centrality of client needs. This approach 
has worked well in many financial sector development activities as it starts with people and ends with 
solutions uniquely tailored to meet their needs.39 Like participatory planning and development, client 
involvement is not a one-off activity. Rather it is an ongoing, iterative process integrated into market 
development activities. This approach can be at odds with the more rapid pace expectation of private 
sector actors. Where implemented to good practice levels, however, HCD has been shown to reduce 
market entry risks leading to improved prospects for sustainable product/services development.  
117.  Co-Financing. Programs that involved private sector typically have some form of co- financing 
arrangements. Programmes must strike a balance between incentives for the private sector to engage 
in  market  development  and  insisting  on  an  investment  cementing  their  commitment  to  the 
commercialization of an opportunity.  In lay terms, this is called “skin in the game” or, that a business 
must risk substantial time and capital to prove their commitment and to justify programme resources. 
118.  Graduation  models  and  livelihood  opportunities.  The  original  BRAC  graduation  model 
implemented in Bangladesh is commonly referred to  as the “graduation approach”.40  Results  of the 
approach as applied in other countries provides encouraging but mixed results, and have found that it 
is  not  possible  to  predict  ex-ante  those  who  will  benefit  most  from  the  graduation  approach.41 
Challenges  in  Bangladesh,  for  example,  included  difficulties  graduated  households  encountered 
marketing  products  intended  to  sustain  them  out  of  poverty.42  This  example  underscores  both  the 
challenge and need for access to realistic sustainable livelihood opportunities for the graduating poor. 
The  IFAD  programme  PROFIT  in  Kenya  confirms  strong  technical  expertise  is  required  to 
operationalize and manage graduation programmes. 
Rural finance programme management lessons learned 
119.  Technical capacity. Both graduation and financial sector development programs typically rely 
on  and  require  substantial,  and  often  times  highly  specific  technical  expertise.  This  applies  both  to 
programme management and to programme implementation. Programmes lacking technical expertise 
have often struggled to attract and assess the capacity of appropriate programme partner institutions. 
Monitoring and evaluation of partner performance can be equally challenging, a particularly important 
consideration for multi-phased, performance-based programmes such as FARMSE. At the programme 
39  For  more  information  see:  https://www.cgap.org/publications/what-human-centered-design-means-financial-inclusion  for 
further information 
40 CGAP and Ford Foundation, September 2014.  From Extreme Poverty to Sustainable Livelihoods. A Technical Guide to the 
Graduation Approach. 
41 IPA, September 2016. Impact of the Graduation Approach: Findings from the CGAP – Ford Foundation Pilots. 
42  Representatives  of  the  Malawi  Team  Visiting  the  BRAC  Graduation  Programme  in  Bangladesh  (authors  not  cited),  2016. 
BRAC Bangladesh Study Tour Report from 29th November to 4th December 2015. 
23 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
level  for  both  graduation  and  financial  sector  programming,  the  capacity  and  resources  must  be 
available for sourcing highly capable technical assistance and for ongoing support of programme/field 
team  training  and  development.  In  many  cases,  high-level  technical  assistance  must  be  a  condition 
project funding.  
120.  Short  Term  or  Sporadic  TA  is  often  insufficient.  Myriad  past  experiences  show  sporadic, 
short-term TA focusing on single technical challenge is typically insufficient to support financial service 
providers  in  developing  appropriate  and  rural  financing  products/services.  FSPs  typically  require 
substantial  technical  and  operational  capacity  improvements  beyond  market  research  and  product 
development.43 Developing and implementing a sustainable rural outreach strategy also often implies 
institutional change beyond the simple transfer of technical skills which also requires experienced TA.  
121.  Championing  change  is  critical  in  the  private  sector.  Negative  perceptions  about  the 
feasibility  of  profitably  of  serving  rural  areas  and  agriculture  are  often  rooted  at  all  levels  of  an 
institution,  from  frontline  staff  to  senior  management  to  board  members.  A  change  in  institutional 
perception is key to successful results on the ground and experience has repeatedly shown a credible 
institutional champion is critical to changing mind sets.44 The champion, often the CEO, must ignite, 
and  drive  new  product  or  market  development  processes,  ensure  support/guidance  from  qualified 
technical  partners,  build  ongoing  internal  change  management  support,  and  manage  institutional 
change risk.  
122.  Funding  Flow.  Private  sector  partners  and  market  development  interventions  are  highly 
sensitive to timing issues, particularly when substantial private sector investment is at risk. In RUFIP 
Lesotho, for example, funding for CBFO group formation was stalled 18 months and resulted in both 
lost  opportunity  costs  to  serve  more  beneficiaries,  leading  to  the  closure  of  RUFIP  funded  CBFO 
groups  due  to  lack  of  support.  Maintaining  planned  flow  of  funding  is  critical  to  ensure  programme 
targets and co-financing commitments are met, and private sector partners’ commercial momentum is 
maintained. 
123.  Program  oversight.  Just  as  technical  capacity  is  required  at  the  management  and  project 
implementation level, financial sector programmes require a high level and engaged oversight body. 
Without  such  oversight,  meeting  implementation  targets  and  market  development  objectives, 
programming  can  fall  behind  the  relatively  fast-paced  expectations  of  programme  partners  – 
particularly private sector partners causing them to lose interest, not meet performance goals, or find 
other more profitable ways to spend time and capital. 
IFAD policies 
124.  The  strategic  goal  of  IFAD  Strategic  Framework  2016-2025,  also  aligned  to  the  cross  cutting 
issues around policy engagement, is to ‘enable rural households and communities to gain increasingly 
remunerative,  sustainable  and  resilient  livelihoods  that  help  them  permanently  move  out  of  poverty 
and  food  insecurity’.  To  achieve  this,  IFAD  will  focus  on  three  interlinked  and  mutually  reinforcing 
strategic objectives: 
i)  Strategic Objective 1: Increase poor rural peoples’ productive capacities – investing 
in  rural  people,  especially  the  most  vulnerable,  to  improve  their  skills  to  become  more 
productive farmers, fishers, or artisans; 
ii)  Strategic  Objective  2:  Increase  poor  rural  peoples’  access  to  markets  –  increasing 
poor  rural  peoples’  access  to  and  integration  in  markets  for  goods,  services,  and  wage 
labour both in agriculture and in non-farm activities on a sustainable and profitable basis; 
and 
43 Examples include strengthening human resources (capacity and incentives to service new rural target groups), adjustments 
of the Management Information System (MIS) to adequately measure performance and make adjustments in a timely manner, 
but  also  investments  in  physical  outreach  capacity  to  reach  remote  rural  clients,  such  as  low-cost  branches  and  mobile 
technologies. 
44 In Swaziland’s Rural Finance and Enterprise Development Programme, a FSP was unable to advance outreach and improve 
performance despite consistent support due primarily because its ownership was not willing to change its business model.  
24 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
iii)  Strategic  Objective  3:  Strengthen  the  environmental  sustainability  and  climate 
resilience  of  poor  rural  peoples’  economic  activities  –  strengthening  rural  people’s 
ability to be able to adequately take care of the environment in which they live while, at the 
same time, benefiting from it.  
125.  FARMSE  is  aligned  with  all  three  Strategic  Objectives. The  programme  will  increase  poor 
rural people’s productive capacities (SO1) by providing them with access to financial services either 
directly  or  indirectly  through  provision  of  value  chain  enhancements.  Through  the  graduation 
component, FARMSE will provide some of the poorest people in Malawi a pathway from ultra-poverty 
to  sustainable  livelihoods  and  active  market  participation.  The  programme  will  increase  target 
beneficiaries’  access  to  markets  (SO2)  by  providing  financial  tools  to  build  household.  Improved 
household  management  will  also  increase  household  social  capital  and  confidence  to  start  and  or 
expand  farming  activities,  and/or  micro  and  small  enterprise.  Finally,  the  programme  will  strengthen 
the  environmental  sustainability  and  climate  resilience  of  target  beneficiaries’  economic  activities 
(SO3),  by  promoting  community-based  financial  activities  with  local  economic  multiplier  effects 
making the poor less dependent on climatic variability. 
Overall compliance with IFAD Policies 
126.  The design of FARMSE is aligned to all relevant IFAD strategies and policies, including:  
i)  Strategic Framework 2011-15;  
ii)  Targeting Policy – Reaching the Poor (2010);  
iii)  Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment;  
iv)  Rural Finance Policy;  
v)  Private-Sector Development and Partnership Strategy;  
vi)  Rural Enterprise Policy;  
vii)  Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support; 
viii) Climate Change Strategy (2010);  
ix)  Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy (2011); and  
x)  Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP).  
127.  Rural  finance  policy.  Consistent  with  the  goals  of  IFAD’s  rural  finance  policy  and  technical 
guidance, FARMSE  will support several demand-driven  and  innovative approaches to rural financial 
services: including: i) strengthening financial literacy and community-based microfinance; ii) providing 
technical assistance to selected FSPs to strengthen their capacity to service smallholder farmers; and 
iii) encouraging risk-sharing through a partial guarantee facility for selected FSPs. 
128.  Targeting and gender and women economic empowerment policy. FARMSE will target the 
full  socio-economic  strata  of  the  rural  poor.  This  will  include  both  non-economically  active  poor  and 
productive poor (those engaged in smallholder subsistence and commercial farming, as well as those 
with  micro  and  small  enterprise).  The  programme  will  target  at  least  50%  of  all  beneficiaries  to  be 
women  and  over  40%  youth. The  programme  will  employ  graduation  household  methodologies  and 
CFBO  models  aimed  at  enhancing  gender/youth  household  relationships.  Financial  product/service 
development will proactively consider women, and youth. 
129.  Environment and climate change. The environmental and social classification of FARMSE is 
Category B. The impact of directly-financed activities is limited to specific sites and can be mitigated 
using  readily  available  measures.  The  cumulative  impact  of  an  increase  in  economic  activities, 
indirectly  caused  by  the  programme,  may  cover  a  wider  geographical  area  and  be  less  easily 
mitigated  by  the  programme,  but  will  have  limited  impact  severity.  Programme-specific  risks  will  be 
further detailed and mitigation measures agreed upon in the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework  (ESMF)  which  will  be  developed  during  programme  start-up.  Contracting  of  service 
providers will be preceded by due diligence on their social and environmental policies and capacities 
25 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
to implement those. Implementation of the ESMF will be monitored as part of the Programme’s M&E 
system and a grievance redress mechanisms will be established.  
130.  The high vulnerability of the target beneficiaries to climate-related shocks, will pose a risk to the 
programme  achieving  its  objectives.  Major  events  such  as  droughts  or  floods,  such  as  those 
experienced  in  2015  and  2016,  may  disturb  the  expected  development  trajectory  of  those  farmers 
under the graduation model or negatively affect the ability of households to repay loans or save. At the 
same time, the Programme’s design includes innovations in rural finance to overcome these types of 
setbacks. The  climate  risk  category  is  thus  assessed  as  Medium.  More  details  are  available  in  the 
SECAP Review Note in Appendix 14. 
III.  Programme implementation 
A.  Approach 
131.  The proposed principles of engagement for programme design are: 
i)  Within  each  household  strata,  people  of  different  ages  and  gender  require  a  different 
approach  to  attain  food  security,  income,  and  asset  development. While  not  exclusive  to 
any group, some financial tools and interventions are more appropriate for one group than 
others. Graduation models will target the ultra-poor, while informal financial organizations 
such as CBFOs are better suited to the ultra-poor but non-labour constrained and poor but 
food-secure.  Financial  services  offered  by  formal  FSPs  are  often more  effective  tools  for 
households  that  are  vulnerable  to  poverty  and  resilient  households  and  MSMEs.  The 
FARMSE  design  will  seek  to  provide  the  most  appropriate  intervention  for  each  target 
group, including youth, with gender sensitive approaches; 
ii)  While the programme will be national in scope, some interventions will target strategically 
identified  districts.  This  will  be  done  to  concentrate  resources  to  maximize  use  of  funds, 
and  to  test/identify  effective,  efficient,  and  replicable  interventions  for  the  purposes  of 
scaling  up.  Where  possible  programme  activities  will  overlap  in  geographic  areas  to 
maximize impact and potential for scaling up; 
iii)  The programme will work with a range of private and non-profit financial service sector and 
agro-industry  organizations  and  stakeholders  on  a  cost  sharing  basis,  to  provide 
sustainable financial and non-financial benefits to targeted groups and beneficiaries; 
iv)  The  programme  will  support  private  and  not-for-profit  organizations  individually  or  in 
consortia, based on short or longer-term strategic partnerships. Longer-term programmes 
will be multi-phased and performance-based, on a cost sharing basis; 
v)  To  ensure  the  GOM’s  ability  to  successfully  manage  and  oversight  programme 
implementation, a Programme Management Unit (PMU) technically qualified to manage a 
financial  inclusion  programme  will  be  created.  The  GOM  will  be  supported  with  training 
and technical capacity development as required;  
vi)  A high-level Programme Steering Committee (PSC) with GOM and private and non-profit 
sector financial and agro-business stakeholders will be formed; and  
vii)  Programme  partners  will  be  required  to  employ  high-calibre  international,  regional,  and 
to  ensure  effective  programme 
financial  sector  experts  as 
required 
national 
implementation. 
B.  Organizational framework 
132.  The lead ministry and lead programme agency for FARMSE is the MoFEPD. The Pension and 
Financial Strategy Division will be charged with coordinating, liaising and day to day interaction with 
the  programme.  Other  stakeholder  ministries  include:  Ministry Agriculture  and  the  Ministry  of  Local 
26 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Government and Rural Development (MLGRD). Other key stakeholder institutions  such as identified 
new  partners  and  recruited  service  providers  will  take  responsibility  for  Component  1,  the  Reserve 
Bank  of  Malawi,  the  Bankers  Association  of  Malawi,  and  the  Malawi  Microfinance  Network.  Other 
important  stakeholders  will  include  non-governmental  organizations,  private  sector  financial  sector 
and agricultural value chain suppliers providing services for FARMSE implementation. 
Figure 1: FARMSE management structure 
133.  The programme will have the following implementation bodies: 
134.  Programme Steering Committee. A multi-sector stakeholder Programme Steering Committee 
(PSC),  chaired  by  the  Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  will  be  established  to  provide  overall  programme 
oversight, direction, and guidance. The PSC will be made up of representatives of key stakeholders 
including, inter-alia, government ministries, farmer organisations, apex bodies, the private sector, and 
development partners. The PSC would meet on a six months basis to review work plans and budgets, 
financial  and  progress  reports,  receive  draft  annual  reports  and  approve  all  major  programme 
decisions.  The  multi-sectoral  composition  of  the  PSC  will  ensure  FARMSE’s  implementation 
complements  rather  than  duplicates  other  government  interventions  and  encourages  private  sector 
participation,  harmonizing  the  programme’s  contribution  with  the  GOM’s  strategic  priorities  and 
development objectives for the sector.    
135.  The IOF investment committee to be known as the proposals review committee (PRC) will be a 
technical committee that will review and approve grant applicants. The committee shall elect its own 
chairperson  and  shall  be  composed  of  eight  members,  including:  (i)  one  representative  from  RBM; 
(ii) one representatives from the Ministry of Finance (MoF); (iii) one representative from the Ministry of 
Local  Government  and  Rural  Development  (MLGRD);  (iv)  one  representative  from  Bankers 
Association  of  Malawi  (BAM);  (v)  one  representative  from  the  board  of  directors  of  MAMN;  (vi)  one 
representative  of  the  board  of  directors  of  FUM/NASFAM/Association  of  financial  cooperatives; 
(vii) two  private  sector  representatives  recruited  through  an  appropriate  process  as  may  be  decided 
by  the  PSC.  The  later  shall  preferably  be  persons’  familiar  with  banking  and  finance,  but  not  be 
actively  engaged  in  the  financial  sector.  The  appointment  of  the  institutional  representatives  will  be 
done  by  the  Steering  Committee  upon  nomination  by  the  respective  chief  executive  officer  of  the 
respective  institution  and  the  results  of  the  open  recruitment/tender  process.  The  PC  will  not  be  a 
member  of  the,  but  will  serve  as  convenor  of  and  secretary  to  the  committee  and  will  present  the 
27 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
cases  submitted  for  approval,  and  respond  to  queries.  Other  experts  may  be  co-opted  as  the  need 
arises  upon  majority  decision.  Neither  the  PC  nor  co-opted  experts  shall  have  voting  rights  at  the 
committee. 
136.  Programme  Management  Unit.  Day  to  day  coordination  of  programme  activities  and  select 
technical activities will be delegated to a stand-alone dedicated programme management unit (PMU) 
located  in  Lilongwe.  Reporting  to  the  Principal  Secretary  of  the  MoFEPD,  the  PMU  will  be  granted 
authority to undertake all financial and procurement management activities, lead implementation and 
provide  specialist  technical  inputs.  It  will  be  responsible  for  programme  accounting,  withdrawal 
applications,  keeping  of  programme  accounts,  consolidating  AWPBs,  consolidating  annual  reports, 
correspondence with government authorities on issues related to the Financing Agreement (excluding 
the  technical  implementation  matters),  document  depository,  procurement,  submission  of  reports  to 
IFAD and other related agencies/stakeholders, monitoring and evaluation, preparation, guidance and 
supervision  of  the  mid-term  review  mission,  commissioning  the  beneficiary  impact  assessment,  and 
preparing the end-of-programme evaluation. Other activities comprise the preparation of and support 
to supervision and research missions.  
137.  The PMU will be staffed with: i) programme coordinator; ii) national rural finance/microfinance 
specialist;  iii)  CBFO  Specialist;  iv)  financial  controller;  v)  procurement  officer;  vi)  knowledge 
management/communications officer; vii) monitoring and evaluation officer; viii) Accountant 
138.  Additionally,  the  PMU  will  host  a  long  term  Chief  Technical  Advisor  (CTA)  recruited 
internationally  or  regionally,  and  contracted  to  manage  Component  2  and  provide  overall  technical 
support especially systems development and also component 3. The position is for a three year term 
and  this  may  be  extended  if  there  is  need.  This  position  will  be  paid  through  the  Innovation  and 
Outreach Facility (subcomponent 2.2). The CTA will work closely with the programme coordinator and 
the national rural finance/microfinance specialist, who together will develop the AWP&B. The CTA will 
be  responsible  for  delivering  all  aspects  of  Component  2.0  activities  based  upon  the AWP&B,  The 
rural  finance/microfinance  specialist  besides  overseeing  activities  of  component  1  will  shadow  the 
CTA, with the goal of taking over functions of the CTA after the three year term. 
139.  The PMU staff will be recruited through a competitive process following IFAD/GOM procedures, 
and, staff will be contracted based on time-bound, performance-based contracts. Some key staff will 
transition from RLEEP to FARMSE under new contracts, but the recruitment and renewal of all PMU 
staff will require prior consent from IFAD. Long-term technical specialists attached to the PMU will be 
selected as part of the PMU start-up activities with support from the IFAD rural finance technical unit. 
(See TORs for these positions in Appendix 11).   
140.  The PMU will have three programmatic technical tasks. The first will be to oversee and support 
the  implementation  of  Component  1.0  and  subcomponent  2.1.  The  second  will  be  to  implement 
subcomponent 2.2. This will be led by the CTA who will be in contracted  for three years, after which 
the  rural  finance  specialist  will  assume  responsibility  for  the  subcomponent  activities.  Third,  the 
programme coordinator will be responsible for the coordination and management of Component 3.0, 
recruiting and supervising TSPs as necessary.   
141.  Programme  implementation.  Under  Component  1.0,  the  GOM  and  its  partners  will  support 
stage 1 of the graduation which mainly comprises cash transfer for consumption support, while IFAD 
support  will  only  be  for  stage  2  to  stage  5  of  graduation  stages.  Implementation  of  activities  under 
Component  2.0  will  be  done  primarily  by  private  sector  and  NGO  service  providers,  with  the  PMU 
providing  guidance  and  oversight  and  support  as  required.  For  Component  3.0,  the  programme 
coordinator  will  proactively  manage  institutional  partner  development.  Specific  research  and 
knowledge activities will be undertaken by contracted private sector and NGO service providers, the 
Reserve Bank of Malawi, or government agencies.  
28 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
142.  FARMSE’s  approach  to  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  will  be  compatible  with 
corresponding GOM and IFAD policies and tools (e.g., IFAD Results and Impact Management System 
- RIMS). Guided  by the  Programme’s logical framework, the M&E function  will  systematically record 
data  and  performance  information  of  programme  partner  performance  implementation,  as  well  as 
household surveys. 
Planning 
143.  The  main  planning  tools  for  FARMSE  will  comprise  the  Logical  Framework,  M&E  framework 
including its indicators and targets, and the Results Based Annual Work plan and Budget (RB-AWPB). 
The  Logframe  provides  indicators  and  targets  for  programme  implementation  from  output  over 
outcome,  development  objective  to  impact  levels.  The  RB-AWPB  will  break  physical  targets  up  by 
year  and  attach  financial  resources  to  them.  The  RB-AWPB  shall  present  financial  and  physical 
outputs  and  outcomes  of  the  programme  for  the  given  year,  and  report  on  the  accumulative 
achievements.  The  execution  of  the  RB- AWPB  will  be  monitored  along  the  M&E  framework  of  the 
programme and reported back in regular intervals from quarterly to semi-annuals reports. The cycle of 
planning,  monitoring  and  reporting  is  essential  for  efficient  management  of  the  programme  and  for 
achieving the results as agreed.  
Results based Monitoring and evaluation 
144.  FARMSE’s approach to planning, M&E and knowledge management system will be developed 
to  generate  comprehensive  and  reliable  information,  to  improve  planning  and  decision-making  for 
effective  programme  management  towards  results  and  impact.  The  system  will  inform  FARMSE 
overall and programme performance. Both, programme and Results and Impact Management System 
(RIMS) indicators, at each level will be used to guide programme management and performance. The 
IFAD- RIMS manual and templates will be placed in the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) for 
guidance. The PMU will have the responsibility for M&E system management. 
145.  Preliminary baseline and target values are to be established for the key indicators based on the 
data  used  for  the  economic  and  financial  analysis.  The  PMU  will  conduct  a  baseline  survey  of 
targeted  areas  to  benchmark key  indicators  at  the  beginning  of  programme  implementation  and  set 
targets against which progress of the programme will be monitored and impact assessed. A detailed 
M&E plan to guide the implementation of the programme at all levels will be developed by the PMU 
within the first few months of implementation.  
146.  The integrated M&E system will: i) measure the achievement of the logical framework indicators 
(including  the  RIMS);  ii)  assess  the  relevance  of  the  programme  strategy,  methodologies  and 
implementation processes; iii) assess the performance of implementing agencies and external service 
providers;  iv)  assess  programme  outcomes  and  impacts  partner  service  providers/stakeholders 
including clients, specifically  women  and  youth;  v) identify successes and  good  practices  which can 
also be used to inform Component 3 (and particularly sub-component 3.1); and vi) share knowledge 
as  appropriate  with  programme  stakeholders  to  support  dialogue  and  decision  making.  The  system 
will  provide  performance  transparency,  respecting  as  necessary  sensitive/proprietary  partner 
information.  
147.  Beyond  RIMS  and  Logical  Frame  work  measures,  other  programme  and  programme  metrics 
will be developed by the PMU with the input of programme stakeholders. Component 1.0 will have two 
streams of complementary data. First it will undertake a baseline study structured to provide the basis 
for a random control trial research assessment of graduation impact. This will be used as a part of a 
longitudinal  impact  study  of  the  targeted  graduation  households.  Second,  two  qualitative  studies  of 
graduation  model  households  will  be  undertaken  to  better  understand  the  effect  of  graduation  on 
household time use, productive decision making, gender relations impacts, etc.  
29 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
148.  Component  2.0  will  require  the  development  of  a  set  of  programme  partner  performance 
metrics.  Data  required  for  CFBO  groups  will  be  provided  by  programme  partners  and  will  include 
basic programme performance indicators including number of groups, number of members, location, 
some basic form of performance/sustainability. A set of cores metrics will apply to all 2.2 programmes 
(i.e.,  around  profitability,  efficiency,  etc.).  Another  set  of  metrics  will  apply  only  to  each  specific 
programme  (e.g.,  non-financial  sector  partners  versus  financial  sector  partners). All  metrics  beyond 
those  related  to  FARMSE  Logframe,  will  be  developed  with  the  concomitant  aim  of  providing 
programme  partner,  programme  partner  stakeholders  and  the  programme  performance  data  in 
support  of  performance  management.  This  will  include  development  of  a  monitoring  process  with 
provision  of  timely,  actionable  problem  and  opportunity  identification  outputs  (e.g.,  identification  of 
TSPs  and  FSPs  conflicts,  client  need/demand  for  financial  services,  market  bottlenecks,  etc.).  Data 
will also be used to support relevant policy dialogue. Performance data will be collected by partners 
and aggregated by the PMU monthly, and reported on a quarterly.  
149.  Programme Baseline Study. The FARMSE baseline study will be designed and carried out at 
programme start-up in areas likely to be selected for at least one component activities, preferably two. 
The  baseline  study  will  form  the  basis  for  assessing  programme  effectiveness  and  results 
achievement. The household survey shall be repeated at mid- term (or programme year 3-4) and at 
programme completion. Repeated measurements allow for obtaining data and information required for 
assessing  the  performance  and  achievements  of  the  programme  over  time.  Baseline  studies  will 
include  a  target  group  and  a  control  group,  and  will  incorporate  the  Multidimensional  Poverty 
Assessment  Tool  (MPAT).  This  will  be  essential  to  determine  attribution  of  results  to  programme 
activities.  
150.  Reporting. The M&E staff will produce three core reports: i) a quarterly progress report by each 
service provider; ii) a semi-annual progress report; and iii) an annual progress report. The programme 
Logical  Framework  includes  the  draft  indicators  against  which  programme  performance  would  be 
monitored  and  the  sources  of  data  to  be  used. These  indicators  would  be  discussed  and  agreed  at 
programme  start-up.  Draft  reports  will  be  shared  with  programme  partners  and  other  relevant 
stakeholders.  Comments  and  input  would  be  consolidated  by  the  PMU  M&E  staff,  reviewed,  and 
approved by the PSC prior to submission to IFAD, and the GOM. The M&E team will also consolidate 
programme performance input for Sub components 2.1 and 2.2 monthly, providing trend analysis as 
projects  are  implemented.  Aggregate  core  metrics  and  limited,  non-proprietary  (to  be  negotiated) 
project partner performance data will be published on-line quarterly to update stakeholders on project 
performance and to foster friendly competition. 
151.  Start-up  workshop.  MoFEPD  will  organize  a  FARMSE  start-up  workshop,  with  the  aim  of 
presenting  programme  objectives  and  scope,  roles  and  responsibilities  to  potential  stakeholders, 
service  providers  and  samples  of  beneficiaries.  The  workshop’s  timing  and  agenda  will  be  agreed 
upon between GOM and IFAD. The objective will be to have full buy-in and ownership of FARMSE by 
all  stakeholders.  The  programme  design  report  needs  to  be  disseminated  prior  to  a  wide  audience 
within  the  GOM,  among  potential  programme  implementation  partners,  and  other  stakeholders. 
Invitations to the workshop should be equally inclusive.  
Learning and knowledge management 
152.  Learning system. Capturing and documenting lessons and innovations through on-going data 
collection, monthly/semi-annual reports, and thematic studies will be an integral part of the FARMSE 
L&KM. disseminating reports and studies (in full or synthesized) will enable sharing of information and 
dialog  facilitation  with  stakeholders.  FARMSE  will  also  have  bi-annual  and  annual  review  meetings/ 
workshops. Workshops will report on programme progress, lessons learned, challenges and solutions 
to implementation constraints. Workshops will be learning events as well, presenting the opportunity 
to  influence  the  programming  performance  reviews.  A  short  report  capturing  workshop  discussions 
and  results  will  provide  feedback  to  the  programme’s  planning  and AWPBs  as  a  part  of  FARMSE’s 
commitment to participatory, demand-driven planning and implementation commitment.  
30 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
153.  Knowledge  development  and  diffusion.  FARMSE  will  support  the  creation  of  replicable  and 
scalable  approaches  to  graduation.  It  will  also  support  the  development  of  several  innovative  rural 
financial  products,  services,  and  delivery  mechanisms.  The  PMU  will  work  closely  with  programme 
partners and the M&E function to capture the process, technical, management, and impact learning's 
of  these  programme/project  experiences.  The  knowledge  management  function  of  the  M&E  will 
document  and  share  knowledge  through  internal  (e.g.,  learning  events,  stakeholder  workshop 
meetings,  etc.)  and  external  mechanisms  (e.g.,  website,  blogs,  podcasts  featuring  programme 
stakeholders,  etc.).  In  addition,  the  programme  would  publish  a  semi-annual  programme  update 
(online/print)  and  on  various  good  practices  and  human  interest  stories.  Knowledge  activities  will 
proactively  pursue  gender  and  youth  issues,  and  present  success  stories  related  to  vulnerability 
reduction and livelihood diversification as a means of household risk management. 
D.  Financial Management and Procurement  
Financial management 
154.  A Financial Management Assessment (FMA) was undertaken as part of the programme design 
in  accordance  with  IFAD  requirements  and  Financial  Management  Division  (FMD)  guidelines  on 
financial management assessment at design. The assessment was  based  on review  of operation  of 
the Programme Support Unit (PSU) of the IFAD financed RLEEP, Ministry of  Local Government and 
Rural Development (MLGRD), the IFAD financed SAPP mainstreamed in the  Ministry of Agriculture, 
the  National  Audit  Office  headed  by  the  Auditor  General  and  the  Internal  Audit  of  the  Ministry  of 
Finance.  A  review  of  previous  supervision  mission  reports  on  financial  management  was  also 
undertaken during the design mission.  
155.  The results find a medium fiduciary risk if the PMU composition, management responsibilities, 
and implementation activities proposed by design are followed. While FARMSE will be the first IFAD 
programme  led  by  the  MoFEPD,  the  ministry  has  substantial  experience  with  other  donors  and  the 
FMA  found  that  GOM  systems  provide  adequate  controls  to  ensure  proper  management  of 
programme  funds.  That  the  Pension  and  Financial  Strategy  Division  of  MoFEPD,  the  designated 
FARMSE manager, was recently formed ensures the importance of a strong, supportive PMU and of 
the proposed management training activities. (See Appendix 7 for details)  
156. 
IFAD  funding  will  be  administered  through  a  separate  designated  account  opened  solely  to 
receive  Programme  funds  from  IFAD.  MoFEPD  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  adequate  financial 
management  arrangements  throughout  FARMSE 
implementation.  The  operational  day-to-day 
financial  management  functions  including  budgeting,  accounting,  funds  flow  management,  internal 
control,  financial  reporting,  and  ensuring  timely  external  audits  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the 
Financial Controller of the PMU overseen by the Programme Coordinator. 
157.  To  provide  assurance  of  strong  internal  controls,  MoFEPD  will  ensure  regular  internal  audit 
activity  provided  by  the  internal  audit  unit  of  the  Ministry.  Supervision  missions  would  report  on  the 
activity  of  the  internal  audit  by  reviewing  Programme  reports  and  assessing  management’s 
responsiveness  to  recommendations.  Internal  controls  will  also  be  verified  during  an  annual  audit 
undertaken  by  the  Auditor  General  or  by  an  acceptable  designated  third  party.  In  compliance  with 
IFAD’s  General  Conditions,  FARMSE’s  financial  statements  shall  be  audited  on  an  annual  basis  in 
accordance  with  IFAD  audit  guidelines.  The  audit  reports  together  with  the  related  management 
letters shall be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after the end of each fiscal year. Financial 
management  arrangements  including,  staffing,  budgeting,  accounting,  funds  flow,  disbursements, 
financial reporting, internal controls, and auditing are detailed in Appendix 7. 
Procurement 
158.  Procurement  of  goods  and  services  including  human  resources  to  be  financed  from  the 
proceeds  of  the  loan  will  be  done  in  accordance  with  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Malawi 
(GOM)  procurement  procedures  as  per  the  Public  Procurement  Act  Number  8,  2003,  the  Malawi 
31 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Government  Public  Procurement  Regulations  of  2004,  and  GOMDesk  Instructions  for  Public 
Procurement. 
159.  The  Secretary  to  Treasury  will  delegate  procurement  powers  to  the  FARMSE  PMU  and  will 
appoint an Internal Procurement Committee (IPC) comprised of officers from MoFEPD and the PMU. 
The  IPC  will  be  the  overall  approval  authority  as  it  will  approve:  i)  all  procurement  plans;  ii)  draft 
advertisements  and  other  bidding  documents;  iii)  specific  terms  and  conditions  relating  to  contract 
amounts,  completion  periods,  stages,  and  conditions  of  part  payments;  iv)  all  the  contracts  above 
USD 10,000 (or as shall be specified in the Letter to the Borrower); and v) variations/amendments of 
contracts  that  have  been  cleared.  The  operational  day-to-day  procurement  functions  including 
procurement planning, execution of procurement actions and reporting will be the responsibility of the 
procurement  unit  of  the  PMU.  A  Procurement  Specialist  will  be  recruited  on  a  performance  based 
contract  shortly  after  start  up  to  support  help  establish  procurement  systems  and  train  the  staff 
responsible for procurement in the PMU and MoFEPD. 
160.  All  procurement  financed  from  proceeds  of  the  IFAD  grant  will  be  exempt  from  national  and 
local duties and taxes. All procurement will be executed only against approved procurement plans and 
AWPBs,  specifying  items  to  be  procured,  responsibility  for  the  procurement  and  the  appropriate 
procurement methods. There is a need for strong record keeping including at implementation partners 
to facilitate procurement verification during missions and audits during implementation. Details on the 
procurement arrangements are presented in Appendix 8. 
E.  Supervision 
161.  FARMSE  would  be  directly  supervised  by  IFAD.  Direct  supervision  would  encompass  four 
discrete  processes:  i)  loan  and  grant  administration;  ii)  procurement  review;  iii)  audit  review;  and 
iv) supervision  and  implementation  support.  Direct  supervision  would  be  applied  as  a  continuous 
process which requires on-going communication and  engagement with the GOM and the  PMU.  Key 
supervision processes which would be applied are outlined below. 
162.  Loan and Grant administration would ensure fiduciary compliance, with focus on: i) compliance 
with legal covenants; ii) financial management and specific focus on management of grants under the 
innovation facility. The procurement review will focus on: i) the procurement planning and processes; 
and  ii)  management  and  monitoring  of  contracts.  Audit  reviews  will  focus  on:  i)  prior  review  of  the 
terms of reference and appointment of the programme audit; and ii) quality of the programme audit.  
163.  Programme  supervision  with  focus  on:  i)  implementation  performance  and  progress  towards 
programme  objectives;  ii)  programme  investments,  outputs,  outcomes,  and  impact;  iii)  quality  of 
AWPB,  M&E,  and  reporting;  iv)  effectiveness  of  the  PSC,  programme  management,  implementing 
institutions,  and  service  providers;  v)  good  governance:  transparency  and  participation;  and 
vi) targeting  and  gender.  Associated  implementation  support  will  provide  advice  for  the  following 
ii) 
aspects  of  programme  performance: 
implementing  and  mainstreaming  new  approaches;  iii)  addressing  operational  issues  and  problems; 
and iv) generating lessons and articulating best practices. 
i)  efficient  achievement  of  programme  objectives; 
164.  The  supervision  process  would  guide  the  programme  towards  the  achievement  of  strategic 
objectives  and  broader  poverty  reduction  outcomes,  while  ensuring  fiduciary  compliance  and 
responsiveness  to  the  accountability  framework.  Several  instruments  would  be  applied  to  influence 
implementation: i) on-going policy dialogue with Government; ii) adjustment of annual work plans and 
budgets;  iii) revision  of implementation manuals; iv) undertaking of supervision  and mid-term review 
missions; and, legal amendments as appropriate. 
165. 
 IFAD will conduct joint field supervision missions with the MoFEPD twice per year. In addition, 
the  MoFEPD  will  commission  an  independent  external  review  at  mid-term  and  end-of  term.  The 
evaluations will assess processes and results and draw lessons for future programming.   
32 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
166.  FARMSE  will  be  the  first  inclusive  finance  sector  development  programme  in  Malawi  since  a 
United Nations Capital Development Fund programme ended in 2012. Current and recent past IFAD 
and  other  donor  programmes  had  limited  or  indirect  rural  finance  sector  intervention  impacts. Thus, 
there  is  less  than  ideal  information  upon  which  to  anticipate  risks  to  FARMSE.  Some,  however,  are 
well  known  due  to  experiences  in  other  countries  in  the  region  while  others  are  specific  to  the 
operating and government environment of Malawi.  
167.  Because  of  this  and  to  ensure  sustainability  of  the  proposed  programme  interventions, 
substantial  attention  is  given  to  identification  and  management  of  risks  in  the  FARMSE  design, 
particularly  through  the  provision  of  strong,  long  term  technical  assistance.  The  current  programme 
design  limits  the  exposure  to  risks,  and  proposes  measures  to  manage  those  risks  deemed 
acceptable or inevitable. Macro-economic and political instability, however, remains a key risk outside 
the  control  of  the  programme.  The  principal  risks  affecting  FARMSE  are  set  out  in  Table  4  which 
provides an assessment of the current level for each major risk facing the programme, and identifying 
the possible consequences as well as proposed mitigation measures. 
Table 4: Risk identification and mitigation matrix 
Risks 
Current 
Level 
Possible Consequences 
Mitigation 
1. Slow Programme 
start up jeopardizes 
implementation plan. 
2. Climate change, 
climate variability, 
macro-economic and 
shocks. 
Medium.   Component 1.0 has a staged approach with a 
relatively tight time line. There is a risk of slow 
interface between level 1 which will be fully 
GOM/other partners supported with level 2-5 
where IFAD support is expected. Component 
2.0 risks not meeting disbursement targets. 
Both risks potentially decrease the number of 
target beneficiaries supported out of poverty. 
Medium   Poor crops negatively affect rural economy 
and financial sector expansion potential. 
Unexpected macro-economic shocks (hyper- 
inflation, devaluation, etc.) negatively affect 
the national/rural economy. 
Provide sufficient support to GOM in start-up phase. 
Provide sufficient and capable TA for programme 
start up and implementation. Closely monitor 
potential bottlenecks in implementation and allow 
flexibility in overcoming these. 
FARMSE will stress planning for long-term financial 
service provision. Proposed financial service 
innovations/outreach mechanisms will be rigorously 
tested and business models/pro forma estimates will 
be purposely modest to accommodate climate driven 
or macro-economic impacts. The programme can not 
anticipate economic shocks but every effort will be 
taken to ensure the effectiveness of finance products 
to withstand/accommodate reduced demand and or 
increased market place risk.  
FARMSE will, in the short term, increase households’ 
resilience by increasing financial buffers. Over time, 
increased investments will reduce exposure to 
extreme weather events. 
Soft commitments by CBFO support organizations 
and FSPs in design of programme participation. 
Provide strong technically capable PMU staffing. 
Proactive recruitment of enterprise/organizations for 
participation and provision of strong TSPs for 
product/service development. 
The FARMSE PMU/CTO for rural finance must have 
strong international experience and proactively 
support recruitment of TA service providers with the 
capacity to support IOF grantees in Malawi. 
to 
Low 
Medium 
Without substantial participation from 
enterprise/organizations, there is a risk that 
few innovative and/or scalable financial 
products/services are developed to better 
serve the rural poor. 
Without strong technical assistance, IOF 
grantees will face substantial challenges to 
design, develop, test and roll out new 
products for rural markets.  
3.Lack of interest by 
financial institutions 
and agricultural value 
chain businesses/ 
organizations to 
participate in the IOF. 
4. Financial 
institutions/ agriculture 
value chain actors do 
not source 
appropriate technical 
assistance. 
5. GOM policy 
deviates from good 
practice inclusive 
finance or political 
economy prevents 
good practice from 
Low 
Low 
GOM financial and inclusive financial policy 
and regulations to date have generally 
followed international good practice. However, 
the government could introduce subsidy 
programmes, interest rate caps, or not 
entertain needed if modest regulatory and/or 
Provide proactive support to the MoFEPD, other 
stakeholder ministries, the RBM and other relevant 
sector stakeholders to bolster commitment to good 
practice inclusive finance sector development and a 
comprehensive strategy to manage political 
alignment with policy recommendations coming from 
33 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Risks 
Current 
Level 
being translated into 
policy. 
Possible Consequences 
Mitigation 
policy initiatives (esp. around mobile money) 
anticipated by FARMSE which could limit 
private sector investment interest in rural 
financial sector innovation and outreach 
development. 
Component 3 of the project. 
Continuous heavy 
load shedding 
Medium  Provisions of services will be severely 
constrained and frequent occurrences of 
communication breakdown. These will slow 
down development and lower demand and 
supply of goods/services. 
The FARMSE PMU should include the need for 
mitigating strategies by partners and this should be 
included in their proposals. 
IV.  Programme costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Programme costs 
168.  Programme  costs  are  organized  into  three  technical  and  one  non-technical  components: 
(i) Graduation  of  Ultra-Poor  Households;  (ii)  Support  to  Financial  Innovation  and  Outreach; 
(iii) Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation and Policy; and (iv) Programme Management and 
Coordination.  A  summary  breakdown  of  programme  costs  by  components  and  their  respective  sub-
components is shown in Table 2. 
169.  Total  programme  costs  to  be  incurred  during  the  seven-year  implementation  period,  including 
price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at USD 57.8 million. This includes a 
base  cost  of  USD  54.8  million  and  physical  and  price  contingencies  of  USD  2.9  million.  Estimated 
foreign  exchange  expenditure  is  about  USD  28.1  million,  local  cost  is  about  USD  20.8  million  and 
duties and taxes  amount to USD  8.8 million. Investment costs represent 93  per cent,  with recurrent 
costs  accounting  for  the  remaining  7  per  cent  of  the  total  cost.  Programme  management  and 
coordination costs account 10 per cent of total programme costs.   
Table 1: Programme Cost Summary by Component & Year (USD’000) 
B.  Programme financing 
170.  FARMSE  will  be  financed  by  the  Government  of  Malawi  (GOM),  IFAD,  and  private  sector 
participants.  IFAD  will  finance  73  per  cent  (USD  42  million)  of  the  programme  costs.  Half  of  IFAD 
funding will be provided on loan at highly concessional terms, while the other half of IFAD funds will 
be  provided  as  a  grant.  The  Government  will  contribute  USD  9.6  million  (17%)  out  of  which  about 
USD 3.1 million (5%) will be financed from its Social Cash Transfer fund and USD 6.5 million (11%) 
will finance taxes and some duties. Domestic private sector will contribute 11 per cent of total project 
costs,  USD  6.1  million  through  in-kind  and  cash  contributions  to  sub-projects  financed  under  the 
Innovation and Outreach Facility. The programme cost does not include contributions of any potential 
partner in Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households component. 
34 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD '000) Totals Including Contingencies18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 8992,4063,7064,3553,2621,1782315,8292. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 1536,2504,6885,8985,7487,0084,44934,1953. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 292193547393345751,6484. Programme Management and Coordination 8527978498238988559846,057Total PROJECT COSTS 1,9069,5459,43511,62310,3019,3865,53157,728 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Table 2: Programme Financing Plan by Component (USD ‘000) 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
171. 
Benefits and Beneficiaries: Total estimated number of targeted households is 432,800. 
This  include  around  (i)  15,000  ultra-poor  households  who  would  benefit  from  the  graduation  model 
interventions; (ii) 380,600 poor, vulnerable and resilient households who would benefit from expansion 
of informal financial services and products; and (iii) 37,200 households from formal financial services 
and  products.  Beneficiary  households  are  likely  and/or  expected  to  participate  in  more  than  one 
programme  activity.  Ultra-poor  households,  for  instance,  may  graduate  from  ultra-poverty  and/or 
become  members  of  VSLAs.  To  minimise  double  counting,  the  analysis  assumed  that  around  30 
percent of households will benefit from improved access to informal (component 2.2) as well as formal 
(component  2.1)  financial  services  and  products.  Please  refer  to  Table  5  for  assumptions  on  target 
beneficiaries.    
Table 5: Summary of target beneficiaries 
172.  Financial  Analysis.  This  financial  analysis  focuses  on  the  incremental  costs  and  benefits 
accruing at the household level because of the anticipated increased access to and productive use of 
sustainable formal and informal financial services.  
173.  Crop/Activity  Models.  Eight  crop/activity  models  were  developed.  On-farm  models  (per  ha) 
include: i) Maize; ii) Groundnuts; iii) Soya bean; iv) Rain-fed Potato; v) Irrigated potato (w/ investment 
in a low-cost treadle pump); and vi) Maize on rented land. Livestock activities include: i) goat rearing 
with an initial investment of two goats, reaching a maximum stock of nine; and ii) one dairy cow.  
174.  Household Models. Five Household models were developed to represent expected FARMSE 
beneficiaries. For the purposes of this analysis households are classified as being either: i) Ultra Poor; 
ii) Poor; or iii) Vulnerable. These household types are differentiated by: i) land holding; and ii) livestock 
ownership. Some 87% of adopting households will benefit only from the Programmes investments in 
the expansion and strengthening of CBFO groups, through which access to formal financial services 
35 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Components by Financiers GovtGovt cashIFADPrivate(USD '000) taxestransferIFAD LoanGrantSectorTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmount1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 2,0943,0595,3375,337-15,8292. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 3,340-12,35212,3526,15134,1953. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 261-693693-1,6484. Programme Management and Coordination 822-2,6182,618-6,057Total PROJECT COSTS 6,5173,05921,00021,0006,15157,728 Ultra-Poor Households  Poor Households  Vulnerable Households TOTAL:1. Graduation of ultra poor households15,000              -                        -                      15,000                 -                       -                       2.1: Community based financial organisation support-                    190,287                190,287               380,574               2.2: Financial innovation and outreach facility -                    18,600                  18,600                 37,200                 TOTAL:15,000              151,801                151,801               432,774               1. Graduation of ultra poor households15,000              -                        -                      15,000                 -                       -                       2.1: Community based financial organisation support-                    133,201                133,201               266,402               2.2: Financial innovation and outreach facility -                    9,300                    9,300                   18,600                 TOTAL:15,000              142,501                142,501               285,002               At various adoption rates and participation in multiple activitiesCOMPONENTTarget Number of Beneficiaries 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
will  be  increased.  CBFO  groups  allow  members  to  boost  savings  (and  returns  thereon)  and  obtain 
access to short term loans. CBFOs allow members to smoothen consumption (not quantified), and in 
some cases, make short-term productive investments (in this analysis represented as farm inputs and 
land rental). A much smaller portion of participating households (9% of adopting households) will gain 
access  to  formal  financial  services  due  to  Programme  investments  in  CBFOs,  and  the  increased 
innovation and outreach of the rural financial sector. It is expected these households will have access 
to loans and savings products from formal FSPs that will allow for larger and longer-term productive 
investments  (represented  in  this  analysis  by  livestock  and  micro  irrigation  equipment).  Finally,  ultra-
poor households (4%) will benefit from the implementation of the graduation component which offers 
training, mentoring, as well as a one-time a lump-sum cash grant for investment in productive assets 
and working capital. The “with” and “without” programme scenario for each of these household types 
is summarized in Table 6 below.    
Table 6: Summary of with and without programme situations per household type 
175.  Household  Cash  Flow  Analysis.  The  analysis  of  the  cash  flows  after  financing  for  all 
household  models  indicate  that  participating  households  will  be  substantially  better  off  because  of 
programme  interventions.  The  analysis  indicates  that  if  households  can  muster  sufficient  savings 
36 
CropsUnitWOPWPMaize ha0.200.20Groundnutsha0.100.20Total Cropped Areaha0.300.40Total Plot Areaha0.400.40LivestockGoats heads05CropsUnitWOPWPMaize ha0.400.40Groundnutsha0.200.20Soya Beanha0.200.20Maize on Rented Landha0.000.00Total Cropped Areaha0.800.80Total Plot Areaha0.800.80LivestockGoats heads59CropsUnitWOPWPMaize ha0.400.40Groundnutsha0.200.20Soya Beanha0.200.20Maize on Rented Landha0.000.10Total Cropped Areaha0.800.90Total Plot Areaha0.800.80LivestockGoats heads514CropsUnitWOPWPMaize ha0.200.20Groundnutsha0.200.20Soya Beanha0.200.20rainfed potatoha0.400.40Total Cropped Areaha1.001.00Total Plot Areaha1.001.00LivestockGoats heads1428CropsUnitWOPWPMaize ha0.200.20Groundnutsha0.200.20Soya Beanha0.200.20Rainfed potatoha0.400.00irrigated potatoha0.000.40Total Cropped Areaha1.001.00Total Plot Areaha1.001.00LivestockGoats (investment in 2 goats)heads2828Dairy Cowheads01Ultra Poor Houshold (Graduation beneficiaries)Poor Household (only VSLA)Poor Household (VSLA & FFS)Vulnerable Household (only VSLA)Vulnerable Household (VSLA & FFS) 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
through  CBFO  groups  and  can  access  adequate  financing  products  through  the  formal  financial 
sector, the proposed investments are financially sustainable. This is summarized in Table 7.  
Table 7: Summary of Profitability Indicators - Household Models 
176.  Financing requirements. For each household type have been estimated as a function of total 
incremental  production  costs  and  beneficiary  contribution.  For  households  benefiting  under 
Component  1.0,  it  is  assumed  that  financing  requirements  will  be  met  through  a  grant  (the  one-off 
lump sum part of the graduation programme). For households benefitting only from subcomponent 2.1 
(CBFOs),  it  is  assumed  that  all  financing  requirements  are met  through  beneficiary  contribution  (i.e. 
from  both 
savings  accumulated 
subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2, it is assumed that 50% of financing requirements are met though savings 
and  the  remaining  50%  through  loans.  A  summary  of  the  financing  requirement  per  household  is 
presented in the Table 8. 
through  group  participation).  For  households  benefiting 
Table 8: Household Financing 
177.  The  analysis  considers  that  not  all  households  will  be  willing  or  able  to  profit  from  FARMSE. 
Given  that  FARMSE  investments  will  not  flow  directly  to  rural  households  (except  for  under  the 
graduation  component),  an  adoption  rate  of  50%  was  conservatively  assumed. The  total  number  of 
households that benefit from the programme is therefore calculated to be 194,800. The coverage and 
phasing of beneficiary by programme year is summarised in the Table 9.  
37 
720n. of adopting HHMWKUSDMWKUSDUltra Poor Household (Graduation) 7 500                 156 705     217.3     245 865    341.01          89 160        123.7     537 896     746        #NUM!Poor Household (VSLA)84 350               324 512     450.1     452 655    627.82          128 143      177.7     558 006     774        82%Poor household (VSLA and FFS)9 300                 324 512     450.1     575 021    797.53          250 509      347.4     1 146 666  1 590     116%Vulnerable Household (VSLA)84 350               644 542     894.0     820 685    1 138.26       176 143      244.3     792 604     1 099     77%Vulnerable Household (VSLA and FFS)9 300                 644 542     894.0     1 143 099 1 585            498 557      691        2 564 284  3 557     102%WOPWP at full developmentNet Annual income after financing721Incremental Income after financingMWKUSDMWKUSDIRR (after financing)NPV (@ 10%)  -  incremental income after financingMWKUSDMWKUSDMWKUSDUltra Poor Household (Graduation) 90,567         126             40,567     56             90,567         126        Poor Household (VSLA)45,381         63               22,690     32             22,690         32          Poor household (VSLA and FFS)586,528       815             274,295   381           312,233       434        Vulnerable Household (VSLA)316,335       439             179,250   249           137,084       190        Vulnerable Household (VSLA and FFS)866,325       1,203          247,948   344           618,377       859        Incremental production costsBeneficiary contributionHousehold loan requirement 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Table 9: Beneficiary Phasing and Adoption 
178. 
Incremental Financing. Based on the expected total number of adopting households, the total 
incremental  amount  of  financing  that  must  be  made  available  by  FSPs  over  the  programme  life  is 
estimated at USD 1.18 million, assuming an 85% recovery rate.  
179.  Economic  Profitability  Indicators.  Given  the  above  assumptions,  the  base  case  economic 
internal rate of return (EIRR) for FAMRSE is estimated at 19.4%. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 
2.08. The Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) estimated at USD 29 million.  
ENPV @ 12% (USD) 
EIRR (%) 
B/C Ratio 
29 million 
19.4% 
2.08 
Table 10: Sensitivity Analysis 
Table 11: Switching Values 
180.  Sensitivity  Analysis.  The  key  risks  to  the  success  of  FARMSE  implementation  have  been 
identified and analysed in the main report of this programme design document. A sensitivity analysis 
was  conducted  on  the  EIRR  and  ENPV  to  determine  the  effect  that  reduced  programme  benefits, 
38 
Y 1Y 2Y 3Y 4Y 5Y6Y7Y8 TotalUltra Poor Household (Graduation) 15 000      coverage rate0%0%0%25%25%25%25%0%100%adoption rate50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%no. of HH-             -                  -                  1 875               1 875               1 875               1 875               -                                     7 500 cumulative no. of HH                 -                         -                         -                    1 875                  3 750                  5 625                  7 500                  7 500 Poor Household (VSLA)168 700    coverage rate0%0%10%10%10%30%20%20%100%adoption rate50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%no. of HH-             -                  8 435             8 435               8 435               25 305             16 870             16 870                           84 350 cumulative no. of HH                 -                         -                  8 435               16 870               25 305               50 610               67 480               84 350 Poor household (VSLA and FFS)18 600      coverage rate0%0%10%10%10%30%20%20%100%adoption rate50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%no. of HH-             -                  930                 930                   930                   2 790               1 860               1 860                                9 300 cumulative no. of HH                 -                         -                     930                  1 860                  2 790                  5 580                  7 440                  9 300 Vulnerable Household (VSLA and FFS)18 600      coverage rate0%0%10%10%10%30%20%20%100%adoption rate50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%no. of HH-             -                  930                 930                   930                   2 790               1 860               1 860                                9 300 cumulative no. of HH                 -                         -                     930                  1 860                  2 790                  5 580                  7 440                  9 300 Vulnerable Household (VSLA)168 700    coverage rate0%0%10%10%10%30%20%20%100%adoption rate50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%no. of HH-             -                  8 435             8 435               8 435               25 305             16 870             16 870                           84 350 cumulative no. of HH                 -                         -                  8 435               16 870               25 305               50 610               67 480               84 350 Totals    389 600  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6  Y7  Y8 Total Number of HH                 -                         -               18 730               20 605               20 605               58 065               39 335               37 460             194 800 Total Cumulative HH                 -                         -               18 730               39 335               59 940             118 005             157 340             194 800 Project Year Target HH ChangeEIRRENPV0%20.3%15,638,679-10%18.2%11,120,390-20%15.8%6,602,101-50%7.2%-6,952,76710%22.3%20,156,96920%24.2%24,675,25810%18.4%12,684,25820%16.7%9,729,83750%12.4%866,5721 yr17.1%10,393,4702 yrs14.8%5,116,28220%20.3%48,369,882Sensitivity variablesBase scenarioProject costsProject benefitsDelay in benefit accumulationIncreases in VSLA loans 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
increased  programme  costs,  or  a  lag  in  benefits  could  have  on  the  economic  viability  of  the 
investment. The sensitivity analysis is summarised in Table 10 above. 
181.  The  analysis  indicates  that  the  programme’s  profitability  is  robust  in  the  sense  that  its  main 
economic  profitability  indicators  do  not  change  significantly  in  response  to  changes  in  the  expected 
benefits  or  costs.  The  EIRR  remains  acceptable  in  all  calculated  scenarios.  Switching  values  were 
calculated  for  incremental  benefits  and  incremental  costs.45  Benefits  would  have  to  be  reduced  by 
60% or cost increased by 166% for FARMSE to become economically unviable. 
D.  Sustainability 
182.  The success of rural finance sector development investments is largely determined by how well 
both the needs of supply and demand are met. For suppliers, a reasonable and long-term profit must 
be realizable. For demand, products and services must meet a practical  need  which advances their 
household economy, at a cost that is acceptable for outcomes rendered. Moreover, these conditions 
must  be met  under  prevailing  macro-economic  and  environmental  conditions,  of  which  both  present 
ongoing and inevitable future challenges for financial sector stability. Investment also require a stable 
and  good  practice  regulatory  and  policy  environment.  Each  FARMSE  component  recognizes  these 
needs and challenges and has built in mechanisms to ensure sustainability of outcomes  and impacts 
are guarded to the extent possible.  
183.  Component 1.0 will build on GOM graduation concept which is based on the Malawian context 
and is likely to result in selection  of high rate of household graduation from poverty on a sustainable 
basis. The blend of local context and international practices of Component 1.0 provides significant risk 
mitigation against unsustainable results. 
184.  Subcomponent 2.1  will support CBFO groups applying good  practice consolidation and  group 
formation  methods  which  experience  shows  some  80%  remain  operational  after  3  to  5  years.  It  is 
critical  to  understand  that  not  all  groups  should  continue  to  operate  as  many  individuals  come 
together  in  a  group  as  their  financial  context  allows  or  demands.  What  is  critical  is  that  the  CBFO 
group methods/structures imbedded in member’s financial knowledge/capacity base are sustainable, 
so  that  when  groups  are  restructured,  consolidated  or  formed,  no  outside  support  organization  is 
required.  In  addition  to  serving  the  needs  of  individuals  and  groups,  CBFOs  are  considered  a 
sustainable  market  platform  for  linking  for  low  monetary,  value  high  volume  transactions  to  formal 
FSPs.  Several  institutions  are  now  collaborating  with  CBFO  organizations  and/or  existing  CBFO 
groups/members and subcomponent 2.1 activities  will encourage and support these efforts. Equally, 
subcomponent 2.1 will directly support efforts to expand CBFO linkages to formal FSPs via innovation 
funding activities. These initiatives could also be featured as part of IOF funded activities with FSPs or 
value chain actors.  
185.  The  premise  of  subcomponent  2.2  is  that  all  funding  initiatives  will  result  in  a  sustainable/ 
profitable  financial  product  or  service  meeting  the  needs  of  FARMSE’s  target  groups.  As  with 
Component  1.0,  subcomponent  2.2  proposes  a  rigorous,  systematic  good  practice  approach  to 
financial  service/product  development. As  critical,  the  subcomponent  includes  the  funding  of  expert 
technical  assistance.  This  is  critical  on  two  fronts.  The  first  is  the  embedding  of  the  CTA  in  the 
FARMSE  PMU.  Expert  and  proactive  support  for  proposals  from  FSPs  and  agriculture  value  chain 
participants  is  key  to  developing  a  viable  investment  pipeline  with  strong  sustainability  potential. 
Managing  and  guiding  proposals,  and  later  supporting  implementation,  is  also  critical.  The  second 
consideration  is  the  expectation  that  IOF  grantees  will  source  technical  expertise  related  to  their 
specific product or service innovation or outreach activities. While this will not be required in all cases, 
the  expectation  is  that  grantees  seldom  have  the  internal  technical  capacity  to  design,  test,  and  roll 
out financial products. This is not to say institutions cannot manage such a process, rather that they 
simply  have  no  business  rational  for  maintaining  the  fixed  overhead  costs  of  such  specialized 
45  The  switching  value  of  a  variable  is  that  value  that  it  would  have  to  attain  for  the  outcome  of  the project  to  fall  below  the 
minimum level of acceptability (net present value of the project equal to zero). 
39 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
capacity,  so  they  seldom  do.  In  almost  all  cases,  the  Innovation  and  Outreach  Facility  funding  will 
have sourcing  of FARMSE-approved external  technical  assistance  as a condition, ensuring the best 
chance that the resulting financial products and services and their outcomes will be sustainable.  
186. 
It  is  not  anticipated  that  support  to  key  institutions,  knowledge  products  and  policies  in 
Component  3.0  will  in-and-of  themselves  guarantee-improved  sustainability  of  any  FARMSE 
intervention.  The  activities  in  this  component  are,  however,  critical  to  the  long-term  stability  of  the 
sector and to embedding  a sustainability ethos in the  rural finance sector eco-system. Key concrete 
outputs such as broad rural finance policy that include CBFO guidelines will have direct and tangible 
impacts towards this end, but improving the good practice knowledge of key stakeholders is equally, if 
not more important to the long-term leadership influence on sector development. 
187.  While  FARMSE  planned  interventions  and  implementation  considerations  anticipates  some 
many  of  the  challenges  facing  rural  financial  sector  development,  macro-economic,  climatic 
conditions,  along  with  unfavourable  political  events  could  have  unexpected  impacts  beyond  the 
control of the programme and/or the financial services/products developed from programme support. 
40 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
1. 
Country  context.  Malawi  is  a  small,  densely  populated  land  locked  country  located  between 
Zambia, Mozambique and Tanzania. Its climate is tropical, with a rainy season from October to April 
and a mean annual rainfall ranging between 500 and 3,000 mm.  
Malawi’s  population  increased  from  4  million  in  1966  to  16.7  million  people  in  2014;  and  is 
2. 
expected  to  grow  to  26  million  in  2030.  Two  out  of  three  people  are  under  25  years  of  age.46  Life 
expectancy  has  improved  to  62.8  years.47  The  average  population  density  is  177  persons  per  km² 
(2014), with some areas in the south having over 300 people per km². 
3. 
Malawi is a Least Developed Country with a 2014 Human Development Index of 0.445, ranking 
it  174th  out  of  182  countries.  The  gross  national  income  per  capita  fell  from  US$370  in  2011  to 
US$250 in 2015,48 mainly due to a drop-in income from export crops. Despite progress in HIV/AIDS 
prevention  and  treatment,  9.1%  of  the  adult  population  is  infected  (2010).49  Poor  nutrition  and 
HIV/AIDS  prevalence  aggravate  the  low  rural  productivity.  Caring  for  family  members  also  puts  an 
extra burden especially on women. About 51% of the population live below the national poverty line,50 
with 30% living in severe poverty in 2010.51 Poverty is predominantly rural, with the south and north of 
the country taking the main burden. (See Appendix 2 for more details on poverty in Malawi) Statistics 
for rural food and nutrition security are alarming too. Stunting among children averages 42%, and in 
some districts over 60%.52 Female-headed households  are more affected by food insecurity as they 
usually have smaller resources endowments.53 
The  2014  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  was  about  US$4.258  billion  of  which  17.0%  derives 
4. 
from industry and 49.7% from services. Agriculture provides the remaining 33.3% but plays a key role. 
The sector employs 80% of the workforce and is the main foreign exchange earner, through export of 
tobacco,  sugar,  tea,  coffee,  and  cotton.  Real  GDP  growth  in  2014  was  estimated  at  5.7%,  driven 
largely  by  agriculture,  with  significant  contributions  from  manufacturing,  wholesale  and  retail  trade, 
and services.54 Official unemployment stands at 6.6% (2014). Youth unemployment is strikingly high 
at 40%. Inflation has remained above 20% annually since 2013 (up from 4.1% in 2007), driven by low 
crop  harvests  and  subsequent  surges  in  food  prices.  In  2016,  food  price  inflation  was  at  28.4% 
affecting net-food buyers and posing a risk of increased child malnutrition.55  
5. 
Rural livelihoods. Eighty-five per cent (ca. 11 million) of the population live in rural areas and 
almost  all  engage  in  crop  and  livestock  production.  Some  88%  of  Malawian  adults  are  involved  in 
farming. Whilst for many this is primarily subsistence farming, for 33% farming is their primary source 
of  income.  More  than  80%  of  rural  land  is  under  customary  tenure  and  land  holdings  average  0.8 
hectares (Smallholder farmers cultivate on average 1.2 hectares of land – 30% cultivate less than half 
a hectare), with maize being the dominant crop (66%) for smallholders, followed by pigeon peas and 
groundnuts  (16%  each)  and  tobacco  (8%).  Agriculture  export  account  for  85%  of  the  country’s 
exports,  of  which  tobacco  comprises  55%.  Other  major  exports  products  are  uranium,  sugar,  tea, 
maize and cotton. Imports are dominated by oil, coal, consumer goods and fertilizers. 
46 Malawi Population Reference Bureau. (2014). 
47 UNDP. (2015). Human Development Report 2014, Malawi summary. 
48See:http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?q=gni+per+capita+malawi&d=WDI&f=Indicator_Code%3aNY.GNP.PCAP.CD%3bCountry_Code%3aMWI#W
DI 
49 See: http://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/malawi 
50 See: http://data.worldbank.org/country/malawi 
51 See: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/MWI.pdf. 
52 IFAD. (2016). Baseline Report on Food Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice (KAP). 
53 Kassie et al. (2015). Gendered Food Security in Rural Malawi. 
54 Africa Economic Outlook. (2015). 
55 Cornia, Doti, Sassi. (2016). Source of food price volatility and child malnutrition in Niger and Malawi, Food Policy. See also: 
Klasen, Rischke. (2016). Analyzing nutritional impacts of price and income related shocks in Malawi, Food Policy. 
41 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Rapid  population  growth  reduces  family  landholdings.  Land  degradation56,  deforestation  and 
6. 
climate  change  exacerbate  food  and  nutrition  insecurity.57  Agriculture  is  increasingly  vulnerable  to 
natural shocks. Heavy rains followed by the 2015/16 drought left 2.8 million Malawians dependent on 
food aid. Agricultural practices are inadequately adapted to intensive land use and weather extremes. 
Loss of topsoil from agricultural lands is substantial, largely because of inappropriate management.  
7. 
Almost  all  rural  households  in  Malawi  participate  in  on-farm  activities,  with  more  than  60%  of 
their income coming from these activities. Agriculture relies heavily on rains and is dominated by two 
crops: maize and tobacco. The majority of Malawian farmers are smallholder producers, characterised 
by use of traditional agrarian tools and limited adequate technologies. Livestock is dominated by small 
stocks mostly owned by small holder farmers.  
Rural households provide agricultural labour, which is seasonal and poorly paid, especially for 
8. 
women. Women nonetheless play a leading role in agricultural production but they suffer the sector's 
structural  deficiencies  more  acutely  than  men.  Rural  women´s  potential  participation  in  paid 
employment  is  hampered  by  a  significant  domestic  work  burden,  unequal  decision  making  in  the 
household, and systemic bias in the market place (e.g., for employment, formal credit, etc.). There is 
limited  diversification  into  off-farm  activities,  through  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)  for 
agricultural  product  value  addition,  employment,  trading,  and  services  offer  some  opportunity  to 
improve livelihoods and reduce vulnerability for both men and women.58 
9. 
Development  policies  and  programmes.  Malawi’s  development  vision  is  outlined  in  the 
Malawi  Vision  2020,  which  aims  to  make  Malawi  “secure,  democratically  mature,  environmentally 
sustainable, self-reliant with equal opportunities for and active participation by all”. The Malawi vision 
2020  is  translated  into  strategies  and  sector  policies  and  implemented  by  programmes,  which  are 
relevant to the COSOP. They include: 
i) 
The Malawi Growth and Development Strategy  III  (MGDS  III: 2017-2022)  which is the 
overarching  medium-term  development  strategy  designed  to  contribute  to  Malawi’s  long-
term development aspirations. It aspires to reduce poverty through sustainable  economic 
growth and infrastructure development, inter alia in agriculture; 
ii)  The  National  Agriculture  Policy  (NAP  2016-2020)  outlines  eight  priority  areas  that  fully 
correspond  with  Malawi  COSOP  SOs:  agricultural  production  and  productivity;  irrigation 
development;  mechanisation  of  agriculture;  agriculture  market  development,  agro-
processing  and  value  addition;  food  and  nutrition  security;  agricultural  risk  management; 
youth and women empowerment in agriculture; institutional development, coordination and 
capacity strengthening;  
iii)  The  National  Export  Strategy  (NES,  2013-2018)  pursues  growth  through  oilseeds  and 
sugarcane products, and through processing dairy, maize, wheat, horticulture, and pulses. 
These commodities will be supported under SO2; 
iv)  The  National  Climate  Change  Policy  (2013)  promotes,  as  per  SO1,  climate  change 
adaptation and mitigation for livelihoods through economic development.   
10.  The  above  policies  are  implemented  through  government  programmes.  The  Farm  Input 
Subsidy  Programme  (FISP)  aims  to  contribute  to  crop  production  and  diversification.59  Since  its 
inception  in  2005,  FISP  reached  50%  of  Malawi’s  smallholders,  but  it  consumes  80%  of  the 
agricultural budget and considerable time from staff. It impacts on the outreach of extension services 
and lacks incentives for farmers to boost productivity. The Malawi Agricultural Sector Wide Approach 
support programme (ASWAp-SP,  2011-2015) aims to coordinate  interventions,  with the target  of 6% 
56 Land degradation and subsequent change in land use is estimated to cause economic costs in range of 6-7% of Malawi’s 
GDP. See Kirui. (2016). Economics of Land Degradation and Improvements in Tanzania and Malawi. 
57 Draft National Forest Policy of Malawi. (2013). See Appendix VI. 
58 SMEs include micro-enterprises and homestead production as well as minor rural processors and agro-dealers that employ 
up to 30 people. 
59 Arndt et al. (2015). The Economy-wide Impacts and Risks of Malawi's Farm Input Subsidy Program. Amer. Journal of Agro-
Economics.  
42 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
annual  growth  in  the  agricultural  sector. ASWAp  is  currently  being  reviewed  to  address  challenges 
encountered  during 
to  poverty  alleviation  with 
intersections to FARMSE include the Irrigation Master Plan and Investment Framework (IMPIF, 2015) 
and National Climate Change Investment Plan (2015). 
implementation.  Other  programmes  relevant 
11.  There have been several financial sector development strategies and programmes supporting 
poverty  alleviation. A  series  of  financial  sector  development  and  reform  initiatives  by  GOM  with  the 
support  of  the World  Bank,  leading  to  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Strategy  2010  -  2016. The 
GOM  also  developed  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  (NSFI)  for  2010-2015  which 
focused on improving the quality and diversity of financial services delivery to those excluded from the 
financial sector. This has been followed up by the National Financial Inclusion Strategy for 2016-2020.   
12.  Government  capacity  to  manage  and  implement  programmes  is  stretched.  The  World  Bank’s 
2014  Country  and  Policy  Institutional  Assessment  (CPIA)  shows  a  negative  trend  for  public  sector 
management.  Decentralisation  provides  a  network  of  local  institutions  and  rural  services,  but  the 
capacity to implement projects and programmes remains limited, and is further compromised by FISP. 
Private sector engagement in the rural economy is cautious due to high risks and limited returns. 
Overview of Financial Sector Structure60 
13.  There  are  10  commercial  banks  in  Malawi,  six  of  which  account  for  over  50%  of  institutional 
financial assets. Commercial banks served most corporate and government clients in the country, as 
well as 27% of Malawian adults, among them most salaried employees. Commercial banks hold 92% 
of credit and 89% of deposits, and are generally profitable, though several have relatively high non-
performing loans portfolios (some > 20%). There are 34 Savings and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs), 
down from a recent high of 48 due to mergers and closures. Of them, 10 operate in smaller towns in 
rural  areas,  but  none  have  notable  agricultural  products  offered  at  scale.  Most  have  community,  or 
open  bonds,  but  salaried  employees  form  the  core  membership  for  most  SACCOs.  There  are  41 
registered microfinance institutions (MFIs) classified as follows; (i) Deposit taking (1); (ii) Non deposit 
taking  (9)  (iii)  Microcredit  agencies  (31).  Of  these,  three  have  the  largest  rural  exposure  with  over 
100,000 clients. There are 8 payday lending companies (PLCs). Together MFIs and PLCs serve about 
17%  of  adults  (mostly  salaried  employees)  in  Malawi.61  SACCOs  provide  basic  savings  and  small 
working capital/consumer loan products, while MFIs and PLCs, with the exception of FINCA provide 
small credit only. Two mobile network operators (TNM and Airtel) offer basic mobile money services, 
particularly  money  transfers  and  a  no-interest  savings  vehicle  (short-term,  low-value).  Informal 
providers  such  as  Village  Savings  and  Loan  Associations  (VSLAs)  and  other  community  based 
financial  organizations  (CBFOs)  have  between  over  1.1  million  urban  and  rural  members  from  all 
income  strata,  of  which  an  estimated  47%  are  women.  Fewer  than  2%  of  Malawian  use  insurance 
products and there is almost no insurance available for the rural economy or small scale agricultural 
production.  
14.  A  recent  FinScope  study  showed  a  gradual  improvement  of  access  to  financial  services  in 
Malawi  over  the  last  several  years.  Still,  only  42%  and  12%  of  urban  and  rural  adults  respectively 
(most salaried employees) use formal financial services, with only 2.6% regularly using more than two 
financial  products.  In  total,  some  one  third  of  the  adult  population  have  access  formal  financial 
services and an additional 25% make use of informal financial services only. Farmers are amongst the 
least banked even as they constitute the largest portion of formal financial sector clients. They are, by 
contrast, the largest users of informal financial services. Savings and money transfers constitute most 
products employed, with credit and insurance use is very limited. 
60  As  this  section  draw  extensively  from  three  sources  and  citations  are  given  only  when  required  for  context.  The  sources 
include: FinMark Trust (2008). FinScope Consumer Survey Malawi 2008; FinMark Trust (2014). FinScope Consumer Survey 
Malawi 2014; Cenfri. (2015). Making Access Possible, Malawi. 
61 Note that many adults use multiple formal and informal service providers. 
43 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
for  more  profitable 
Figure 1: MFIs in Malawi and Rural Lending Challenges 
15.  There are currently two banks in Malawi with a broad outreach retail strategies, and three MFIs 
with  some  degree  of  rural  orientation.  National  Building  Society  (NBS)  and  Opportunity  Bank  of 
Malawi  (OBM)  both  have  relatively 
large 
networks  of  branches  and  agencies  in  rural 
towns, and OBM  has mobiles vans to service 
more  remote  rural  areas.  Both  banks  face 
challenges  with 
their  operating  models, 
particularly  the  cost  of  outreach,  but  also  the 
suitability  of  product  offer,  which  affect  their 
financial  performance  and  ability  to  expand 
market share. Three MFIs also operate in rural 
transaction  cost 
face  similar 
areas  and 
challenges.  While  MFIs  have  begun 
to 
collaborate  with  CBFOs  and  have  innovated 
product  design 
rural 
financial 
outreach,  as  non-deposit 
institutions  they  face  the  additional  challenge 
of funding their loan portfolios. (See Figure 1) 
There are 3 non-for profit, licensed non-deposit taking MFIs with a 
rural focus and basic but successful group lending products. Cumo 
has piloted low-cost delivery mechanisms using loan officers out-
posted in the villages and held-held technologies to reach out 
deeper into rural areas. The other two MFIs are experimenting with 
product innovations such as individual and agricultural loans. They 
are also using CBFOs to originate loans, financial education, and 
business training. Average loans sizes are well below USD 100 
showing these MFIs target rural low income households. 
Nevertheless, the three MFIs are small: with a combined loan 
portfolio of less than USD 5 million, they reach fewer than a 
combined 100,000 borrowers. Unable to take deposits, their growth 
has been slow and with outreach capacity limited to core equity 
capital, retained earnings, and modest borrowed funds. With 
commercial bank interest rates above 40% per annum, domestic 
borrowing from commercial banks is prohibitive, and would do little 
to reduce the already extremely high lending rates of MFIs (above 
70% per annum) further undercutting their rural growth potential. At 
the same time, portfolio growth is a necessary pre-condition for 
MFIs to increase their operational efficiency and lower their lending 
rates. Offshore borrowing exposes MFIs to high currency risks and 
hedging costs would make such funds expensive again. In addition, 
their small sizes and limited track-record with external borrowing 
makes it difficult for these MFIs to such funding. 
16.  The  main  barriers  of  formal  financial 
sector  use  are  affordability,  including  the  cost 
of travel to financial institutions (particularly in 
rural  areas),  lack  of  reliable  identification,  ill-
suited  financial  products,  particularly  for  the 
rural  poor,  and  limited  income  and  collateral 
for  loans.  These  constraints  are  exacerbated 
by  relatively  high  banking  costs,  low  financial  literacy,  and  a  “fear”  among  the  poor  of  using  formal 
financial services. On the supply side, commercial banks in Malawi earn about 60% of their revenue 
from  loans  mostly  to  large  corporate  clients;  22%  from  foreign  exchange;  15%  from  investments 
(mostly treasury bills) and 6% from fees and commissions. Almost 100% of MFI revenue comes from 
high-interest  group  and/or 
income  clients. 
Approximately 85% of revenues from SACCOs comes from credit services and smaller amount from 
investments,  fees  and  commissions.  PDL  revenue  is  from  high  interest  rate  loans.  CBFOs  do  not 
retain earnings, rather profits earned on high interest loans are distributed annually to group members 
pro rata to their savings accounts.   
loans  serving  both  salaried  and 
individual 
taking 
low 
Savings 
Figure 2: Use of Savings 
17.  Gross  savings  as  a  percentage  GDP  in  Malawi  is  7.9% 
which is low compared other Southern African countries where the 
rate  is  typically  double  that  of  Malawi’s.  (World  Bank,  2012) 
Savings has, in fact, been decreasing in formal financial institutions 
from  3.8  million  adults  in  2008  to  3.4  million  in  2014  (an  11% 
decline),  resulting  in  a  2%  decline  in  gross  savings  at  a  national 
level.  The  two  main  savings  providers  by  volume  of  accounts/ 
members are commercial banks and CBFOs. In terms of market share by deposits, banks are by far 
the largest providers with K 190.3 billion (USD 456.5 million).62 Two other significant savings providers 
are retirement funds with  K 17.6 billion (USD 42.3 million) and  SACCOs with  K 3.7 billion (USD 8.8 
million) CFBOs have an estimated combined 2% of deposits outstanding.63 
About 20% of savings are used 
for recurring living expenses, 7% 
for farming expenses, and the rest 
for various consumer, medical, 
educational or emergency needs. 
18.  Over half the adult population in Malawi does not save (58%),  and only 27% of those that do, 
save in a financial institution. Informal savings has by contrast, increased sharply in recent years and 
over one million adults save via CBFOs. Despite a decline in formal savings, the proportion of adults 
62 See: Reserve Bank of Malawi. https://www.rbm.mw/  
63 These are 2013 numbers. USD conversions are also 2013. 
44 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
using  multiple  savings  providers  has  increased  over  the  same  time,  indicating  demand  for  different 
type of savings products.  Only  22% of those  who save informally  also use  other institutions, though 
most also saving at home (e.g., cash or small liquid assets such as livestock - FinScope, 2014)). Men 
saved more in formal institutions, women more in informal organizations. Overall levels of saving were 
on  par  in  2008  for  men  and  women,  but  female  adults  experienced  a  greater  decrease  in  saving 
usage by 2014. Over 38% of farmers and 34% of labourers save at home compared to only 13% and 
5%  in  formal  financial  institutions  respectively.  Over  60%  do  not  save  at  all,  or  save  in  the  form  of 
inflation  protected  “vehicles”  (e.g.,  small  livestock).64    Some  36%  and  25%  of  famers  and  labourers 
use CBFOs, particularly VSLAs. Some 20% of MSMEs use CBFOs, but over 24% and 17% also use 
banks  and/or  SACCOs.  There  are  over  1  million  subscribers  to  AirTel  and  TNM  mobile  money 
services,  many  in  rural  areas,  however,  only  a  fraction  of  those  accounts  is  active.  Value  saving  on 
MNO systems is very short term and by law MNOs cannot pay or make interest on account balances. 
19.  The hassle, distance, and cost of saving in formal financial institutions, lack of attractive savings 
products and of electronic payments infrastructure are the main constraints to more formal savings in 
rural areas. Many poor people also simply do not have the money to save, or if they do, they require 
highly liquid vehicles formal and informal sources often cannot provide. VSLAs and MNOs provide low 
value savings products mostly for low income clients, while banks provide a range of saving products 
for  wealthier  clients.65  Rapid  inflation  ensures  short-term  savings  and  offers  negative  real  returns 
however. When interest rates, fees, and transportation costs are included, the attractiveness of formal 
savings  further  declines.  CBFOs  offer  positive  interest  when  gross  returns  including  low  transaction 
costs and distribution of profits are considered. MNO saving services see the greatest savings value 
erosion due to lack of interest paid, but are popular as very short term storage, particularly for funds 
transfer purposes. 
Credit 
20.  Commercial  banks  loans  totalled  K234  billion,  compared  to  CBFOs,  PDLs,  and  MFIs  whose 
loans  totalled  between  K5  and  K6  billion  respectively.  SACCOs  had  K3  billion  in  loans  outstanding. 
Just 4% of Malawian adults, mostly salaried employees, used credit from a formal provider in 2014, or 
just over half of those who used credit in 2008 (from 480,000 adults to 270,000). Commercial banks 
have the most formal clients with 17% of adults. MFIs, PDLs, and SACCOs account for 6% of credit 
clients. Banks dominate the total loan book, accounting for 91% of total credit (mostly large corporate 
clients, MSMEs, and high-net worth individuals). Over 50% of borrowers get their credit from informal 
providers  which  account  for  only  2%  of  the  total  loans  outstanding.  MNOs  have  recently  developed 
lending products which rely on subscribers SIM cards, cell phone payment history, and mobile money 
transaction  records  as  means  to  secure 
against  and  assess  credit 
risk.  This 
innovative  approach  is  limited  to  a  small 
number of subscribers however.  
Figure 3: Commodity exchanges and finance in Malawi. 
21.  Despite costs and low levels of access, 
Malawians  borrow  often.  In  2014,  almost  all 
adults  reported  to  have  taken  a  cash  or  in 
kind  goods  loan  within  the  preceding  12 
months.  (FinScope,  2014)  RBM  reports  that 
21.5% of credit from banks is directed to the 
fishing  and  hunting 
agriculture, 
forestry, 
loans  are  almost 
sector.  These  are 
exclusively  to  larger  commercial  enterprises, 
particularly  in the tobacco  sector.  Just 4%  of 
farmers have formal credit and this, again, is 
Malawi  is  one  of  the  few  African  countries  with  two  functioning 
commodity exchanges and a warehouse receipt financing system. The 
Afrikaner  Commodity  Exchange  (ACE)  doubles  as  a  warehouse 
manager  and  facilitates  credit  through  agreements  with  several 
commercial  banks.  While  most  banks  still  require  the  depositors  of 
grain  to  have  a  forward  contract  to  release  finance,  First  Merchant 
Bank provides loans up to 70% of the value of the stored products and 
the  depositor  is  free  to  sell  through  the  commodity  exchange  to  the 
highest bidder. As experienced by a recent grant project funded under 
IFAD’s  RLEEP,  there  are  opportunities  to  expand  warehouse  receipt 
financing,  improve  its  conditions  and  scale  it  down  to  organised 
smallholder  farmers  and  rural  SMEs.  In  addition,  a  pre-harvest 
financing scheme linked to ACE has  been  piloted successfully  and  is 
being  up-scaled  during  the  current  season.  The  scheme  provides 
inputs for soybean farmers on credit which is recovered through ACE 
from proceeds of the auction.  
64 FinMark Trust (2014). FinScope Consumer Survey Malawi 2014. 
65 Only VSLAs currently serve clients at or below Malawi’s average income. Alternative informal savings group options serve a 
range of incomes (averaging from K 8,403 or USD 20, to K 32,836 or USD 79). 
45 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
almost  entirely  directed  towards  tobacco  farmers. Another  8%  to  12%  of  Malawians  also  borrow  for 
agricultural inputs or on farm assets primarily from informal sources such as input suppliers.66 There 
are few aggregate statistics available, but the practice, while  widespread,  is not broadly available to 
smallholder  farmers,  limited  primarily  to  organized  value  chains  such  as  tobacco  and  dairy.  Such 
lending lacks the formalization to achieve scale or maximize  benefits to farmers and input providers 
alike. 
22.  Bank  lending  to  the  agricultural  sector  has  largely  concentrated  on  seasonal  lending  for 
tobacco  accounting  for  50%  of  agricultural  loan  portfolio  of  leading  banks.  In  addition,  tobacco 
companies also lend a sizeable amount to farmers. A high level of value chain organization is key. In 
response  to  the  recent  decline  of  the  tobacco  market,  some  banks  including  First  Merchants  Bank 
(FMB),  CDH  and  the  Opportunity  Bank  of  Malawi  (OBM)  have  been  trying  to  diversify  their  loan 
portfolio into other commodities such as tea and sugar, as are some tobacco companies. Some other 
agribusiness companies are engaged in pre-financing out-growers in high-value crops such as chilli. 
Often,  value  chain  finance  arrangements  involve  partnerships  between  banks,  off-takers,  input 
suppliers, NGOs and donors, sometimes facilitated by partial credit guarantees. 
23.  Overall use of informal credit has increased significantly since 2008 from 340,000 to 1.1 million 
people, this despite average interest rates on loans of 240% on a relatively low average loan size of 
K8,250 or USD 15. The average formal sector interest rate, by contrast, is much lower at 30% to over 
40%  due  in  large  part  to  the  RBM’s  fight  against  inflation  in  Malawi  (i.e.,  high  benchmark  interest 
rates). This causes most formal credit to be short term in nature  with an estimated 95% of all loans 
with terms of one year or less. There is no evidence of over-indebtedness in Malawi, although data on 
this limited (as noted, NPLs at some banks are more than 20%). Malawians do not seem to take on 
too  much  debt. While  data  is  scarce,  FinScope  reported  in  2014  that  only  0.3%  of  adults  indicated 
using credit to pay off another loan – usually an indication of over-indebtedness. Input suppliers often 
also provide valuable credit to smallholders on an in-kind discount basis in return for harvest.   
 For many Malawians, cost of credit includes substantial transportation, fee, and  other related 
24. 
expenses  which  are  particularly  onerous  for  the  rural  poor.  Beyond  cost,  access  to  formal  credit  is 
constrained  by  collateral  availability,  an  inefficient  judicial  system,  bank  preparations  to  comply  with 
Basel II requirements, and investment opportunity costs (e.g., the relative profitability and security of 
investing  deposits  in  government  treasury  bills/bonds).  Also,  many  commercial  banks  over  lent  to 
SMEs in middle of the last decade further increasing their conservative lending practices. 
25.  While  CBFO  credit  usually  has  a  higher  interest  rate,  it  is  highly  accessible  (e.g.,  low 
transaction costs, no collateral or identification requirements). Many CBFO group members, however, 
do not want/need credit, either because they have no productive purpose for it, or because amounts 
are  too  small  for  productive  purposes  beyond  petty  trade  or  paying  for  some  agricultural  inputs. 
Moreover, loans are made available to one or two members monthly so timing of loan availability may 
not coincide with a household’s funding needs. A major benefit to CBFOs, particularly VSLAs, is not 
credit, but the annual lump sum pay out, or profit distribution, received at the end of a group’s lending 
cycle  (usually  one  year  and  typically  paid  in  September-December).67  Indeed,  many  members 
participate in VSLAs as a forced saving vehicle and the desire to participate in the profit distribution 
which can reach K 30,000 to K 70,000 (USD 60 to USD 100) in the typical rural CBFO group.68   
26.  For most farmers, CBFOs can be helpful but do not necessarily satisfy their credit needs given 
the  irregular  nature  of  farm  income  and  annual  working  capital  required  for  seeds,  and  fertiliser. 
Notably  and  again,  CBFO  loan  and  distribution  sizes  are  small,  allowing  for  limited  productivity 
enhancing investments. Timing of loan availability and distribution also limit the value of CBFO loans. 
Rural household generally need funding pre-harvest, pre-school year, and pre-planning when savings 
are  unavailable  or  exhausted,  and  when  CBFO  loans  and  distribution  may  not  be  available. 
66 Cenfri. (2015). Making Access Possible, Malawi. 
67 The lump sum payment consists of a member’s savings plus proportional share of accumulated profits from loan income. The 
share is based on the amount of each members’ savings. 
68 This assumes a 15-member group saving between K400 and K700 per week. 
46 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Additionally, without a formal legal identity systematically linking CFBO groups and members to formal 
institutions is challenging. While some groups have established formal bank accounts, the potential of 
using CBFO participation information as credit risk data or for group collateral, for example, remains 
the  exception  rather  than  the  rule.  Potential  exists  to  link  CBFOs  to  formal  institutions  offerings  is  a 
substantial opportunity, particularly for high economic performance households. 
27. 
It  is  not  just  farmers  either.  MSMEs,  particularly,  high-potential  rural  MSMEs,  are  not  well 
served by CBFOs for the same reasons. Similarly, formal financial sector credit, even when backed by 
collateral,  is  still  too  expensive  and  institutions  too  risk  averse  for  much  rural  or  agricultural  MSME 
lending beyond short term working capital loans to occur. The relatively recent commercial bank SME 
credit  bubble,  exacerbated  by  the  lack  of  an  affordable  and  operational  credit  bureau,  cost  and 
capacity  demands  of  monitoring  many  smaller  loans,  and  a  lack  of  easy  payment  system  further 
complicate farmer and SME lending.   
Payments and Transfers 
28.  The predominant form of payment in Malawi is cash. About 80% of adults receive their income 
in cash and only 5% through the bank. Some 95% use cash to purchase most of their consumer items 
and  just  0.3%  of  payments  in  Malawi  are  through  electronic  channels.  (FinScope,  2014  and  BTCA, 
2013) An estimated 75% of the total value of payments made in Malawi is through cash. Some 23% of 
salaried employees receive incomes through a bank, and 14% of Malawians receive a portion of their 
income in-kind. MSMEs receive 90%  of income in cash. Bank accounts are used primarily for basic 
deposits  and  withdrawals  and  a  very  small  number  of  more  complex  payments.  Cheques  remain  a 
major  form  of  payments  accounting  for  79%  of  the  value  of  retail  transactions.  ATM  withdrawals 
account  for  13%  of  the  value  of  non-cash  transactions,  while  internet  banking  accounts  for  5% 
(normally  high  average  value  transactions  by  corporations  and  better  off  salaried  employees).  Only 
11% of adults have bank cards which are used almost exclusively for ATM withdrawals. Just 0.8% of 
Malawian adults use debit cards and 0.2% have credit cards.  
29.  After  savings,  the  second  most  used  financial  service  are  funds  transfers,  with  1.4  million 
Malawian  sending  or  receiving  money  through  formal  or  informal  channels.  Formal  remittances 
doubled from 2008 to 2014 but are still limited at 12% all transfers (foreign remittances are only 1% 
GDP).  Remittances  are  still  largely  made  through  family  and  friends,  the  simplest,  least  expensive 
option despite evident risks. Some 24% of adults use some form of formal mobile transactions, most 
still  involve  cash  (e.g.  ATM  and  mobile  money  agent  cash  withdrawals).  Six  banks  offer  mobile 
services and four offer internet banking, but have less than a combined 50,000 subscribers. Only 4% 
of transactions are completely cashless. Mobile  banking transactions constitute  14% of all  non-cash 
transactions (1 million transactions per month). Only 25% of all mobile accounts were active in 2014 
(i.e., used within 45 days). As with bank accounts, salaried employees use mobile money most (62%) 
and farmers 36% next most. 
30.  AirTel and TNM have 1.1  million mobile money subscribers (14% of Malawian  adults).  Mobile 
money transactions constitute about half of all non-cash transactions with 3.8 million transactions per 
month (ATM accounts for the second highest number with 28%, or 1.9 million withdrawals). The value 
of mobile money  transactions grew 150%  in 2013 from MKW 3.4 billion to MKW 8.6 billion in 2014. 
About  34%  of  the  urban  population  compared  to  15%  in  all  areas  use  mobile  money,  primarily  for 
airtime purchases, value transfer and bill payments (e.g., electricity,  water,  insurance premiums and 
loan repayments). Some mobile money agents also accept electronic money for goods and services. 
Cashing  in  and  out  at  agents  constitutes  the  largest  proportion  of  the  value  of  mobile  money 
transactions, while airtime top-ups account for 39% of the value of total transactions.  
31.  There  a  several  non-account  financial  service  providers  of  note.  Peoples  Trading  Centre  and 
Zoona allow people to transfer money from in-store kiosks to receivers at any other company kiosk in 
the country. This service requires identification for pick up, a challenge for many Malawians. The Post 
Office’s Fast Cash product is the most widely used remittance product in Malawi with 60,000 transfers 
monthly.  The  total  value  transferred  rose  45%  between  2013  and  2014  and  had  an  average 
47 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
transaction value of K 7,800 (USD 18.7). The service requires no identification, and is available in all 
180 post offices nationwide, although in more remote locations lack of electricity, network connectivity 
and lack of computers can limit speed of service. 
32. 
Initially  rudimentary  interoperability  between  banks  and  mobile  money  providers  limited 
electronic  banking,  mobile  money,  and  transfer  service  growth.  There  is  now  good  interoperability 
between banks and basic operability between MNOs. Malawi is still a cash economy, however, though 
this too is changing as the GOM has digitized salary payments and is looking to digitize social cash 
transfer  payments.  This  will  help  expand  electronic  payments.  So  too  will  new,  simpler  business 
model  for  agents  being  adopted  for  MNO  agents.  Instead  of  a  complicated  system  of  remuneration 
based on types of transactions, MNOs now pay a flat 2% transaction commission and bonus of K 300 
(USD  0.7)  for  signing  up  new  phone  subscribers.  This  has  improved  agent  network  growth  vital  for 
outreach, but with most agents earning as little as K 2,589 (USD 6.21 per month, or just 19% of what 
a stand-alone mobile money agents required), agents are not yet universally, proactive mobile money 
sellers. The combined MNO agent network is 18,000 strong but with an estimated 12,000 to 14,000 
largely inactive or lacking the liquidity to provide critical cash out services the system growth is limited. 
That the 2011 Mobile Payments System Guidelines restricts interest income to be paid to the MNOs 
also limits growth, as does the regulated K 200,000 (USD) cap on mobile money value permitted in a 
single account.69    
Macro level 
33. 
In Malawi, financial sector development is the joint responsibility of the Ministry of Finance and 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  (RBM),  the  central  bank  responsible  for  monetary  policy  and  for  the 
oversight  and supervision  of commercial banks, microfinance  institutions,  SACCOs, capital markets, 
pension  funds,  and  insurance  companies.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  is  broadly  responsible  for 
government  fiscal  policy,  and,  in  relation  to  the  financial  sector,  is  responsible  for  formulation  of 
financial sector policies and coordinating their implementation and monitoring. It is the lead institution 
for  monitoring  the  implementation  of  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Strategy  and  the  National 
Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  (led  by  the  newly  created  Pension  and  Financial  Sector  Policy 
Division).  Several  other  line  ministries  have  inclusive  or  rural  financial  inclusive  strategies  which  to 
various degrees complement that of the MOF. 
34. 
Important  progress  towards  good  practice  financial  sector  development  has  been  made 
incrementally  over  the  last  15  years,  especially  in  the  policy,  legal  and  regulatory  environment 
governing the financial sector. The Financial Sector Assessment program (FSAP) of World Bank and 
the  GOM  carried  out  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  Malawi’s  financial  sector  in  2007. A  Financial 
Sector Development Strategy 2010  - 2016 resulted and  was implemented  with the support of World 
Bank  Financial  Sector  Technical Assistance  Project  (FSTAP).  In  partnership  with  UNDP  and  United 
Nations Capital Development Fund, the GOM implemented the Financial Inclusion in Malawi (FIMA) 
project in 2007 to create an inclusive financial sector. Through this, the GOM developed the National 
Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  (NSFI)  for  2010-2015  which  focused  on  improving  the  quality  and 
diverse  financial  services  delivery  to  those  excluded  from  the  financial  sector.  The  MOF  recently 
published  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  for  2016-2020  which  seeks  to  establish  a 
shared vision for the sector to define core priorities for financial inclusion and strategic interventions 
and  action,  along  with  a  broad  implementation  strategy.  Rural  financial  inclusion  is  stressed  in  the 
strategy  particularly  as  it  relates  to  outreach  and  credit  services. A  Financial  Sector  Policy  Unit  was 
also  established  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  which  chairs  the  Financial  Inclusion  Technical  Working 
Group, a coordination structure for all financial inclusion topics 
69 According to the Mobile Payment System Guidelines 2011, “Interest earned or otherwise accrued to balances in the trust 
account shall not be to the benefit of or otherwise paid to the Mobile Payment Service Provider”. Instead MNOs must use any 
interest accrued on corporate social responsibility projects. The guidelines also stipulate that the mobile money float should be 
kept in a trust account with a bank “whose usage shall be restricted to facilitating mobile payment transactions.” 
48 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
  Table 1: National Financial Inclusion Strategy for 2016-2020 
35.  The first comprehensive regulation for inclusive finance was the Microfinance Act of 2010  and 
Financial Cooperatives Act of 2011 which provides for the regulation and supervision of microfinance 
institutions  and  financial  savings  and  cooperatives  respectively.  The Acts  gives  the  Governor  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  powers  to  regulate  and  supervise  the  sector  and  provides  defines  legal  conduct  of 
microfinance  business  through  registration  of  micro-lending  of  non-deposit  taking,  deposit-taking 
microfinance  institutions  and  SACCos.  The  Acts,  alongside  the  Financial  Services  Act,  introduces 
administrative penalties for non-compliance.  
laundering 
introduction  of 
legislation.  The 
the  Regulation  of 
36.  A credit reference bureau legislation was enacted in September 2014, complementing existing 
anti-money 
Interception  of 
Communications and Provision of Communication-Related Information Act (RICA) is planned. This will 
require  all  SIM  card  owners  to  comply  with  know  your  client  (KYC)  requirements.  In  2016,GOM 
enacted  the  Payments  Systems  Act  and  the  Reserve  Bank  (E-Money)  Regulations,  2014.  The 
Payments Act provides clarity and transparency mobile money and, more broadly, Malawi’s payments 
systems and payment system providers. The E-Money Regulations detail regulatory arrangements for 
all  stored  value  facilities  such  as  mobile  money,  and  includes  the  requirements  for  organizations 
issuing/storing  e-money  value  and  operating  e-money  payment/  transfer  systems.  E-Money 
Regulations  will  replace  the  existing  Mobile  Payment  System  Guidelines  2011.  Rules  will  include 
provisions  requiring  MNOs  to  use  a  written  contract  with  agents,  to  assume  limited  liability  for  the 
actions of agents, to train agents, and to profile agents profiling prior to signing-on with MNO.  
Meso level 
is 
the  Malawi  Micro-Finance  Network  (MAMN)  which  represents  20 
37.  There are three key sector-wide players active in the inclusive financial sector of Malawi. The 
financial  service 
first 
organizations. Its goal is to facilitate the creation of an enabling environment for the development of a 
sustainable microfinance industry in Malawi. It does this by developing, promoting good practice and 
regulation,  as  well  as  by  coordinating/facilitating  the  exchange  of  ideas,  innovations  and  collective 
activities  among  members  and  stakeholders.  The  second  is  the  Bankers’  Association  of  Malawi 
(BAM).  The  BAM  provides  a  forum  for  financial  sector  providers,  primarily  commercial  banks,  and 
stakeholders  on  matters  of  policy  and  of  mutual  interest.  It  interacts  with  GOM,  the  Malawi  Stock 
49 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Exchange, other public bodies, the press, the public, private associations and institutions. BAM has a 
long-standing  interest  in  inclusive  finance,  including  a  inclusion  working  group  that  was  active  until 
recently,  and  has  played  a  substantial  role  in  the  National  Payments  Council  (NPC)  and  the 
implementation  of  a  payment  system  reform  in  Malawi.  The  Malawi  Union  of  Savings  and  Credit 
Cooperatives (MUSCCO),  has been  a second-tier organization for the sector since 1993.  MUSCCO 
advocates  on  behalf  of  SACCOs  and  provides  a  range  of  financial  and  non-financial  services  to  its 
members. MAMN, BAM and MUSCO have all led/participated in donor funded development projects 
to  support  their  membership  and  mandate.  Other  institutions  at  this  level  that  FARMSE  will  interact 
may include Farmers Union of Malawi (FUM) and Canadian Cooperative Association (CCA). FUM is 
an umbrella body of farmers organizations in Malawi established in 2003, with an overall objective to 
ensure  that  farmers  effectively  and  meaningfully  participate  in  the  improvement  of  their  livelihoods 
through  functional  farmer  associations,  cooperatives  and  clubs.  CCA  in  Malawi  with  IFAD  support 
supports the consolidation and confederation of VSLAs in to cooperatives. 
38.  A VSLA Steering Committee convened by MoFEPD, the EPD division in collaboration with GIZ 
and other development partners and stakeholders, works to coordinate, promote, and advocate good 
practice  VSLA  development.  Activities  undertaken  range  from  knowledge  management  on  key 
innovations/lessons  from  the  field,  training,  collaborative  initiatives,  networking,  etc.  The  committee 
includes  a  range  of  stakeholders  from  CBFO  support  organizations,  formal  financial  institutions, 
donors and GOM representatives. Additionally, there are two credit reference bureaus (CRB) working 
Malawi. They are regulated by the 2014 credit reference bureau legislation enacted September 2014 
and  amended  in  2015.  Formal  financial  institutions  must  use  a  one  of  two  credit  bureaus,  but  the 
bureaus  typically  collect  data  only  on  larger  loans  clients  as  the  cost  of  maintaining  and  buying 
records  is  too  expensive  for  small  loans.  The  CRBA  credit  bureau  (South  African  owned) 
dominates  the  market  and  is  the  exclusive  provider  to  most  commercial  banks,  which,  again, 
serves primarily large credit clients. A smaller nationally owned bureau also serves other financial 
sector organizations.  
39.  With  support  from  the  World  Bank  funded  FSTAO  project,  the  National  Switch  Initiative 
(NatSwitch) was launched in February 2015 to enable interoperability between all commercial banks. 
In  addition,  a  Microfinance  Hub  is  in  the  pipeline  to  connect  the  Microfinance  sector  to  this  system. 
Regulations  for  agency  banking  have  recently  been  issued  which  will  facilitate  low-cost  outreach 
mechanisms, and a warehouse receipt-financing bill is currently awaiting parliamentary approval. 
Key Findings  
40.  There  have  been  many  positive  developments  in  the  Malawian  financial  sector,  which  has 
grown to develop a comprehensive slate of products, services and delivery mechanisms. Supported 
by  a  good  practice  regulatory  environment  and  several  capable  meso  level  institutions,  financial 
sector performance has been modestly positive in recent years.  
41.  This  said,  macro-economic  volatility  in  Malawi  creates  substantial  financial  and  non-financial 
market uncertainty and risk, affecting the financial system. The economy is largely reliant on primary 
commodities vulnerable to exogenous price shocks and  natural disasters, impart significant negative 
impact  on  financial  services  provider  performance  and  outreach.  Inflation  undermines  the  value  of 
savings and contributes to high lending rates. This makes credit, particularly long-term asset lending, 
unaffordable  for  most  Malawians,  but  for  the  low-income  and  rural  population  in  particular.  Poor 
contract  resolution  and  infrastructure  further  exacerbate  lending  expansion  in  rural  Malawi. As  it  is 
unlikely  the  current  high-inflation  environment  in  Malawi  will  disappear  in  the  short  term,  formal 
financial  savings  products  --  save  for  the  those  who  can  take  longer  terms  at  formal  financial 
institutions  --  will  likely  constrain  formal  financial  sector  outreach  (particularly  of  physical  branches 
expansion to rural  areas).  In the medium term, VSLAs and to  a lesser extent  MFIs, will continue as 
the main provider of financial services in rural areas 
42.  Within  this  context,  the  development  of  an  inclusive  financial  sector  has  been  underway  for 
some time in Malawi. And while there have been some good if modest strides towards greater access 
50 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
by the poor to formal finance, sector building efforts have created far more access for urban than rural 
households. The advent of mobile banking and mobile money will change this, and building on gains 
made  in  urban  microfinance  and  CBFOs,  substantial  gains  for  inclusive  finance  in  rural  areas  is 
possible in the medium-term. For this to be happen, however, the ecosystem of financial institutions, 
products  and  services,  as  well  a  comprehensive supporting regulatory  and  policy environment must 
still  be  supported  to  overcome  the  low  value,  high  transaction  volume  and  cost  of  current  rural 
financial service provision.  
43.  The  demand  for  savings  for  consumption  smoothing  and  unanticipated  economic  and/or 
household  events  is  a  first  order  priority  for  most  rural  households.  Money  transfers  services  (or 
mobile  value  transfer)  is  an  important  complementary  means  to  meeting  the  same  needs.  Working 
capital  loans  for  agricultural  inputs,  as  well  as  small  consumption  loans  are  also  vital  for  managing 
household economic cycles and unexpected events. Demand for larger loans, primarily for productive 
assets, is limited due to both the unfavourable macro-economic context in the country and a typically 
low  household  repayment  capacity.  Nonetheless,  a  substantial  number  of  households  and  MSMEs 
lack asset credit to the great detriment of their own economic development and that of rural economic 
development generally.  
44.  Sustainably serving high-volume, low-value savings and transfer services demand has proven 
challenging.  Use  of  the  formal  financial  sector’s  branch  network  and  electronic  banking  service  is 
limited and better designed to serve high-net worth and corporate clients. Banks are well-trusted, but 
they  have a  limited distribution footprint  and  are a costly option for most Malawians. Banks strategy 
also  focuses  on  a  small  number  of  corporate  clients  who  take  larger,  higher  margin  loans  or  make 
larger, lower administration cost saving deposits (leading to relatively higher financial margins on fund 
intermediation). The  incentive for most commercial banks to expand services to  lower income client 
markets is limited given the inevitable smaller per client contribution to revenue. Banking agents have 
the  potential  to  increase  formal  financial  sector  outreach  at  a  lower  cost,  but  the  relative  comfort  of 
existing revenue models, as well as a hangover from SME over lending, makes banks adverse to new 
market development. OIBM with its microfinance roots has a range of experiences reaching beyond 
the  traditional  commercial  bank  market  -  some  more  successful  than  others,  and  continues  to  find 
ways to reach rural clients (e.g., via banking through armoured trucks), yet has only reached a limited 
scale. 
45.  MFIs and SACCOs have better penetrated low income markets and rural areas to some extent, 
but  are  limited  by  internal  management  and  human  resource  capacities,  technology,  and  capital  for 
on-lending (MFIs cannot legally collect deposits). As with banks, MFIs have not expanded  a network 
of lower cost local agents  and their product product/service  offer is relatively expensive.  Even given 
higher  costs,  these  formal  financial  organizations  provide  low-value  products  well-suited  to  poor 
households. This said, the MFI typical low value, weekly or monthly repayment group credit product is 
not necessarily well tuned to the agricultural economic cycle of most rural households. There is some 
interesting innovation however. An IFAD funded project led by the MUSCCO, demonstrated clustering 
rural VSLAs can lead to the creation of a new, low income member driven rural SACCO. Similarly, the 
CUMO  MFI  links  motorbike  outreach  to  individual  and  VSLA  group  clients  to  overcome  transaction 
costs in rural areas.  
46.  Clearly  there  are  substantial  business  environment  challenges  to  serving  the  low-income 
market  generally,  and  the  rural  low  income  market  more  specifically.  These  constraints  and  formal 
financial sector business models have precluded substantial outreach and innovation for rural market 
development,  leading  to  a  generally  poor  understanding  of  and  experience  in  these  markets. 
Commercial banks have little expertise designing and delivering products and services beyond those 
intended for the commercial and salaried individual markets. Not surprisingly, commercial banks have 
limited exposure to and understanding of rural markets which can elevate risk perception and market 
potential.  
47.  Community  based  financial  organizations  like  VSLAs,  by  contrast,  have  proven  pivotal  in  the 
growth  of  inclusive  finance  in  rural  Malawi.  Providing  lower-value  products  (e.g.,  micro  savings  and 
51 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
credit)  well-suited  to  poorer  households,  CBFOs  have  effectively  penetrated  both  urban  and  rural 
markets. They are not a panacea however. The scale of outreach  and sustainability of some CBFO 
organizational types can be limited by internal capacities and on-lending liquidity, particularly in those 
cases  where  group  formation  is  unstructured  and  informal.  Those  groups  receiving  support  from 
international  and  national  agencies  with  specialized  group  modalities  tend  to  do  well,  some  with  an 
80% sustainability rate. The relatively small size of loans and savings provided CBFOs, however, can 
limit household economic impacts to consumption smoothing and small, relatively expensive working 
capital  loans. Annual  profit  distribution  provides  larger  sums  to  members,  but  not  large  enough  for 
asset purchase beyond small livestock or production tools. Moreover, most CBFO models are not well 
synchronized with the agricultural-based economic cycle of rural households which additionally limits 
their economic impacts.     
48.  Mobile  network  operators  also  have  the  potential  to  serve  the  low  value,  high  transaction 
market.  The  introduction  of  MNO  mobile  money  initially  attracted  over  one  million  subscribers. 
Currently, an only estimated 100,000 or so are regular users. This is because current mobile money 
business  models,  have  yet  to  stimulate  the  vibrant  electronic  payment  ecosystem  required  to 
sustainably  offer  savings  and  transfer  services  at  scale.  That  MNOs  cannot  legally  offer  interest  on 
savings or invest aggregate stored value to make money, is a significant barrier to system expansion. 
MNO also offer their agents a less than compelling fee income business proposition, and unresolved 
agent  liquidity  issues  only  exacerbates  challenges  to  systems  growth.  Limited  liquidity  particularly 
constrains mobile money outreach into rural areas as rural customers can walk or ride bicycles many 
kilometres to get cash only to be disappointed. 
Lack of products/service beyond short term low-value, value storage, bill and air time payment 
49. 
services  has  also  hindered  growth  and  benefits  of  mobile  money. Affordable,  accessible  micro  and 
small  credit  products  which  can  be  originated  and  serviced  on-line  are  available  from  both  MNOs, 
another clear need, but is available in very limited quantities. Limited use of e-money for goods and 
service  payments  similarly  constrains  mobile  money  uptake,  as  does  simple  lack  of  phone  access 
(60%  adults  do  not  access  to  a  mobile  phone  despite  the  relatively  good  penetration  of  cellular 
infrastructure).  Some  complex  MIS  issues  also  must  be  overcome  if  consumers  are  to  gain  the 
enduring faith in the services so essential for self-sustaining mobile money market growth.  A strong 
preference  in  Malawi  for  cash  transactions,  and  relatively  low  levels  of  financial  literacy  only  serve 
compound these challenges.  
50.  Finding  the  balance  between  low  costs  and  incentivized  bank  and  MNO  agents  may  be  the 
most  critical  piece  to  filling  rural  market  financial  service  puzzle.  Provision  of  other  services, 
particularly credit, will be another. At present, no single financial institution - formal or informal - offers 
either the accessibility or the products and services required to sustainability meet the needs or rural 
households.  A  small  number  of  ongoing,  innovative  partnership  initiatives  suggests  scalable,  cost-
effective and profitable financial services are possible in rural areas. Given the proclivity to use cash 
in  Malawi,  and  lack  of  financial  service  delivery  agents,  in  the  medium  term  at  least,  rural  financial 
service  development  will  be  characterized  by  a  transition  from  fewer  physical  financial  transaction 
points, to more mobile service delivery. It will also require the development and adaptation of products 
and  services  to  meet  rural  household  needs.  This  will  require  FARMSE  provide  outreach  and 
innovation  support  to  service  providers  as  they  find  sustainable  paths  to  greater  mobile  financial 
solutions. It will also require supporting collective meso level sector development activities, as well as 
some  limited  macro  level  interventions  to  improve  supporting  policy  and  regulation,  particularly  of 
CBFOs  which  will  require  some  form  of  formalization  to  facilitate  group  and  member  linkage  to  the 
formal financial sector. Indeed, meso and macro level stakeholders will require support to identify and 
guide strategies for expanding inclusive rural finance. This will include, most importantly, partnerships 
leading to attractive rural financial products, improved  and interoperable access points which reduce 
payment  and  transfer  costs,  while  laying  the  rails  for  improved  access  to  both  shot  and  long  term 
savings and credit products. 
52 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Malawi is divided into three regions (Southern, Central and Northern Regions) and 28 districts. 
1. 
The country has an estimated population of 16.8 million people;70 the majority living in the Central and 
Southern  regions  (45%  and  42%  respectively).71  About  85%  of  the  population  lives  in  rural  areas, 
reflecting  the  predominantly  agricultural  nature  of  the  household  and  the  country’s  economy.72  In 
2013, rural households size averaged at 4.9 people. Rural to rural migration in the Northern Region 
has  increased  in  recent  years,  followed  by  Central  Region.  The  greatest  mobility  is  observed  in 
households  having  undergone  divorce/separation  or  having  lost  the  spouse.  73  Life  expectancy  in 
Malawi was 62.8 years of age. 
A. Poverty 
2. 
Poverty levels. Despite GOM and donor efforts 
to  date,  marginal  progress  has  been  made  in  poverty 
reduction  over  the  past  few  decades  –  with  only  a 
1.7% drop in the proportion of people living under the 
national  poverty  line  between  2005  and  2010.  Over 
50%  of  the  population  still  lives  under  the  national 
poverty  line  and  includes  a  growing  number  of  ultra-
poor food insecure households.  
Table 1: Poverty in Malawi % population 
Poverty level 
Year 
Poor 
Ultra-Poor 
2005 
2010 
52.4% 
50.7% 
22.3% 
24.5% 
Malawi’s national poverty lines are consumption-based. People whose total consumption level 
3. 
is below MKW 37,002 are considered poor and those whose consumption is below MKW 22,956 as 
ultra-poor. Thus, the food  poverty line reflects the monetary costs  of purchasing basic food  items to 
meet minimal dietary requirements established at 2,400 kilocalories per person per day. The poverty 
line adds to this, the cost  of basic non-food needs.74 Households falling  below the food  poverty  line 
are commonly referred to as extremely/severely food ultra-poor. Households falling under the poverty 
line but food secure are referred to as poor.  
4. 
Spatial dimensions of poverty. The absolute number of poor people is higher in the densely 
populated Southern and Central Regions, where poverty is also more severe. The Southern Region is 
highly  succeptible  to  droughts  and  floods;  this  region  has  also  been  host  to  refugees  fleeing  from 
warfare  in  the  neighbouring  Mozambique.  The  Central  Region  is  the  better  off  region  with  the 
prevalence of poverty and ultra-poverty 10 points lower than in other regions of the country.   
5. 
Dimensions  and  causes  of  poverty.  Beyond  income  or  consumption,  it  is  estimated  that 
66.4%  of  the  country’s  population  lives  under  multidimensional  poverty  reflecting  multiple  health, 
education,  and  standard  of  living  related  deprivations,  including:  alarmingly  high  levels  of  maternal 
and child mortality and under nutrition, low access to electricity, cooking fuel, sanitation, and assets.75 
In 2014, Malawi ranked 173 of 188 countries in the Human Development Index.76 
6. 
The combined effects of low agricultural production and productivity of smallholder farmers due 
to reliance on rain (over 60% of the population), use of very small plots of land with mostly degraded 
soil,  gender  inequality,  limited  access  to  markets  and  poor  access  to  savings  and  credit  products 
70 National Statistical Office, Population Projections Malawi. See: 
http://www.nsomalawi.mw./images/stories/data_on_line/demography/census_2008/Main%20Report/ThematicReports/Population%20Projections
%20Malawi.pdf (accessed 14th October 2016). 
71 National Statistical Office. (2008). 2008 Population and Housing Census. 
72 National Statistical Office. (2012). Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio-Economic Characteristics 
Report. 
73 National Statistical Office. (2014). Integrated Household Panel Survey. Household Socio-Economic Characteristics Report. 
74 National Statistical Office. (2005). Integrated Household Survey 2004-2005, Volume I Household Socio-Economic 
Characteristics. 
National Statistical Office. (2012). Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio-Economic Characteristics Report. 
75 OPHI. (2013). Country Briefing Malawi. 
76 UNDP (2014). Human Development Report 2014. 
53 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
result in poor livelihood outcomes. Unexpected dramatic climatic events have increased, leaving most 
smallholder farmers highly exposed to severe, unpredictable extreme weather risks such as droughts 
and floods.77 
7.  Weak internal and external conditions do not only constrain rural households’ agricultural yields, 
they also lack access to markets and other profitable economic opportunities. The poorest are unable 
to  invest  in  productive  assets,  education,  and  savings,  and  remain  chronically  trapped  in  poverty. 
Combined, these factors result in high levels of poverty, food insecurity, malnutrition, and vulnerability 
to HIV/AIDS.  
B.  Rural Livelihoods in Malawi 
8. 
Malawi  is  a  predominantly  rural  country.  Some  31%  of  the  country’s  land  area  is  suitable  for 
rain-fed  agriculture;  32%  is  marginal;  and  37%  unsuitable  for  agriculture.  Average  smallholder 
landholdings  in  Malawi  are  of  1.51  hectares,  although  66%  of  cultivated  plots  are  less  than  0.81 
hectares.  Smallholder  farmers  strongly  rely  on  maize,  although  cultivation  of  cassava,  sorghum  and 
potatoes is common in some areas of the country. Involvement in cash crops such as tobacco, cotton, 
sugar,  and  groundnut  and  in  smaller  value  chains  such  as  honey  and  milk  enables  better  off 
households to income sources. Despite the existence of abundant water (Lake Malawi and a network 
of rivers) the country’s irrigation potential is largely yet to be exploited – especially among smallholder 
farmers.78  The  country’s  substantial  watersheds  are  believed  to  have  the  highest  potential  for 
developing  smallholder  agriculture.  In  addition,  the  rural  economy  is  characterized  by  substantial 
volumes  of  petty  trade  and  other  forms  of  informal  economic  activity  which  enables  households  to 
diversify income sources.   
Figure 1: Malawi agricultural seasonal calendar 
Source: http://www.fews.net/southern-africa/malawi 
9. 
The rainy season in Malawi typically starts mid-October and runs through the end of April. The 
main planting season for maize and other local crops is between November and January. This is the 
most  difficult  economic  time  of  the  year  for  households.  Even  when  there  is  sufficient  rain,  many 
households experience prolonged periods of hunger and are unable to meet food requirements, and 
many are unable to pay school fees and other basic needs. Vegetables harvested in February through 
to the end of April constitute the first agricultural output after the lean season; cereals are harvested 
immediately after between April and August, coinciding with the winter planting.  
77 Malawi Vulnerability Assessment Committee. (2016). National Food and Nutrition Security Forecast, April 2016 – March 
2017. Bulletin No.12/16 Volume 1. 
78 National Statistical Office. (2012). Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio-Economic Characteristics 
Report. 
54 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
10.  Access for the poor to savings and credit services is  still  incipient  in  Malawi  with only 34% of 
adults  being  served  by  banks  and  other  formal  financial  institutions.  Almost  15%  rely  solely  on 
informal institutions to save or borrow money. Use of informal  services is higher among women than 
men (16% vs. 13%, respectively). Overall though, use of financial services  – formal and informal – is 
lower in rural areas (44%) than in urban areas (69%) and 
peri  urban  areas  (58%).  A  large  proportion  of  the 
population  (51%)  is  reliant  on  loans  from  family  and 
friends as they are excluded from financial services. (See 
Appendix 1 for more details). Households in Malawi save 
and  acquire  loans  to  improve  their  farming,  address 
medical,  school  and  food  needs  and  cover  other  living 
expenses.79 
fluctuation 
rains,  price 
inputs, 
the  major 
11.  Vulnerability  factors  affecting  rural  livelihoods.  In 
2010,  droughts/irregular 
for 
food  and  agricultural  outputs 
agricultural 
constituted 
risks  affecting  household 
resilience.80 It  is estimated 6.4 million people  will  not be 
able to meet annual minimal food consumption needs in 
2016.81  No significant differences have been reported on 
the  impacts  of  shocks  on  male  and  female-headed 
households in comparable situations.82 
12.  HIV and AIDS (national  prevalence at 10.6%) and 
pervasive  malnutrition  are  additional  factors  affecting 
household  productivity  and  human  capacity.83  An 
analysis of food expenditure patterns highlights the poor 
nutritional  content  of  lower  income  households,  who 
spend  very  little  on  animal  products,  fats,  and  oils.84  
Child  stunting  patterns  have  improved  over  time  but 
continue  being  alarming.  Mean  stunting  among  ultra-poor  households  in  2010  was  still  over  55%.85 
Nutritional challenges in Malawi compromise household productivity and wellbeing by increasing the 
probability  of  infectious  diseases  among  children  as  well  as  the  cognitive  ability  and  thus  the 
economic performance of future adults.86  
Source: MVAC, April 2016. National Food and Nutrition 
Security Forecast, April 2016 to March 2017.   Bulletin N. 
1216 Volume 1. 
13.  Vulnerable  groups  in  Malawi  include  the  elderly,  the  chronically  ill,  orphans  and  vulnerable 
children, persons with disabilities and destitutes.    
79 FinMark Trust (2014). FinScope Consumer Survey Malawi 2014. 
80  National  Statistical  Office.  (2012).  Integrated  Household  Survey  2010-2011:  Household  Socio-Economic  Characteristics 
Report. 
81 The Malawi Vulnerability Assessment Committee. (2016). National Food and Nutrition Security Forecast, April 2016 to March 
2015. Bulletin No.12/16 Volume 1. 
82  National  Statistical  Office.  (2012).  Integrated  Household  Survey  2010-2011:  Household  Socio-Economic  Characteristics 
Report. 
83 National Statistical Office. (2010. Malawi Demographic and Health Survey. 
84  National  Statistical  Office.  (2012).  Integrated  Household  Survey  2010-2011:  Household  Socio-Economic  Characteristics 
Report. 
85 International Food Policy Research Institute. (2015). Nutrition Country Profile, Malawi. Global Nutrition Report.  
86  The  nutritional  status  of  households  in  Malawi  is  a  result  of  deficiencies  in  food  availability  due  to  low  production  and 
productivity,  limited  access  primarily  due  to  food  inflation  and  poor  utilization,  manifested  through  poor  feeding  practices 
associated to dietary preferences, limited understanding of infant and young child nutritional needs and gender inequality. Data 
available up to 2011 indicates that food consumption in Malawi increased overall  from 2004, but this  was accompanied by a 
decrease in food quality or nutritional intake. The rise in food prices during this period partly explains this shift as households 
consume more lower cost foods. However, it is also recognized that a shift towards the consumption of a more diversified and 
nutrient rich diet which includes pulses, green leafy vegetables and animal products requires various demand and supply side 
interventions,  including  greater  gender  equality.  See:  IFRI.  (2015).  Mapping  the  Linkages  of  Agriculture,  Food  Security,  and 
Nutrition. Malawi Strategy Support Programme.  
55 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
C. Women and Youth 
Figure 2 Malawi changes in stunting 
14.  Youth.  Defined  as  those  aged  10-35, 
youth  in  Malawi  constitute  over  40%  of  the 
population.87  Custom  and  tradition  entail  the 
submission  of  youth  to  parents  and  other 
(older)  adults.  Thus,  youth  do  not  generally 
participate  in  household  or  community  level 
decision-making processes and their views are 
unrepresented in wider societal circles.  In rural 
areas,  youth  and  younger  households  tend  to 
be  poorer  than  those  headed  by  35-45  year 
olds  not  only  due 
the  progressive 
accumulation  of  assets  over  time,  but  also 
to 
because  youth  have 
productive  assets  such  as  land.  This  typically 
leaves  youth  in  Malawi  locked  in  unpaid  or 
subsistence  farming  and  poverty.88 As  in  other 
countries  in  the  region,  anecdotal  evidence 
indicates that youth in Malawi expect to engage 
in economic activities with quick returns, especially providing support services in agriculture or higher 
up in agricultural value chains or off-farm activities.    
Source: International Food Policy Research Institute, 2015. 
limited  access 
to 
15.  Gender roles and gender inequality. Women represent 52% of the country’s population and 
play  an  essential  role  at  the  heart  of  the  household  as  prime  food  producers  and  carers. Women´s 
participation in income generating activities such as petty trade and services is prominent. Men play a 
key  role  is  specific  stages  of  the  agricultural  cycle  such  as  preparing  fields,  marketing  and  deciding 
how  to  use  income.  Men  have  increased  involvement  in  cash  crops,  however,  according  to 
interviewees men expect to find jobs that are few are far between. 
16.  Unequal  workloads  between  men  and  women  are  not  the  only  manifestation  of  gender 
inequality in Malawi. Despite being a predominantly matrilineal society, de facto control of productive 
assets  is  in  the  hands  of  men, first  in  women’s male  relatives  and  once  married,  in  their  husbands. 
Women  do  not  usually  participate  in  decisions  that  have  a  bearing  on  them,  their  households,  and 
communities, due to the dominated of these spaces by men.89 Women have lower literacy rates than 
men (57% vs. 74%), and generally lower access to opportunities and services that can improve their 
lives and that of their families (e.g., remunerated employment).90 Women are also the prime victims of 
gender-based violence.91  
17.  Women  headed  households.  Some  25%  of  households  in  Malawi  are  headed  by  women. 
Plots  of  cultivated  land  among  women-headed  households  are  smaller  than  those  of  men  (average 
0.81  hectares  vs.  1.62  hectares  among  men).  This  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  57%  of  women-
headed households live under the poverty line. 92 
In  Malawi,  70%  of  women  managing  farming  plots  are  widowed,  divorced,  or  separated.  A 
18. 
recent  study  considering  the  gender  gap  in  agricultural  productivity  reveals  that  the  key  factors 
hindering productivity for women managing agricultural plots as follows (by order of importance): 
87 National Statistical Office, 2008. 2008 Population and Housing Census. 
88 National Statistical Office, 2012. Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio-Economic Characteristics 
Report. 
89 National Statistical Office, 2010. 2010 Malawi Demographic and Health Survey. 
90 National Statistical Office, September 2012. Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio-Economic 
Characteristics Report. 
91 National Statistical Office, 2010. 2010 Malawi Demographic and Health Survey. 
92 National Statistical Office, 2012. Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio-Economic Characteristics 
Report. 
56 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
a. Limited access to male labour; 
b. Limited participation in the production and marketing of cash crops; and 
c. Limited access to agricultural implements.93 
D. Government Policies, Strategies, and Programmes 
19.  Poverty reduction and rural development. Malawi’s Third Growth and Development Strategy 
2017-2022 sets ambitious goals to reduce poverty. Integrated Rural Development is a key strategy to 
transform rural livelihoods through governance and decentralization, local economic development and 
investment, the expansion  of rural financial services, local development planning and human capital 
development.94   
20.  Agriculture  sector  policies  and  drivers.  The  approval  of  the  National Agricultural  Policy  in 
2010  aimed  to  substantially  raise  sector  performance  and  promote  food  security.  Numerous  sub-
sector  policies  have  been  produced  covering  domains  such  as  HIV  and AIDS,  extension,  livestock 
development, conservation, irrigation, and others.95 The Agriculture  Sector-Wide Approach (ASWAp) 
drives strategic investment in relation to food security, the development of commercial agriculture and 
sustainable land (and water management).  ASWAp includes two major programmes: The Farm Input 
Subsidy  Programme  (FISP)  and  the  Green  Belt  Initiative  (GBI).  Together  these  programmes  aim  to 
substantially increase production and productivity and thus, food and income security. 
21.  Nutritional  policy  environment.  Malawi´s  Nutrition  Policy  and  Strategic  Plan  2007-11  and 
Guidelines  acknowledge  that  poor  nutrition  is  one  of  the  major  constraints  to  national  development 
and  progress.  These  documents  constitute  a  multisector  approach  to  nutrition.96  The  National 
Nutrition  Committee  (NNC)  is  responsible  for  coordination  nutrition  related  interventions.  In  2011, 
Malawi  was  the  first  country  to  launch  Scaling  Up  Nutrition  (SUN)  a  global  movement  to  improve 
nutrition - highlighting the importance of the country’s nutritional profile.97 
22.  Social protection. The Government has also developed an ambitious social protection system 
through the Malawi National Social Support Programme (NSSP).98 Two components of the NSSP are 
worth mentioning: i) a social cash transfer programme (SCTP) in the process of being rolled out to the 
last set of 10 districts of the country in 2016 targeting labour constrained ultra-poor households; and 
ii) the  Public  Works  Programme  (PWP),  which  targets  moderately  poor  households  and  non-labour 
constrained  ultra-poor  households  by  providing  wages  for  labour  in  public  works. The  GOM  and  its 
development  partners  have  recently  taken  steps  to  develop  a  graduation  approach  for  ultra-poor 
labour  constrained  households  into  sustainable  livelihoods  to  increase  their  resilience  and  promote 
their self-reliance. 
23.  Equality  of  rights  to  men  and  women.  The  constitution  grants  equal  rights  to  men  and 
women  and  prohibits  sex-based  discrimination.  The  National  Gender  Policy  of  2011  reflects  the 
government´s  commitment  the  working  on  gender  equality.99  The  Gender  Equality  and  Women 
Empowerment  (GEWE)  Programme  aims  to  accelerate  efforts  to  advance  gender  equality  and  is 
currently being implemented in  13  Districts.100 Anecdotal evidence indicates that the Malawi Gender 
Training Team (MGTT) established in 1996 requires resources and support to fulfil its mandate. In the 
93 UNWOMEN, UNDP, UNEP and the World Bank Group, 2015.  The Cost of The Gender Gap in Agricultural Productivity in 
Malawi, Tanzania and Uganda. 
94 Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development. (2016).  Integrated Rural Development Strategy. 
95 Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (2010.  The National Agricultural Policy: Promoting Agricultural Productivity for 
National Food Security and Economic Growth and Development Through Value Chain Development. 
96 Office of the President and Cabinet. (2007).  National Nutrition Policy. Ministry of Health, 2007.  National Nutrition Guidelines 
for Malawi.  
97 See: http://scalingupnutrition.org/sun-countries/malawi/  accessed 23rd November 2016. 
98 Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, August. (2012).  Malawi National Social Support Programme. 
99 Ministry of Gender, Children, and Community Development. (2011).  National Gender Policy. 
100 See: http://malawi.unfpa.org/news/gewe-gender-equality-and-women-empowerment accessed 10th November 2017. 
57 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
legal domain, the Prevention of Domestic Violence Act was approved in 2006 and the Gender Equity 
Bill in 2012.    
24.  Promotion of gender equality is upheld in Malawi by the country being signatory to:   
i)  The convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women; 
ii)  The Convention on the Rights of the Child; 
iii)  The Beijing Platform for Action; 
iv)  The International Conference on Population and Development; 
v)  The  Southern  Africa  Development  Community  Declaration  on  Gender  and 
Development; 
vi)  The  Protocol  to  the African  Charter  on  Human  and  People’s  Rights  on  the  Rights  of 
Women in Africa; and 
vii) The African Union´s Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa.    
25.  Recognition of the role played by youth. Youth development and empowerment are priority 
features of Malawi´s Growth and Development Strategy II. The National Youth Policy of 2013 aims to 
stimulate the participation of youth in the country´s development. The policy recognizes the role that 
youth  play  in  rural  development  and  the  pressing  need  to  render  agriculture  attractive  to  youth.101 
Equally  important  is  the  fact  that  policies  and  programmes  contributing  to  rural  development  make 
explicit  reference  to  the  need  to  involve  youth  and  for  effective  gender  mainstreaming  strategies  to 
advance gender equality.  
E.  Socio-Economic Characterization of Households in Malawi 
26.  Development  interventions  generally  classify  rural  households  into  the  following  categories: 
i) destitute households and other very poor people who have difficulties in meeting food consumption 
needs;  ii)  economically  active  but  poor  and  vulnerable  households;  and  iii)  resilient  households. 
Development  interventions  generally  target  the  middle  group  and  the  better  off  group  as  they  are 
better  positioned  to  get  involved  in  development  and  succeed  in  activities  at  lower  costs.  However, 
weather  related  shocks  have  exacerbated  food  insecurity  in  households  with  food  consumption 
challenges. As mentioned, specific programmes have been developed in Malawi to specifically target 
very poor households.  
27.  A  more  detailed  socio-economic  classification  of 
in  Malawi  offers  more  precise 
rural  households 
characterization and the opportunity to reach households 
with  targeted  interventions  that  match  their  specific 
needs.  A  more  accurate  classification  of  households  for 
the purposes of FARMSE is:  
Table  2:  Poverty 
Economic Strata 
in  Malawi  by  Socio 
Socio Economic Strata 
Ultra-poor Labor Constrained 
of 
% 
Poor 
10% 
Ultra-poor Non-Labour Constrained 
15% 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
labour constrained ultra-poor households;  
non-labour constrained ultra-poor households;  
Poor but Food Secure 
Vulnerable to Poverty 
Resilient to Poverty 
25% 
25% 
25% 
food secure but poor households;  
vulnerable households; and  
resilient households.102   
28.  These  five  groups  represent  a  continuum  of  poverty/wealth,  vulnerability,  and  resilience.  The 
first two categories (ultra-poor, labour constrained and non-labour constrained households) represent 
those living under extreme/severe food poverty, as these households are unable to meet basic food 
needs.  The  third  category  (food  secure  but  poor  households)  represents  those  living  under  the 
101 Ministry of Youth and Sports. (2013)  National Youth Policy. 
102 While similar, these five categories cannot be strictly equated to the five socio-economic quintiles used in national level 
household surveys. 
58 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
poverty line but are food secure. Together, these three categories represent 50.7% of the population 
of the country living under the national poverty line.  
F.  FARMSE Targeting Strategy 
29.  Overall  targeting  approach.  FARMSE  will  combine  a  national  and  geographic  targeting 
approach.  Component  1.0  will  support  graduation  of  the  poor  from  poverty  by  targeting  both 
categories  of  ultra-poor  households.  The  component  is  based  on  GOM  existing  graduation  model 
which  focuses  on  concentrating  and  coordinating  efforts  to  move  households  out  of  poverty  on  a 
sustainable  basis.  Subcomponent  2.1  will  support  restructuring  and  consolidation  of  CFBOs, 
promoting, linkages with the formal financial sector, and secondly support formation of new CBFOs in 
the  South  North  and  Central  areas  of  the  country  with  a  focus  on  areas  underserved  by  CFBOs. 
Finally,  subcomponent  2.2  will  support  innovation  of  financial  products  and  services  targeted  to 
financial institutions within specified market areas. Care will be made to ensure that interventions are 
not  (as  far  as  possible)  highly  concentrated  in  a  limited  number  of  areas.  Identification  of  target 
regions, districts and communities according to the application of the following criteria: 
  Strategic  opportunities  for  leveraging  investments  between  programme  components,  other 
IFAD  programmes,  as  well  as  existing  and  emerging  livelihood  enhancement  and  nutrition 
opportunities, including programmes implemented with the support of other donors related to 
value chain development, growing competitive advantage of an economic activity, in addition 
to new government investments; 
  Suitable  geographic  and  agro-ecological  conditions  for  the  success  of  underlying  economic 
activity; and 
  Poverty levels. 
30. 
Identification of target households. The programme will target all socio-economic segments 
in  rural  Malawi  through  different  programme  components.  Component  1.0  will  focus  on  ultra-poor 
households.  Sub-Sub  component  2.1  will  support  CBFOs  primarily  targeting  poor  households  and 
households  vulnerable  to  poverty  without  excluding  reaching  into  other  socio-economic  strata.  Sub-
component  2.2  will  focus  on  food  secure  but  poor  households,  vulnerable  households,  and  resilient 
households as participation generally demands higher economic capacity.  
31.  Component  1.0  targeting.  Graduation  activities  will  be  implemented  in  targeted  regions, 
districts, and communities. Selection criteria will include: 
i)  Poverty levels; 
ii)  Suitable  geographic  and  agro-ecological  conditions  for  the  success  of  underlying 
economic activity;  
iii)  Opportunities  for  leveraging  other  programme  investments  (e.g.,  between  programme 
components, other IFAD programmes, other donor, or government programmes); and 
iv)  Areas  with  notable  competitive  economic  activity  and/or  with  emerging  livelihood 
enhancement and nutrition opportunities. 
59 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
32.  Programme approaches, structure and the targeting strategy will ensure that men and women 
of  different  ages  across  all  socio-economic  groups  –  including  youth  –  are  reached  with  impactful 
gender and age sensitive interventions and products. The programme will ensure lessons learnt from 
financial  inclusion  programmes  are  considered  in  programme  design,  planning,  implementation, 
monitoring  and  evaluation  and  in  knowledge  products,  especially  related  to  effectively  targeting 
women and youth. 
33.  Special  geographic  targeting  considerations.  FARMSE  will  seek  to  overlap  graduation 
interventions with other financial sector support activities in the same areas/communities. Community 
level graduation programme activities will be first piloted in manageable sized projects and rolled out 
in a coordinated fashion once outcomes and best practices have been identified. Special attention will 
be  made  to  implementing  interventions  in  the  Southern  Region  given  the  high  presence  of  non-
governmental  organizations  (NGOs)  which  has  been  reported  to  have  led  in  some  communities  to 
high expectations of rewards given multiple programme participation requests from multiple agencies. 
G. Special Programme Strategies to Enhance Programme Effectiveness 
34.  Gender  and  youth  strategy.  FARMSE  will  mainstream  gender  both  within  its  managerial 
structure  and  policies,  as  well  as  at  programmatic  level.  Women  will  be  proactively  given  equal 
opportunities to participate in the management of the programme, access to training and promotions. 
The  programme  will  adopt  a  non-harassment  policy.  PMU  staff  members  will  be  trained  on  gender 
issues,  socio-economic  analysis,  relevant  household  methodologies,  HIV/AIDS  and  basic  issues 
related  to  nutrition.  Compliance  with  the  programme´s  gender  and  youth  strategy  will  be  sought 
among contracted organizations/individuals to undertake any programme related activity.   
35.  At  programme  level,  FARMSE  will  identify  measurable  targeting  objectives  for  women  and 
youth.  Where  possible,  the  programme  will  actively  ensure  women  and  youth  are  encouraged  and 
enabled  to  participate  in  programme  planning  and  monitoring  activities.  The  programme  will  ensure 
intervention opportunities are sensitive to the needs and preferences of women and youth. 
36.  Household  Methodologies.  The  programme  expects  the  integration  of  adapted  Household 
Methodologies into community level activities for Component 1.0. The approach will equip households 
targeted by the programme to elaborate, execute, and monitor realistic household level vision/plan of 
what they would like to achieve in a few years. This requires households to analyse current situations 
and  assess  what  they  need  achieve  their  goals.103  Household  Methodologies  have  been  used  in 
IFAD’s IRLADP and SAPP programmes. The methodology has been adopted within the Department 
of  Agriculture  Extension  Services  (DAES)  at  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  and  Water 
Development.104 The programme will the DAES approach as a basis for Household Methodologies for 
FARMSE. 
37.  The  analysis  promoted  in  household  methodologies  enables  household  members  to  assess 
intra-household dynamics and subsequently identify gender and age power imbalances and effects on 
individual and household wellbeing. Given nutritional challenges in Malawi the programme will ensure 
that  an  analysis  of  intra-household  distribution  of  food  is  also  included  with  the  view  to  promoting 
equal access of foodstuff among all household members. 
38.  Household methodologies unlock households´ economic potential and promote gender equality 
from  within.  As  such,  the  programme  will  address  structural  factors  constraining  long  term 
sustainability  of  development  interventions,  including:  i)  participation  of  men,  women  and  youth  in 
household  and  community  decisions  related  to  access,  control  and  use  of  productive  assets; 
ii) promotion  of  more  equal  access,  control  and  use  of  assets  and  benefits  derived  from  household 
livelihood  activities;  iii)  promotion  of  equal  enjoyment  of  benefits  associated  to  programme 
interventions; and iv) joint decision-making on how to use loans accessed. 
103 IFAD. (2014). Household Methodologies: Harnessing the Family´s Potential for Change. Gender, Targeting and Social 
Inclusion. 
104 IFAD (2014). Case Study: Household Approach for Gender, HIV and AIDS Mainstreaming, Malawi. Gender, Targeting and 
Social Inclusion. 
60 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
39.  Experience in the use of household methodologies (including, for example, the Gender Action 
Learning  System,  GALS105)  indicates  that  poorer  households  are  better  reached  through  individual 
mentoring directly at household level. This is consistent with the experience of graduation models for 
food  insecure  households  including  some  implemented  by  BRAC,  the  Ford  Foundation  and  CGAP 
and  IFAD  in  Kenya,  which  involve  intensive  and  direct  mentoring  of  households.  106  Conversely, 
experience  in  the  use  of  household  methodologies  shows  that  poor  (rather  than  the  poorest) 
households can be effectively reached through community based groups, such as VSLAs, SACCOs. 
This is consistent with findings from IFAD’s SAPP experience in Malawi.  
40.  Household  methodologies  aim  to  generate  profound  changes  at  household  level.  Propelling 
household  potential  involves  households  adopting  behaviour  different  to  that  supported  by  custom 
and  traditions.  Consistent  with  broader  socio-ecological  models,  household  methodologies  involve 
working with individuals, households, communities, and other development players which bear effects 
in  target  communities.  Moreover,  the  experience  of  IFAD’s  SAPP  in  Malawi  indicates  that  a  critical 
mass needs to be targeted at community level to generate a collective impulse for change.107  
inclusion  and  nutrition.  Service  providers 
in 
41.  Financial 
Components  1.0  and  subcomponents  2.1  and  2.2  will  provide  information  to  beneficiaries  to 
strengthen nutrition related knowledge related to nutrition security, namely: i) clarifying the difference 
between food consumption and adequate nutrition; ii) advising beneficiaries to assess their capacity to 
engage  in  savings  and  assume  credit  without  foregoing  food  consumption  needs;  iii)  advising 
beneficiaries  on  the  health  risks  associated  with  shifting  to  highly  processed  foods  often  associated 
with  socio-economic  progress;  and  iv)  providing  women  minimal  information  on  how  to  improve 
breastfeeding  and  feeding  practices  among  children  aged  0-2  years  of  age  to  contribute  to  stunting 
prevention efforts. 
implementing 
interventions 
H.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
42.  FARMSE  will  monitor  targeting  effectiveness  among  households  reached  with  household 
methodologies,  including:  planned  vs.  actual  men  and  women  reached  (including  young  males  and 
females);  improvement  in  intra-household  relations;  improved  sharing  of  tasks  between  household 
members;  and  participation  of  women  in  decision-making  related  to  use  of  land  for  productive 
purposes.  Use  of  data  will  be  encouraged  to  fine  tune  operational  strategies.  Variables  to  be 
monitored will be selected in the next design mission. 
105 IFAD. (2014). Case Study: Gender Action Learning System in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, and Uganda. Gender, 
Targeting and Social Inclusion. 
106 CGAP and Ford Foundation. (2014). From Extreme Poverty to Sustainable Livelihoods: A Technical Guide to the Graduation 
Approach. 
107 IFAD. (2016). SAPP Mid Term Review Report. 
61 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Targeting checklist            
Design 
1. Does the main target group – those expected 
to benefit most – correspond to IFAD’s target 
group as defined by the Targeting Policy (poorer 
households and food-insecure)? 
The programme dedicates an entire component to food insecure 
ultra-poor households, which aims to lift households to 
sustainable livelihoods. Other components will target poor yet 
more economically active/stable households. 
2. Have target sub-groups been identified and 
described according to their different socio-
economic characteristics, assets and livelihoods 
– with attention to gender and youth differences 
(matrix on target group characteristics 
completed)? 
3. Is evidence provided of interest in and likely 
uptake of the proposed activities by the identified 
target sub-groups? What is the evidence (matrix 
on analysis of programme components and 
activities by principal beneficiary groups 
completed)? 
4. Does the design document describe a feasible 
and operational targeting strategy in line with the 
Targeting Policy, involving some or all the 
following measures and methods: 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on poverty 
data or proxy indicators to identify, for area-
based projects or programmes, geographic 
areas (and within these, communities) with high 
concentration of poor people; 
Components structure the programme to target different socio-
economic groups. Characteristics – including description of 
assets and general livelihood strategies – are described in the 
PDR and have fully been considered in programme design. 
Programme components align with GOM strategies for poverty 
alleviation and rural development.   
Field level interviews with GOM, NGOs and community members 
confirmed the need, adequacy, and interest of proposed 
programme interventions. 
The programme proposed a feasible targeting strategy among 
socio-economic groups structured through programme 
components.   
Poverty is widespread in Malawi. Only Component 1.0 will target 
a specific geographic area. Subcomponent 2.1 are national 
scope but interventions will be selected to ensure equitable 
distribution of activities in the North, Central and Southern areas 
of the country. Subcomponent 2.2 will not have specific 
geographic targets, though interventions may be localized.  
FARMSE will attempt to have some programme interventions 
overlaps by area. 
4.2 Direct targeting – when services or 
resources are to be channelled to specific 
individuals or households; 
4.3 Self-targeting – when good and services 
respond to the priority needs, resource 
endowments and livelihood strategies of target 
groups; 
Component 1.0 will target 40% of women headed households. 
Targets for male participation in CBFOs will be set for CBFO 
group restructuring and formation in subcomponent 2.1. will 
target women 50% and youth 40%. Subcomponent 2.2 will target 
youth (40%) and women (50%).  
Programme interventions were designed considering the needs 
and priorities of rural poor households as expressed by GOM 
officials, the private sector, NGOs, and communities/household 
stakeholders. The choice of interventions addresses bottlenecks 
in Malawi´s smallholder agricultural economy which can be 
addressed to some extent with financial products and services, 
considering the capabilities and assets of each target group 
contemplated. 
62 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Targeting checklist            
Design 
4.4 Empowering measures – including 
information and communication, focused 
capacity- and confidence-building measures, 
organizational support, to empower and 
encourage the more active participation and 
inclusion in planning and decision-making of 
people who traditionally have less voice and 
power; 
4.5 Enabling measures – to strengthen 
stakeholders’ and partners’ attitude and 
commitment to poverty targeting, gender 
equality and women’s empowerment, including 
policy dialogue, awareness-raising and capacity-
building 
4.6 Attention to procedural measures – that 
could militate against participation by the 
intended target groups; 
4.7 Operational measures – appropriate 
project/ programme management arrangements, 
staffing, selection of implementation partners 
and service providers; 
5. Monitoring targeting performance. Does the 
design document specify that targeting 
performance will be monitored using 
participatory M&E, and be assessed at mid-term 
review? Does the M&E framework allow for the 
collection/analysis of sex-disaggregated data 
and are there gender-sensitive indicators against 
The programme will coordinate interventions with other 
stakeholders working in related or complementary fields both 
nationally and at the local level (most particularly for Component 
1.0 and subcomponent 2.1). Programme launch will be 
supported with community sensitization activities. Information will 
be disseminated publicly at community level to enhance inclusion 
and transparent selection of beneficiaries. It will mobilize men 
and women of different ages and socio-economic status for each 
programme activity. Key empowering features to be promoted in 
Component 1.0 through household methodologies include: 
  Promotion of household planning and livelihood strategy 
development; 
  Analysis of gender roles and barriers within households, 
empowering household members to be the drivers of 
change; and 
Increase participation and voice of youth in household 
and community affairs. 
 
For subcomponent 2.1, grantees supporting group formation will 
committee to gender and youth sensitive targeting and 
programmatic interventions. 
Enabling measures such as the following will be integrated into 
the programme: 
Transparent identification of beneficiaries; 
 
  Capacity building for transparent governance will be 
provided to CBFOs supported by the programme; 
  Raising the awareness among and requiring contractors 
follow the programme’s targeting and gender approach; 
  Participation in relevant technical gender issues and 
poverty policy dialogue workgroups etc. include for 
example, Social Cash Transfer Task Force, the Village 
Savings, and Loans Association Committee, etc., as 
relevant; 
  Dialogue with relevant GOM line ministries including for 
example, the Ministry of Agriculture and other interested 
stakeholders on the use of household methodologies; 
and 
  Awareness raised among community leaders and other 
community members to promote household approach 
methods beyond targeted households. 
The programme will clearly and publicly share targeting criteria at 
community level and will seek the involvement of targeted 
households – including vulnerable ones - in assessing 
programme progress and effectiveness.   
Geographical selection criteria will be developed with key 
stakeholders. 
TORs for all relevant staff will specify gender related 
responsibilities. Field team compositions will target an equal 
number of men and women. Performance of targeting will be 
monitored. The allocation of funds for special studies will help 
clarify performance challenges. 
The M&E framework will monitor target programme performance. 
In addition, the programme will conduct a longitudinal study in 
the initial phase of implementation of Component 1.0 to assess 
the cost-effectiveness of graduation models tested. This exercise 
will inform the selection of indicators to be subsequently used in 
rolling out a larger graduation approach intervention.  Both will 
ensure data collected is gender disaggregated and youth are 
63 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Targeting checklist            
Design 
which to monitor/evaluate outputs, outcomes 
and impacts? 
accounted for separately. Outcome and impact indicators to be 
used for different programme components include: 
  Component 1: number of targeted household attaining 
food security, and number of targeted households using 
financial services 
  Component 2.1 – Number of women, men, and youth 
targeted; and  
  Component 2.3 – Number of women and youth 
targeted. 
64 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
A.  Country performance 
1. 
IFAD’s  Country  Strategic  Opportunities  Programme  (COSOP)  2010-2015  supported  four 
investment  programmes:  the  Rural  Livelihood  Support  Programme  (RLSP);  the  Irrigation,  Rural 
Livelihoods  and  Agricultural  Development  Programme  (IRLADP),  which  was  co-financed  with  the 
World  Bank,  the  Rural  Livelihoods  and  Economic  Enhancement  Programme  (RLEEP)  and  the 
Sustainable  Agricultural  Production  Programme  (SAPP);  as  well  as  12  regional  and  country  grant 
funded project. A new project for the irrigation sector, the Programme for Rural Irrigation Development 
(PRIDE), will be fully operational in 2017.  
2. 
The  Malawi  COSOP  2016-2022  notes  that  government  capacity  to  manage  and  implement 
programmes  is  stretched.  Most  government  budget  and  human  resources  for  the  agricultural  sector 
goes to the Farm Input Subsidy Programme (FISP) which is reaching 50% of Malawi’s smallholders, 
but  lacks  incentives  for  farmers  to  boost  productivity.  The  World  Bank’s  2014  Country  and  Policy 
Institutional  Assessment 
for  public  sector  management. 
Decentralisation  provides  a  network  of  local  institutions  and  rural  services,  but  the  capacity  to 
implement  projects  and  programmes  remains  limited,  and  is  further  compromised  by  FISP.  Private 
sector engagement in the rural economy is cautious due to perceived high risks and limited returns. 
(CPIA)  shows  a  negative 
trend 
B.  Lessons learned from IFAD past interventions in Malawi 
3. 
The main lessons learnt from the loan funded programmes are summarized below: 
4. 
Project management. During 2010-2015, project start-ups were slow, due to late fulfilment of 
effectiveness  criteria.  Experiences  in  project  management  are  mixed:  SAPP  has  been  managed  by 
the Ministry of Agriculture and its staff was not fully dedicated to the programme. This has negatively 
affected performance, causing a 3-year delay in implementation. RLEEP has a dedicated coordination 
unit under oversight of the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MoLG & RD) that 
performs  well.  The  lesson  learnt  is  that  a  fully  dedicated  management  unit  enables  efficient  project 
implementation. 
5. 
Public extension services use the lead farmers and farmer field school approaches, and the 
IFAD-funded projects (IRLADP, SAPP, RLEEP) support these. The projects report improved outreach 
and  adoption  rates,  and  have  helped  to  refine  the  approaches,  for  example  by  introducing  farmer 
business  schools  and  community  animal  health  workers.  The  effectiveness  of  extension  services 
could  be  further  increased  through  complementary  services  by  non-government  and  private  service 
providers.  
Nutrition  and  food  security. The  outcome  of  IFAD’s  Food  Knowledge Attitude  and  Practices 
6. 
survey provided the baseline for the COSOP to mainstream nutrition.108 The need for more rigorous 
nutrition  intervention  was  confirmed  and  districts  with  high  rates  of  stunting  should  be  targeted. 
Project  intervention  should:  i)  lead  to  improved  infant  and  young  feeding  practices;  and  ii)  ensure 
regular  growth  monitoring  to  identify  risks  early  for  remedial  interventions.  All  project  should  be 
nutrition sensitive which could entail the promotion of: i) nutritious plant products for subsistence and 
in  value  chains;  ii)  good  post-harvest  and  food  processing  technology;  iii)  awareness  through  large 
scale campaigns and household level training. 
7. 
Gender  and  targeting.  In  IRLADP  and  SAPP,  the  application  of  a  household  methodology 
Approach has helped household members develop joint visions, plans and make decisions on crops, 
revenues, and household resources. The household methodology is inclusive and addresses gender 
equality,  while  respecting  household  diversity.  However,  as  experience  in  SAPP  has  shown,  a 
household methodology is most effective when widely used within communities, as changes within the 
108 See: Food Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice (KAP) survey, IFAD Malawi, 2015. 
65 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
households complement changes to broader socially norms. Three specific results expected from the 
use of household methodologies  are relevant to FARMSE:  i) adoption  of gender norms that provide 
greater  opportunities  to  both  women  and  men;  ii)  increased  household  economic  potential;  and  iii) 
promoting the involvement of youth in household and community affairs, as well as in the possibility of 
developing productive livelihood strategies.   
8. 
to 
Policy  engagement.  The  Malawi  COSOP  2010-2015  portfolio  was  well-aligned 
Government’s  policies,  but  results  were  not  systematically  used  to  inform  policy  makers.  Donor 
coordination and policy dialogue on agriculture in Malawi is undertaken through the Donor Committee 
on  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  (DCAFS).  IFAD’s  limited  in-country  presence  has  hampered  its 
regular participation in the DCAFS. Alternative arrangements should be employed to ensure a steady 
transfer of project-based knowledge to policy makers and development partners. 
9. 
Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and climate-smart agriculture. SAPP promotes GAPs 
to  improve  soil  fertility  and  boost  production.  Results  in  farmers’  fields  are  promising  as  yields  of 
rainfed maize increased from 1.3 to 2.2 t/ha. RLEEP supports double lining and improved storage in 
groundnuts,  among  other  initiatives,  which  can  increase  marketable  production  by  50%.  Climate-
smart agricultural practices that can boost better nutrition underpinned by an efficient use of weather 
information are highly relevant. As the irrigated area expands, the need for GAPs adapted to irrigated 
farming increases. There is, however, a need for better post-harvest practices, to boost marketability 
of produce along a 'Farming as a Business’-perspective.  
10.  Sustainable irrigation development enhanced yields and cropping intensities. In IRLADP, 
maize  yields increased from 1.6 to 3.4 t/ha. Cropping intensity  increased in new  irrigation schemes, 
especially  in  small  ones,  from  80%  (baseline)  to  160%.  Water  user  associations  ensure  long-term 
management, secure smallholder access to land and enable contract farming. New irrigation projects 
need  to  build  on  IRLADP’s  approach  for  securing  land  access.  Catchment  soil  and  water 
management are important to sustain the irrigation infrastructure and ecosystem. 
11.  Rural  Finance.  Limited  access  to  rural  finance  services  constrains  agricultural  development. 
COSOP  2010-2015  provided  some  support  to  improve  access  to  rural  finance,  such  as  to  funding 
village  savings  and  loan  association  development.  Farmers’  demand  however  exceeds  available 
services and credit remains expensive. 
12.  Value chain development. RLEEP works with a range of value chain actors including farmers, 
the private sector, and the National Smallholder Farmers’ Association of Malawi. RLEEP’s approach to 
value chain development started with a national mapping exercise, followed by a consultative process 
to identify commodity chains with developmental potential. An innovative process has started recently 
whereby private sector companies identify the value chains and their restrictions. Private companies 
can  apply  to  matching  grants  to  address  value  chain  issues,  like  IFAD’s  Public-Private-Producer 
Partnership (4P) approach. Economic modelling by IFAD/IFPRI confirms the potential for value chain 
development, including biofuels, and cash crops.109  
13.  Climate change and vulnerability to external shocks. Climate change in densely populated 
parts in Southern African is estimated to cause yield losses of about 20% by 2050.110 Climate change 
has become a reality for Malawi’s largely rain-fed agriculture, as evidenced by the various floods and 
droughts (the last drought affecting the country in 2015/16). Smallholders are particularly vulnerable to 
climate effects, and the promotion of good agricultural practices should include climate smart options, 
such as the use of weather forecasts. 
109 Rui & Thurlow 2016 Development of a Rural Investment and Policy Analysis (RIAPA) Modeling Toolkit.  
110 Wheeler and von Braun (2013) Climate change impact on food security, Science.  
66 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
C.  Lessons learned specific to FARMSE design 
Components and Activities  
14.  Geographic Distribution of Resources. While the programme will be national in scope, some 
interventions will target strategically identified districts. This will be done to concentrate resources to 
maximize  use  of  funds,  and  to  test/identify  effective,  efficient,  and  replicable  interventions  for  the 
purposes  of  scaling  up.  Lessons  learned  from  past  interventions  show  that  planned  overlap  with 
complementary existing or planned new IFAD and or other donor interventions can multiple benefits to 
target groups. In the case of FARMSE, where programme activities from graduation through to MSME 
financing  serve  overlapping  targeted  socio  economic  strata,  purposeful  geographic  intervention 
selection is highly desirable.  
15.  Each  socio-economic  stratum  requires  differentiated  interventions.  Within  each  socio-
economic  stratum,  people  of  different  ages  and  gender  require  a  specific  approach  to  attain  food 
security,  income,  and  asset  development  as  their  needs  are  different.  While  not  exclusive  to  any 
group,  some  financial  tools  and  interventions  are  more  appropriate  for  one  group  than  others. 
Graduation models will target the ultra-poor, while informal financial organizations such as VSLAs are 
better suited to the ultra-poor but non-labour constrained and poor but food-secure. Financial services 
offered  by  formal  financial  services  providers  are  often  more  effective  tools  for  households  that  are 
vulnerable to poverty and resilient households and MSMEs. The FARMSE design will seek to provide 
the  most  appropriate  intervention  for  each  target  group,  including  youth,  considering  the  specific 
needs of men and women and the use of gender sensitive approaches.  
Figure 1: Socio economic strata and appropriate financial service 
16.  Private Sector Partners. Private sector partners require incentives to enter markets as well as 
attractive long-term profits to remain  in  them. Before  entering a  partnership for market development 
purposes, interventions must have credible market analysis which shows the commercial potential of 
a venture. Programme partner enterprises must also have a demonstrated will and capacity to sustain 
the  market  intervention  over  the  time  required  to  achieve  profitability,  otherwise  the  sustainability  of 
proposed services/business activities will be at risk. Programmes working on a cost sharing basis with 
private enterprise can ensure long term partnership commitments.  
17.  Terms  of  Partnerships.  Longer  term  partnerships  are  commonly  appropriate  for  sector 
development programmes, particularly those in countries where relatively few market players exist. To 
ensure good performance, longer-term projects should be multi-phased and performance-based, on a 
cost sharing basis. Programmes should support private and not-for-profit organizations individually or 
in  consortia,  based  on  short-term  or  longer-term  strategic  partnerships  if  substantial  sustainable 
benefits to project target groups and beneficiaries can be identified.  
18.  Elite  Capture.  Entering  programmes  with  private  sector  enterprise  often  implies  benefits  will 
flow  to  high  income  beneficiaries.  While  this  is  practicably  unavoidable,  it  is  not  necessarily 
undesirable  as  private  enterprise  can  play  key  roles  in  developing  agricultural  and  finance  sector 
value  chains  to  the  benefit  of  the  rural  poor.  Working  with  the  private  sector  with  the  explicit  and 
67 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
measurable  intention  of  creating  substantial  benefits  to  low  income  populations  can  avoid 
unnecessary  elite  capture.  With  appropriate  processes  and  a  strong  targeting  strategy,  the  risk  of 
unnecessary elite capture or elite capture which does not translate into substantial target beneficiary 
impacts,  can  also  largely  be  avoided.  Programmes  working  on  a  cost  sharing  basis  with  private 
enterprise can minimize elite capture. 
19.  Product  market  analysis.  When  financial  service  providers  attempt  to  design,  or  adapt 
financial services products for low income and/ or rural markets they often fail to undertake adequate 
market research, product testing, and/ or to  develop  the  delivery capacity required to reach/or meet 
demand. The result is almost always poor product/service performance. Good practice product design 
requires an understanding of client needs which can be capture through a Human Centered Design 
(HCD) approach. HCD is an approach which recognized the centrality of client needs. This approach 
has worked well in many financial sector development activities as it starts with people and ends with 
solutions uniquely tailored to meet their needs.111 Like participatory planning and development, client 
involvement is not a one-off activity. Rather it is an ongoing, iterative process integrated into market 
development activities. This approach can be at odds with the more rapid pace expectation of private 
sector actors. Where implemented to good practice levels, however, HCD has been shown to reduce 
market entry risks leading to improved prospects for sustainable product/services development.  
20.  Co-Financing. Programs that involved private sector typically offer some form of co- financing 
arrangements for project development purposes.  Projects must be able to strike a balance  between 
providing  sufficient  incentive  for  a  potential  partner  to  engage  in  new  market  development  and 
insisting on a reciprocal investment proving commitment to the commercialization of an opportunity. In 
lay  terms,  this  is  called  insisting  a  business  have  “skin  in  the  game”  or  that  it  has  substantial  time 
costs and capital at risk to prove their commitment and justify programme resources. 
21.  Graduation  models  and 
livelihood  opportunities.  The  original  graduation  model 
implemented  in  Bangladesh  developed  by  BRAC  is  commonly  referred  to  as  the  “graduation 
approach”.112    Results  of  the  model  in  other  countries  provides  encouraging  but  mixed  results, 
suggesting  it  is  not  possible  to  predict  ex-ante  those  who  will  benefit  the  most  from  the  graduation 
approach.113  Challenges  in  Bangladesh,  for  example,  include  the  difficulty  graduated  households 
encountered marketing products intended to sustain them out of poverty.114 This example underscores 
both  the  challenge  and  need  for  access  to  realistic  sustainable  livelihood  opportunities  for  the 
graduating  poor.  The  IFAD  programme  PROFIT  in  Kenya  confirms  strong  technical  expertise  is 
required to operationalize and manage graduation programmes. 
D.  Programme Management 
22.  Technical capacity - both graduation and financial sector development programs typically rely 
on  and  require  substantial,  and  specific  technical  expertise.  This  applies  both  to  programme 
management  and  to  programme  implementation.  Programmes  without  the  technical  expertise 
required  often  struggle  to  attract  and  assess  the  capacity  of  appropriate  partner  institutions. 
Monitoring and evaluation of partner performance can be equally challenging, a particularly important 
consideration  for  multi-phased,  performance-based  projects. At  the  project  level  for  both  graduation 
and  financial  sector  programming,  the  capacity  and  resources  must  be  available  for  sourcing  highly 
capable  technical  assistance  and  for  ongoing  support  of  programme/field  team  training  and 
development. In many cases, high-level technical assistance must be a condition project funding. 
111 For more information see: https://www.cgap.org/publications/what-human-centered-design-means-financial-inclusion for 
further information. 
112 CGAP and Ford Foundation. (2014). From Extreme Poverty to Sustainable Livelihoods. A Technical Guide to the Graduation 
Approach. 
113 IPA, September. (2016). Impact of the Graduation Approach: Findings from the CGAP – Ford Foundation Pilots. 
114 Representatives of the Malawi Team Visiting the BRAC Graduation Programme in Bangladesh (authors not cited). (2016). 
BRAC Bangladesh Study Tour Report from 29th November to 4th December 2015. 
68 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
23.  Short  Term  or  Sporadic  TA  is  often  insufficient  –  Myriad  past  experiences  show  sporadic, 
short-term TA focusing on single technical challenge is typically insufficient to support financial service 
providers  in  developing  appropriate  and  rural  financing  products/services.  Financial  institutions 
typically require substantial technical and operational capacity improvements beyond market research 
and  product  development.115  Moreover,  developing  and  implementing  a  sustainable  rural  outreach 
strategy also often implies institutional change process beyond the mere transfer of technical skills.  
24.  Championing  change  is  critical  in  the  private  sector  –  Negative  perceptions  about  the 
feasibility of profitably serving rural areas and agriculture are often rooted at all levels of an institution, 
from frontline  staff  to  senior  management  to  board  members. A  change  in  institutional  perception  is 
key  to  successful  results  on  the  ground  and,  as  experience  has  repeatedly  shown,  a  credible 
institutional champion is critical to changing mind sets.  In Swaziland’s Rural Finance and  Enterprise 
Development Programme, a FSP was unable to advance outreach and improve performance despite 
consistent support due primarily because its ownership was not willing to change its business model. 
The champion, often the CEO, must ignite, and drive new product or market development processes, 
internal  change 
ensure  support/guidance 
management support, and manage institutional change risk.  
technical  partners,  build  ongoing 
from  qualified 
25.  Funding  Flow  –  Private  sector  partners  and  market  development  interventions  can  be  highly 
sensitive  to  timing  issues,  particularly  when  substantial  private  sector  investment  is  at  risk.  In  the 
RUFIP rural finance programme in Lesotho, funding for CFBO group formation was stalled for over 18 
months  resulting  in  not  only  lost  opportunity  costs,  but  also  closure  of  groups  due  to  lack  of 
programmed  support.  Maintaining  planned  flow  of  investment  funding  will  be  critical  in  FARMSE  for 
both financial institution and non-financial institution private sector partners to ensure both programme 
targets and co-financing commitments are met. 
26.  Program oversight – just as technical capacity is required at the management and the project 
implementation  level,  projects  like  FARMSE  also  require  a  high-level  and  engaged  oversight  body. 
Without  such  oversight,  particularly  as  it  relates  to  project  partners  meeting  implementation  targets 
and  market  development  objectives,  programming  can  fall  behind  the  relatively  fast-paced 
expectations of project partners – particularly private sector partners causing them to lose interest, not 
meet performance goals, or find other more profitable ways to spend time and capital. 
115 Examples include strengthening human resources (capacity and incentives to service new rural target groups), adjustments 
of the Management Information System (MIS) to adequately measure performance and make adjustments in a timely manner, 
but  also  investments  in  physical  outreach  capacity  to  reach  remote  rural  clients,  such  as  low-cost  branches  and  mobile 
technologies. 
69 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
1. 
The overall goal of the Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise (FARMSE) 
is  to  reduce  poverty,  improve  livelihoods  and  enhance  the  resilience  of  rural  households  on  a 
sustainable basis. The project’s development objective is to increase access to and use of a range of 
sustainable financial services by rural households and micro, small, and medium enterprises. 
2. 
FARMSE will be a seven-year comprised of three components: (1) Component 1.0 - Ultra-poor 
graduation model; Component 2.0 Support to financial innovation and outreach; and Component 3.0 - 
Strategic partnerships, knowledge generation, and policy.  
3. 
Component  2.0  has  two  subcomponents:  Sub-Component  2.1  -  Community  based  financial 
organization  support  which  will  fund  expansion  and  innovation  of  CBFOs  in  rural  Malawi;  and 
Subcomponent  2.2  –  Innovation  and  outreach  facility  (IOF)  which  will  fund  rural  finance  product/ 
service innovation and outreach. Component 3.0 also has two subcomponents both providing funding 
to macro and meso rural finance sector level interventions supporting policy, strategies and system in 
regard to components 1.0 and 2.0; they include: Subcomponent 3.1 – Support for Poverty graduation 
Policy  and  Systems;  and  Subcomponent  3.2  –  Support  for  development  of  broader  Rural  Finance 
Policy.  
Component 1.0 - Ultra-poor graduation model development and scaling up 
4. 
The  outcome  of  this  component  is  the  capacity  of  ultra-poor  households  to  graduate  from 
poverty, improve food security and secure livelihood opportunities is improved. The  objective of the 
component  is  to  roll  out  a  cost-effective,  replicable  model(s)  to  graduate  households  from  ultra-
poverty  and  food  insecurity  into  sustainable,  self-reliant  livelihoods. A  secondary  goal  of  the  design 
and is to reduce the cost of graduation from the benchmark USD 1,500 to between USD 800 to 1,000. 
This  component  is  based  on  the  existing  GOM  graduation  model  which  is  similar  to  the 
5. 
universally tested BRAC model promoted by The Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) and 
Ford  Foundation. This  component  will  be  implemented  by  specialized  agencies  and/or  development 
partners. The later would be partners that are willing to bring additional funds into FARMSE or pledge 
parallel financing. All the implementing agencies will be under the overall oversight of the PMU.  
Rational 
According to the most recent poverty measurements of 2010, 24.5% of the Malawi´s population 
6. 
is unable to source/pay for the minimal energy / daily calorie requirements per person per day of the 
national food poverty line (22,956 Malawian Kwacha).116 In fact, the country has seen a rising trend in 
the  proportion  of  ultra-poor  as  persistent  external  shocks  have  eroded  the  resilience  of  vulnerable 
rural households with limited assets.   
7. 
Government efforts to address the needs of the poorest became institutionalized in 2000  with 
the approval of the National Safety Nets Strategy which included: i) public works; ii) targeted nutrition; 
iii) targeted inputs; and iv) direct welfare transfers. A Government social cash transfer pilot started in 
2006. The broader notion of social protection was after adopted shortly after by the government with 
the  approval  of  the  National  Social  Support  Policy  in  2009  and  the  first  National  Social  Support 
Programme (NSSP) 2012-2016. 117  The NSSP was designed around five components: i) social cash 
transfers  (locally  known  as  Mtukula  Pakhomo);  ii)  public  works;  iii)  school  meals;  iv)  VSLAs  and 
v) microfinance.  It  aims  to  provide  a  continuum  of  support  to  the  vulnerable  and  poor  and  is 
implemented  with  the  participation  of  several  ministries  in  partnership  with  non-governmental 
116  National  Statistical  Office,  2012.  Integrated  Household  Survey  2010-2011:  Household  Socio-Economic  Characteristics 
Report. 
117 Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, 2009.  Social Support Policy: Social Support, a Right for All.   
71 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
stakeholders.118  NSSP II will be soon launched. Two of the five components are critical and relate to 
FARMSE design, and are discussed below. 
The  Social  Cash  Transfer  Programme.  Labour  constrained  ultra-poor  households  represent 
8. 
about 10% of the country´s population. The social cash transfer programme (SCTP) managed by the 
Ministry of Gender, Children, Disability, and Social Welfare (MoGCDSW) targets this group. Its prime 
objective  is  to  reduce  poverty,  hunger,  and  starvation,  improve  school  enrolment  and  attendance, 
along  with  health  and  nutrition.  Following  the  implementation  of  the  first  social  cash  transfer  pilot  in 
2006, a concerted effort by the GOM with the support of a host of donors progressively roll outed out 
the  programme  to  an  increasingly  larger  population.119  The  GOM  expected  that  the  last  set  of  10 
districts in the country not yet integrated into the programme will start receiving transfers by the end of 
the  first  quarter  2017.  The  structure  and  level  of  the  cash  transfer  received  by  target  households 
depends on the number of household members, and the number of people in the household attending 
primary and secondary school. Payments ranged from MKW 1,700 to MKW 3,700 for a one and four-
person household respectively, with an additional MKW 500 for primary students, and MKW 1,000 for 
secondary students. (See Annex 1 for details). Payment methods include manual in-cash payments, 
bank transfers and e-payments, thought the bulk of payments are still in cash. 120  
9. 
An impact evaluation of the SCTP (2016) confirmed successful programme implementation and 
documented  positive  results  across  different  aspects  of  household  economies  including:  i)  greater 
food  security;  ii)  improved  dietary  diversity,  education,  health,  household  improvements,  agricultural 
inputs and livestock; iii) school enrolment and attendance; and iv) a safer transition into adulthood for 
adolescent youth. The study also showed that female and male-headed households tend to use funds 
differently,  with  women  spending  more  on  children  and  men  on  livestock.  Only  2%  of  study 
participants reported having saved a portion of funds received from the programme.121  Other studies 
found that in the absence of credit and insurance, households can use cash transfers to improve their 
productive capacity. An estimated 61% of one sample group of recipients no longer had to work in for 
other  farmers  or  to  piece  work  due  to  their  improved  capacity  to  invest  in  agricultural  inputs  and 
livestock.122 
10.  The Public Works Programme. The Public Works Programme (PWP) targets the moderately 
poor  and  extremely  poor  households,  which  includes  ultra-poor  non-labour  constrained  households 
(or  about  15%  of  the  total  population).  The  PWP  provides  income  support  (wage  compensation  for 
work  on  public  works)  and  infrastructure  that  directly  or  indirectly  benefits  local  communities.  The 
programme  is  managed  by  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  and  Rural  Development  (MoLG  & 
RD).123   
11.  Despite  women´s  high  participation  in  both  programmes  (NCSP  and  PWP),  given  the  large 
proportion of women headed households among the ranks of the ultra-poor and deliberate efforts of 
the  PWP  in  targeting  women,  a  gender  analysis  of  NSSP  points  to  the  need  to  strengthen  gender 
mainstreaming.  The  study  rightly  points  out  that  women’s  participation  should  not  be  equated  to 
gender  equality  and  that  both  programmes  lack  strategies  to  positively  alter  intra-household  power 
relations. Another study goes further to stress the importance of monitoring and evaluating the gender 
impacts and outcomes of NSSP interventions and the acute need for gender training.124   
12.  Graduation of ultra-poor households. While the impact on households targeted by the NSSP 
is clear, it is uneven and, more importantly, does not offer a clear path to sustainable  livelihoods for 
118 Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, 2009.  Social Support Policy: Social Support, a Right for All.   
119  Donors:  Global  Fund  to  Fight  AIDS,  Tuberculosis  &  Malawi,  the  German  Government,  European  Union, World  Bank  and 
Irish Aid. 
120 Amounts in USD 2015 dollars. Carolina Population Center, 2016. Malawi Social Cash Transfer Programme Endline Impact 
Evaluation Report DRAFT. 
121 Carolina Population Center, 2016. Malawi Social Cash Transfer Programme Endline Impact Evaluation Report DRAFT. 
122 FAO (date not visible). From Protection to Production: Productive Impacts of the Malawi Social Cash Transfer Scheme. 
123 Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, August 2012.  Malawi National Social Support Programme. 
124 GIZ, 2015. A Rapid Field Assessment of the Gender Responsiveness of the Malawi Social Support Programme (MNSSP) for 
GIZ. 
72 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
ultra-poor  households.  In  this  context,  the  GOM  and  its  development  partners  recently  began  to 
investigate and make modest investments to develop a strategic graduation agenda and programme, 
drawing largely upon models operating in Bangladesh, Ethiopia, and Zambia. The most well known is 
BRAC’s  “graduation  approach/model”.125  First  developed  in  Bangladesh,  BRAC,  with  the  support  of 
CGAP  and  the  Ford  Foundation,  has  now  employed  its  model  in  10  countries.  The  model  revolves 
around  four  pillars  implemented  over  18-36  months:  i)  meeting  food  security  needs;  ii)  livelihood 
improvement interventions; iii) financial inclusion; and iv) on-going household mentoring. In mid-2014, 
the approach was implemented in the IFAD PROFIT programme in Kenya.126   
13.  Results  of  the  BRAC  model  has  provided  encouraging  but  mixed  results.  First,  evaluations 
indicate  it  is  not  possible  to  predict  ex-ante  who  will  benefit  most  from  the  graduation  approach.127 
Second,  and  related,  not  all  graduates  succeed  in  finding  sustainable  livelihood  opportunities.  In 
BRAC experiences, for example, the marketing of products produced by “graduates” as a part of their 
long-term  livelihood  development  has  been  “challenging”.128  This  underscores  the  importance  of 
exposure  to,  or  development  of  sustainable  livelihood  opportunities  associated  with  a  graduation 
programme. Finally, the cost per beneficiary at around USD 1,500 is considerably beyond the budgets 
many governments can afford. 
14.  There  are  several  ultra-poor  graduation  programmes  in  Malawi  supported  by  various 
development partners in collaboration with GOM, including the Economic Empowerment Pilot Project 
in Mwanza District supported by the GOM, GIZ and COMSIP which targets 557 households receiving 
government  social  cash  transfer  beneficiaries.  Inspired  by  the  BRACs  model,  the  programme  is 
testing  three  approaches  supplementing  monthly  cash  transfers  with:  i)  lump  sum  cash  payment  of 
50,000  MKW  only  (USD  65-70);  ii)  financial  literacy,  business  and  livestock  management,  and 
horticulture  training  but  no  cash;  and  iii)  training  and  lump  sum  payment.129  The  pilot  aims  to 
understand  how  SCTP  recipients  with  different  support  can  best  improve  their  income  streams  and 
household wellbeing.130  
15.  The National Smallholder Farmers Association of Malawi (NASFAM) sponsors programme with 
an approach which loosely corresponds to a graduation programme. NASFAM facilitates access to life 
skills  capacity  building  programme  to  enhance  agricultural  production  and  productivity,  provides 
access to irrigation and farm inputs, and market access. Gender and HIV/AIDS are mainstreamed as 
crosscutting issues.131  
16.  The Overseas Development Institute was engaged in 2016 by the GOM to provide insights into 
how the BRACS model could be adapted to the Malawian context. Options for a Graduation Strategy 
from  the  SCTP  were  developed  but  have  not  been  yet  implemented.  All  options  developed  were 
designed  to  improve:  i)  immediate  wellbeing  and  livelihood  enhancement;  and  ii)  improving  human 
development outcomes for the next generation. Two adaptation features proposed by ODI for Malawi 
include  an  emphasis  on  more  climate  resilient  animal  husbandry  and  promotion  of  sexual, 
reproductive and child health care.   
17.  Beyond  financial  graduation  models,  IFAD  and  other  agencies  have  tested  household 
methodologies  to  move  very  poor  and  poor  households  as  a  means  sustainable  rural  livelihood 
development strategy. There are numerous approaches but the creation by community groups and/or 
households  of  a  realistic  development  vision  is  common  to  each  programme. The methodology  has 
been used successfully to support agricultural product value chains through the facilitated/community 
125 CGAP and Ford Foundation (2014), From Extreme Poverty to Sustainable Livelihoods. A Technical Guide to the Graduation 
Approach. 
126 There are no results on the approaches effectiveness available. 
127 IPA (2016), Impact of the Graduation Approach: Findings from the CGAP – Ford Foundation Pilots. 
128 Representatives of the Malawi Team Visiting the BRAC Graduation Programme in Bangladesh (authors not cited), 2016. 
BRAC Bangladesh Study Tour Report from 29th November to 4th December 2015. 
129 GIZ, Overview on the Implementation of the Economic Empowerment Pilot Project in Mwanza. 
130 Results from the evaluation of the pilot should be available by the end of 2016. 
131 See: http://www.nasfam.org/index.php/membership-benefits accessed 10th November 2016. 
73 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
mentored integration of very poor households into the chain.132 The Gender Action Learning System 
(GALS)  household  methodology  supported  by  IFAD,  has  also  shown  that  working  to  address 
household gender barriers can stimulate new behaviours impactful results for women, men, youth and 
children and unlock household economic potential.133 
18.  Two IFAD programmes in Malawi, the Irrigation Rural Livelihoods and Agriculture Development 
Project  (IRLADP)  and  the  Sustainable  Agricultural  Production  Programme  (SAPP),  employ(ed)  a 
household  methodology  approach.134  In  IRLADP,  positive  changes  in  gender  power  relations  at 
household level were generated from the use of the methodology, increasing the incremental benefits 
of  farming  interventions  promoted  by  the  programme  and  the  overall  wellbeing  of  household 
members. The SAPP programme use of the household methodology was shown to have encouraging 
results  on  household  welfare,  but  the  programmes  mid-term  evaluation  indicates  the  number  of 
households  targeted  with  the  methodology  is  too  low  to  generate  the  scale  of  desired  change.  The 
evaluation  recommends  more  intensified  scale  of  the  methodology  in  the  areas  where  it  is  being 
used.135 
19.  There is a clear need in Malawi to sustainably graduate households from poverty. Graduation 
and household models have shown promise in this regard particularly for the poorest socio economic 
strata.  FARMSE  will  build  off  and  extend  current  GOM  and  IFAD  graduation  and  household 
methodology  models  implemented  in  Malawi.  It  will  also  learn  and  benefit  from  other  existing 
approaches  such  as  that  of  NSAFAM.  The  importance  of  exposure  to  improved  livelihood 
opportunities  is  critical  to  maintaining  household  resilience  and  further  improving  household 
prosperity. Component 2.0 objectives seek to support the development of such opportunity and thus 
complements  and  furthers  the  graduation  goals  of 
Component 1.0.  
Scope and structuring of funding 
20.  Component  1.0  Ultra-poor  graduation  model 
development  and  scaling-up  is  based  on  GOM 
focuses  on 
existing  graduation  model  which 
concentrating  and  coordinating  efforts 
to  move 
households out of poverty on a sustainable basis, and 
is  divided  into  two  stages:  selection  of  operational 
districts, based on existing GOM poverty statistics, and 
in collaboration with EPD, selection and assessment of 
the 
qualifying  ultra-poor  households;  Roll  out 
graduation process. Both stages of the component will 
be 
implemented  by  specialized  agencies  and/or 
development partners with oversight from the PMU. 
21.  This  model  includes  elements  of  household 
methodologies 
inclusive  household 
planning  and  the  promotion  of  gender  equality  for 
the 
In 
strengthen  economic  household  potential. 
course of implementation model will also seek to:  
to  address 
i) 
applicability 
improve 
labour 
constrained  and  non-labour  constrained 
ultra-poor households;  
for 
effective 
pathways 
livelihoods 
Key  Features  of  the  Graduation  Model  for 
Ultra-Poor  Households.  The  growing  levels 
of ultra-poverty in Malawi calls for the  need to 
find 
to 
graduation 
ultra-poor 
sustainable 
households. Consistent with best international 
practise,  models  developed  for  Malawi  could 
include the following:  
i)  Funds for meeting food security needs;  
ii)  Support  for  livelihood  improvement  such 
as  training,  linkages  to  markets,  basic 
business skills;  
for 
iii)  Support 
regular 
through 
household 
mentoring,  including  inter  alia:  addressing 
key information gaps to support household 
behaviour  change  to  reduce  vulnerability 
and  support  engagement 
livelihood 
activities  (e.g.,  HIV/AIDS,  food  production 
and/  or  security  issues,  nutrition,  linkages 
to relevant or community groups); 
in 
iv)  Providing 
grants/capital 
matching 
investment to enhance livelihood activity; 
v)  Facilitating  engagement  in  savings  and 
credit groups or other financial services. 
vi)  Support  for  realistic  and  viable  national 
livelihood development plan. 
ii) 
encourage  household  planning  and 
132 IFAD. (2014). Household Methodologies: Harnessing the Family´s Potential for Change. Gender, Targeting and Social 
Inclusion. 
133 IFAD. (2014). Case Study: Gender Action Learning System in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, and Uganda. 
134 IFAD. (2014). Case Study: Household Approach for Gender, HIV and AIDS Mainstreaming, Malawi. 
135 IFAD. (2016). SAPP Mid Term Review Report. 
74 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
improvement of intra-household relations;  
iii) 
incorporate effective livelihood improvement measures or establishing effective synergies 
with livelihood programmes (e.g., value chain programmes in same area); and  
iv) 
address other key vulnerability factors affecting household resilience to shocks.   
22.  Site selection for implementation will be determined based on GOM current operation sites, but 
will generally target areas offering viable livelihood opportunities for graduating household members. 
Sites in  North and  Central  Malawi are of  interest given most similar graduation  programming efforts 
have concentrated in the South. Target areas will also consider those with, or likely to be targeted by 
complementary  development 
livelihoods 
development).   
form  of  sustainable  rural 
interventions  (e.g.,  some 
23.  The implementing agencies may subcontract qualified national and/or international agencies to 
support 
the 
implementation  of  graduation.  Applicants  will  have  substantial  experience 
implementation  of  graduation/community  development  initiatives  and  proven  operational  capacity  in 
Malawi.  Preference  will  be  given  to  agencies  with  a  record  managing  rigorous  community  level 
processes and household level interventions. Experience and interest in enhancing capacities around 
gender  and  youth  programming  will  also  be  required.  Alone,  or  in  partnership  with  another 
organizations, grantees will implement proposed models approved by the programme. 
in 
24.  A  longitudinal  survey  with  the  baseline  provided  during  research  during  the  previous  stage  of 
work will also be commissioned for the expansion and scaling up stage. The study will measure and 
track  the  impact  of  the  graduation  model  both  during  implementation  and  after.  It  will  assess  the 
degree  to  which  household  graduate  from  poverty  and  if  changes  are  sustainable. A  research  team 
with competencies and  experience like those outlined for the longitudinal study in the first stage  will 
managed the research.  
25.  Roll  out  of  effective  graduation  models.  The  roll  out  will  deploy  the  approved  model(s)  at 
scale  to  expand  programme  benefits  and  test  replicability.  A  total  of  15,000  households  will  be 
targeted, of which, approximately 30% will be women and 20% youth headed households. The rollout 
is  expected  to  take  place  from  year  four  onwards.  Roll  out  sites  will  be  selected  based  on 
representatively  of  large  sections  of  rural  Malawi  and  opportunities  for  household  livelihood 
development.  The  implementation  will  be  contracted  to  service  providers  as  depending  on  the 
different stages. Grantees will be selected based on experience, their knowledge of gender and youth, 
but  with  a  special  emphasis  on  a  capacity  to  manage  small  to  medium  community  programmes. 
FARMSE will commission a qualitative study during the roll out stage to assess both the process and 
impact of implementation. 
26.  Expected Costs. The expected total cost of Component 1.0 is USD 15.8 million or about USD 
900 per person supported, not including price and physical contingencies, duties, and taxes. 
27.  Component 2.0 Support to financial innovation and outreach 
28.  The  outcome  of  this  subcomponent  is  improved  access  to  existing  and  innovate  informal 
community based financial organizations savings and loans products.136 The objective is to support 
CFBOs  expanded  outreach  to  poor  but  food  secure  households,  households  vulnerable  to  poverty, 
and resilient households in rural Malawi.  
29.  Component  2.0  has  two  subcomponents.  The  first  is  support  for  community  based  financial 
organizations  (CBFOs),  which  will  co-fund  the  restructuring,  expansion  and  innovation  of  CBFOs  in 
rural  Malawi.  The  second  subcomponent  is  the  Innovation  and  Outreach  Facility  (IOF),  which  will 
136 Informal CBFOs are commonly referred to as Village Savings and Loan Associations. CBFOs have two defining characters. 
First, they  are  informal,  or  unregulated  by  a  government  agency. Second, they  are  formed  and managed  by  individuals  who 
come  together  voluntarily.  There  many  different  CBFO  models,  many  like  VSLAs,  and  can  include  informal  cooperative 
associations, village bank models, or variations of the VSLA model. See: IFAD, How to do Support community-based financial 
organizations, IFAD, 2014. 
75 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
support  financial  institutions  and  agricultural  value  chain  participants  develop  and  or  increase  the 
outreach of new/existing rural financial products and services. 
30.  Subcomponent 2.1 - Community based financial organization support  
The  outcome  of  this  subcomponent  is  to  improved  rural  finance  access  through  existing,  new  and 
innovative informal community based financial organizations (CBFO) savings and loans products. The 
objective  is  to  support  CFBOs  expand  outreach  to  poor  but  food  secure  households,  households 
vulnerable to poverty, and resilient households in rural Malawi.  
31.  This sub-component has three activities: i). Mapping of existing CBFOs and assessing maturity 
status;  ii).restructuring  and  consolidation  of  CBFOs;  provide  opportunities  to  additional  skills  and 
linking CBFOs and/or their members to formal financial institutions and high value markets. This will 
enhance  smallholder  income,  asset  and  some  livelihood/enterprise  development  opportunities; 
iii)  Formation of new Groups.  
32.  Activities  will  lead  to  provision  of  basic,  structured  savings  and  credit  services  to  financially 
excluded  rural  populations  and  provide  opportunities  to  link  CBFOs  and/or  their  members  to  formal 
financial  institutions.  This  will  contribute  to  household  income  smoothing  and/or  to  enhancing 
household income, asset, and livelihood/enterprise development opportunities.   
33.  This  subcomponent  will  support  CFBOs  to  provide  financial  services  via  a  low-cost  delivery 
mechanism targeting beneficiaries in the socio-economic stratum of poor but food secure households, 
households vulnerable to poverty, and resilient households. Where possible activities will overlap with 
efforts in Component 1 supporting ultra-poor households as they graduate from poverty. Funding will 
be available to CBFO support organizations with proven capacity to restructure and form new, good 
practice  CBFO  structured  groups  and/or 
formation  and 
methodologies. Organizations will respond to an expression of interest for two project types: i) group 
restricting and consolidation; and ii) group formation projects and group innovation projects. 
innovate  at  scale  existing  group 
Rationale  
34.  Options for appropriate financial services for all poor household types in rural Malawi are highly 
limited  due  to  numerous  supply  and  demand  constraints.  These  include  notably  high  transaction 
costs, poor product suitability for low-income households and agricultural producers, poor physical or 
mobile phone access, high interest rates on loans, and negative interest rates on savings. Because of 
these  constraints,  most  rural  poor  neither  save  nor  take  on  productive  credit.  In  response,  various 
types  of  community-based  financial  organizations  (CBFOs),  village  savings  and  loans  associations 
being the most common, have risen to provide basic financial services not only to the rural poor, but to 
urban poor and middle class alike. 
35.  CBFOs are easy to form and provide cost-effective financial services. Such services are good 
for income smoothing, but used alone are rarely adequate for households to develop the productive 
assets required to sustainably lift them out of poverty. While CBFO provide members the discipline to 
save (monthly or weekly), poor rural households typically only save in low volumes, the value of which 
are  quickly  eroded  by  high  inflation.  CBFOs  can,  however,  offer  positive  net  returns  when  low-
transaction  costs  and  year-end  member  profit  distributions  (i.e.,  savings  plus  interest  on  member 
loans) are considered. 
36.  On the credit side, costs and constraints of lending make credit from the formal financial sector 
unavailable  or  unaffordable  for  most  Malawians,  particularly  those  in  rural  areas.  CBFO  credit  has 
risen in response. The low transaction cost, no collateral, and no identification requirements of most 
CBFOs makes it a highly  accessible  and desirable form of credit for most Malawians. But there are 
limitations.  Annual  interest  rates  of  between  200%  to  240%  are  much  higher  than  formal  credit 
(ranging  35%  to  45%).  CFBO  credit  is  also  only  typically  available  in  small  amounts  and  for  a  very 
short term (often one month). As loans are only available to one or two members monthly, timing of 
loan availability may not suit/ coincide with a household’s funding needs (e.g., rural household need 
funding  pre-harvest,  pre-school  year,  and  pre-planting).  Many  members  do  not  want  /need  credit  at 
76 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
all,  either  because  they  have  no  productive  purpose  for  it  or  because  they  need  larger  productivity 
enhancing  loans.  It  is  not  just  households/farmers  either.  Rural  MSMEs,  particularly,  high-potential 
MSMEs, are not well served by CBFOs for the same reasons. 
37.  A  major  benefit  of  the  CBFO  model,  particularly  VSLAs,  is  not  access  to  credit,  but  the  lump 
sum  annual  pay  out  of  a  group’s  accumulated  interest  and  savings.  This  amount  is  received  at  the 
end of a group’s lending cycle (usually after one year of operation and typically paid out September-
December).137  Many  members  participate  in  groups  as  means  to  accessing  the  annual  distribution 
which, while seemingly modest is significant for most rural households (payments can range between 
K 30,000 to K 70,000 or USD 60 to USD 100) per member).138  Despite this benefit, the timing of the 
distribution, like the timing of credit availability, may not be ideal for households. Moreover, all group 
profits  are  typically  distributed  leaving  the  CBFO  with  a  zero-balance  at  year  end  precluding  larger 
loans and/or more capital availability for lending throughout a group lending and savings cycle.  
38.  Several CBFO support organizations such as CARE,  CRS, and Christian Aid have substantial 
networks  of  CBFO  groups  each  employing  slightly  different  models.  These  and  other  organizations 
are  also  beginning  to  innovate  approaches  to  resolve  limitations  in  current  models  and  to  provide 
greater economic and social benefits to their members. Advances include inter alia improved savings 
methods, profit reinvestment, more timely access to credit, integration of household health, economic 
and gender trainings, and structure which promote/facilitate group and member entry into the formal 
financial sector. The accessibility and potential of CBFOs make them an integral part of the Malawian 
financial system, and critical vehicles for expansion of financial services and poverty reduction in rural 
Malawi.  
Scope and structure of funding 
39.  Component 2.1 funding will be available to CBFO support organizations with proven capacity to 
form  new  or  existing  good  practice  CBFO  structured  groups.139  Organizations  will  respond  to  an 
expression of interest for one or two project types: 
40.  Mapping of existing CBFOs - VSLAs have had the greatest success in Malawi in encouraging 
savings amongst rural populations. According to the NSFI (MoF, 2017) the number of members have 
grown  from  86,000  in  2008  to  1.1  million  in  2014.  The  first  activity  will  take  stock  of  the  existing 
CBFOs (VSLAs, SILC, etc.) and assess their status. This will include 641 VSLAs mobilized under the 
IFAD  supported  Rural  Livelihoods  and  Economic  Enhancement  Programme  (RLEEP)  with  10,684 
members. Weak groups  will be supported and their  activities consolidated.  Current figures from two 
NGOs suggest that about  600,000 CBFOs are active in Malawi. There are several other NGOs that 
have been mobilizing savings groups through VSLAs and other forms of CBFOs.  
41.  Restructuring and Consolidation of CBFOs: This activity will support the capacity building of 
CBFOs.  The  "VSLA  plus"  model  will  address  inter  alia  agricultural  and  off-farm  enterprise 
development,  and  group  and  member  linkages  to  the  formal  financial  sector.  The  development  of 
agricultural enterprises will build on the experiences and lessons from RLEEP through the value chain 
development. RLEEP supported development of seven value chains namely: potato, groundnut, soya, 
dairy,  sunflower,  honey  and  beef.  Farmer  groups  supported  in  these  value  chains  have  also  been 
assisted to create  VSLAs.  Some VSLAs  have been successfully  linked to  MFIs  and formal financial 
markets while others have been consolidated to form SACCOs. These are the potential value chains 
to  be  supported  under  FARMSE.  However,  there  should  be  no  restrictions  on  selection  of 
commodities  but  support  agriculture  enterprises  that  are  relevant  to  the  VSLAs.  Further  RLEEP 
initiated  warehouse  receipt  system  for  six  out  of  the  twenty  one  warehouses  constructed  for  farmer 
groups in rural areas. It is expected that FARMSE will scale up the warehouse receipt system to reach 
137 The lump sum payment consists of a member’s savings plus proportional share of accumulated profits from loan income. 
The share is based on the amount of each members’ savings. 
138 This assumes a 15-member group saving between K400 and K700 per week. 
139 IFAD, Lessons learned Community-based financial organizations 
77 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
to the remaining warehouses and any other warehouse that may be certified by relevant warehouse 
receipt system operators.  
42.  Group  Formation  Projects  –  This  activity  will  support  the  mobilization  and  formation  of  new 
CBFOs.  The  objective  will  be  to  enhance  the  economic  and  social  benefits  accrued  to  members 
through CBFOs participation. Two or three CBFOs model innovations will be supported and tested by 
existing CBFOs support group/consortia. A limited expansion programme will test the replicability and 
scalability  of  the  new  models  to  be  supported.  This  activity  will  target  the  formation  of  5,000  new 
groups,  reaching  90,000  members  with  612,000  household  members,  with  a  focus  on  underserved 
rural areas in the North, Centre and  South of the country, and 50% of members will be  women and 
20% will be youth.  
43.  The  selection  process  for  CBFO  organisations  that  want  to  promote  restructuring  and  group 
formation of CBFOs is outlined in the draft PIM in Appendix 11, but will be guided by the following five 
broad principles: 
i)  CFBO promoter must have considerable  and  proven international or national experience in 
the formation of CBFO groups; 
ii)  CFBO promoter must have sufficient operating capacity to support groups as per their group 
formation methodology;  
iii)  CBFOs  portfolios  of  newly  formed/restructured  groups  must  have  the  potential  for  80% 
sustainability rate after three years of operation;  
iv)  CFBO models must hold the potential to link with the formal financial sector including mobile 
money services;  
v)  CFBO  methodology  must  be  consistent  with  and  or  proactively  support  FARMSE  gender, 
youth, and environmental principles; 
vi) 
CFBO Support Organisations must be willing to roll out innovated model within its existing 
network on a co-financed basis; and 
vii)  CFBO Support Organisations must be willing to share knowledge gained in public fora 
44.  This activity will fund between 4 and 5 CBFO support organizations (international and national), 
leading  to  the  restructuring  of  16143  groups  and  formation  of  5000  new  groups,  with  380,574 
members  and  2,283,444  household  members.  The  projects  selected  will  be  concentrated  in  areas 
without  substantial  CBFO  activities  and  where  possible,  will  overlap  with  Component  1  and 
subcomponents 2.2 and 2.3. 
Implementation and management 
45.  Component 2.1 will be managed by a dedicated CFBO specialist within the PMU. The Specialist 
would be familiar with various CBFO models and support organizations. His/her main responsibilities 
would:  i)  proactively  seek  CBFO  support  organizations  for  the  EOI;  ii)  support  qualifying  CBFO 
development  proposals;  iii)  recommending  projects  to  an  Investment  Committee;  iv)  negotiate 
performance-based  grant  agreements  with  CBFO  support  organizations;  and  v)  monitor 
implementation  performance  per  benchmarks.  Funding  decision  will  be  made  by  the  Proposals 
Review Committee (PRC), composed as a sub-set of the Programme Steering Committee.  
46.  FARMSE would first make a call for expression of interest (EOI), proactively recruiting leading 
CBFO support organizations. CBFO support organisations will be permitted to apply for restructuring, 
development  and  formation  of  new  groups.  Approved  project  plans  will  be  multi-phased  and 
performance based.  Estimated average cost per  group for restructuring and consolidation  will range 
78 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
between  USD  840  and  USD  1050.140  Cost  per  groups  for  formation  of  new  groups  will  range  from 
US$ 600 to US$750.     
47.  Expected  Costs.  The  expected  total  cost  of  subcomponent  2.1  is  USD  16.779  million  not 
including price and physical contingencies, duties, and taxes. Of this, an estimated USD 0.261 m will 
fund Group Mapping, USD 13.257 m will fund group capacity building and linkages, and USD 3.260 m 
will support group formation projects.   
Sub-component  2.2  –  Enhancing  innovation  and  rural  outreach  of  financial  service 
providers 
48.  The outcomes for this subcomponent are two: i) new and innovative financial services and low-
cost delivery mechanisms for poor rural households and MSMEs tested and introduced; and ii) proven 
and  successful  financial  services  and  delivery  mechanisms  up  scaled.  The  objective  for  this 
subcomponent is to support the development of financial services that meet the needs of rural target 
beneficiaries on a sustainable basis. 
49.  Activities under this subcomponent will support key players including FSPs to enter and expand 
outreach in rural areas through financial products, services and delivery mechanism innovations for a 
variety  of  client  segments.  Support  will  be  provided  on  a  demand-driven  and  cost-sharing  basis 
through the Rural Finance Innovation and Outreach Facility (the Facility). 
Rationale 
50.  Overall,  formal  financial  institutions  have  made  very  little  inroads  into  rural  and  agricultural 
finance.  Few  banks  have  ventured  into  this  challenging  field  of  banking  successfully  and  there  is  a 
general lack of adequate products and delivery mechanisms to service rural markets. A small number 
of  MFIs  have  rural  presence  but  product  offerings  are  largely  limited  to  highly-standardized,  small 
value  group  lending  with  short  repayment  schedules,  and  high  interest  rates.  Some  MFIs  recently 
introduced  individual  loans  for  their  most  reliable  clients  and  for  some  new  customers.  Several  are 
also  starting  into  tap  into  VSLAs  to  expand  their  client  base.  In  addition,  there  are  encouraging 
developments  in  the  legal  and  regulatory  environment  and  in  mobile  money  operations.  Combined, 
these recent trends provide important opportunities to address key challenges related to high costs of 
rural outreach. 
51.  Notwithstanding  the  challenging  business  environment,  the  single  most  important  constraint 
undermining FSP willingness and ability to enter and expand rural finance is lack of understanding of 
and experience in these markets coupled with limited expertise in designing and delivering adequate 
products and services. Lack of exposure and understanding often leads to an exaggerated perception 
of risks which further discourages FSP from entering these markets. When FSPs do attempt to serve 
these markets they often also introduce products too quickly without proper market research, testing 
and delivery capacity, resulting in poor-performance - as was the case in Malawi during a small and 
medium sized enterprise lending bubble in the mid-200s. 
52. 
In  view  of  the  limited  experiences  with  rural  and  agricultural  finance  for  low  income  groups, 
FSPs  need  exposure  to  international  best  practices  and  innovative  approaches  that  have  worked  in 
other  African  countries.  Exposure  to  international  best  practice  and  innovation  can  be  provided 
through a combination of measures, including: i) workshops with experts and practitioners from other 
countries;  ii)  exchange  visits;  and  iii)  strong  international/regional  technical  assistance.  Technical 
assistance  is  most  particularly  needed  to  adjust  promising  approaches  to  local  realities,  institutional 
settings and market environments. TA is particularly important in the following areas: i) understanding 
the  financing  needs  of  poor  rural  households  and  micro,  small  and  medium  Enterprises  (MSMEs) 
engaged  in  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  activities,  including  those  of  women  and  youth; 
ii) designing  new  products  and  delivery  mechanisms  and/or  adjusting  existing  ones  to  better  meet 
these needs at lower costs and risks to both clients and FSPs; iii) bringing successful products and 
140 Cost per group are based in part on international experience and preliminary estimates made by CBFO support groups in 
Malawi. 
79 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
delivery mechanism to scale by making the necessary adjustments in internal processes and building 
staff capacity; and iv) enhancing the awareness and understanding of rural target groups of the new 
products and delivery mechanisms. 
53.  Experience has shown that sporadic, short-term TA focusing on single technical challenge is not 
sufficient to support FSPs in developing robust smallholder financing models and related institutional 
capacity. Institutions often require substantial technical and operational capacity improvements areas 
beyond  market  research  and  product  development.141  Moreover,  developing  and  implementing  a 
sustainable rural outreach strategy implies an institutional change process beyond the mere transfer 
of technical skills. Negative perceptions about the feasibility of serving rural areas and agriculture in 
the profitable  way are often deeply rooted at  all levels of the institution, from frontline staff to senior 
management  and  board  members.  Successful  introduction  of  new  rural  finance  products  requires  a 
change  in  such  perceptions  based  on  successful  results  on  the  ground.  While  a  champion  in  the 
institution  must  initiate  and  drive  the  process,  guidance,  and  support  from  a  reputable  technical 
partner  with  a  credible  record  of  accomplishment  is  often  critical  to  build  internal  buy-in,  provide 
change management support, and manage the risk inherent in institutional change. A gradual, phased 
approach  is  required,  one  which  allows  FSPs  to  learn  from  initial  results,  make  necessary 
adjustments, and build understanding and delivery capacity across the institution.  
54.  The  size  and  timeframe  of  support  should  be  sufficient  to  allow  the  recruitment  of  a  strong 
technical  partner  to  address  a  variety  of  technical  issues  and  coach  the  FSP  through  the  change 
process. The preferred model is to mobilise specialised international/regional TA to team up with local 
service providers in supporting FIs. The combination of international and local TA will bring fresh ideas 
into the country but have the capacity to adjust ideas to local conditions. It will enhance credibility from 
the perspective of the governing bodies of FIs and allow skills transfer to the national technical service 
expertise. Both companies and individual consultants can be employed, but in either case they must 
have  proven  ability  to  mobilize  the  different  types  of  expertise  required  during  the  implementation 
process. 
55.  Experiences  in  Malawi  and  elsewhere  show  that  non-financial  institutions  can  and  do  play  an 
important role in providing financial services to farmers and other rural low income populations or in 
facilitating  such  access.  Such  institutions  include  commodity  exchanges,  mobile  money  operators, 
input suppliers and off takers. In Malawi, agribusiness companies play an important role in providing 
input finance in the tobacco and sugar-cane sub-sectors, sometimes in collaboration with banks and 
MFIs, and such arrangements could be replicated in other structured value chains, such as dairy and 
certain  fruits  and  vegetables.  Malawi  stands  out  as  a  country  with  two  functioning  commodity 
exchanges and a small but growing warehouse receipt system. Even though the system is currently 
used primarily by larger traders thought there is significant potential to expand existing infrastructure 
and  business  activities  towards  organized  smallholder  farmers  and  SMEs.  Pilots  of  pre-harvest 
financing  provided  by  input  suppliers  in  collaboration  with  a  commodity  exchange  show  promise  for 
replication.  Partnerships  between  financial  and  non-financial  institutions  are  often  more  effective  in 
managing  risks  and  reducing  transaction  costs,  as  they  allow  to  tie  in  finance  with  input  and  output 
markets and harness the infrastructure of non-financial actors in rural areas. 
56.  While  enhancing  the  supply  of  financial  services  is  critical,  the  ability  of  the  target  clientele  - 
poor  rural  households  and  MSMEs  -  to  access  and  use  these  services  is  equally  important.  This 
requires  sufficient  awareness  about  the  services,  including  their  terms,  conditions,  and  delivery 
mechanisms. Non-financial services are often critical to enhance the capacity of poor households and 
MSMEs  in  rural  areas  to  access  and  use  financial  services  effectively.  Such  services  include  the 
establishment  and  strengthening  of  farmer  organisations,  financial  literacy,  and  business  skills 
development,  as  well  as  technical  training  and  extension  services.  For  example,  the  use  of  mobile 
money and digital finance solutions requires sensitization and training of rural users with low literacy 
141 Examples include strengthening human resources (capacity and incentives to service new rural target groups), adjustments 
of  the  Management  Information  System  (MIS)  to  adequately  measure  performance  and  adjust  in  a  timely  manner,  but  also 
investments in physical outreach capacity to reach remote rural clients, such as low-cost branches and mobile technologies. 
80 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
levels.  Likewise,  access  to  warehouse  receipt  finance  requires  smallholder  farmers  to  bulk  their 
produce at a certified warehouse. Experiences under a related IFAD project RLEEP shows the need 
for substantial investments in capacity development of farmer organizations and their members to fully 
understand the financial products to make full beneficial use of it. Preharvest financing arrangements 
in contract farming and out grower schemes equally require farmer training and capacity development 
on organizational as well as technical matters. 
Scope and structure of the IOF 
57.  The  Facility  would  co-finance:  i)  client-centred/demand  driven  market  research  and  feasibility 
studies;  ii)  design  and  pilot  test  new  financial  products  and  low-cost  delivery  mechanisms;  and  iii) 
rollout of successfully piloted products and services. The latter would include support for institutional 
strengthening, for increasing the FSP product delivery capacity, and the capacity of the target group to 
use new financial products and services. Funded projects should enhance sustainable access to rural 
financial  services  contributing  to  growing  incomes,  assets,  and  resilience  of  the  targeted  rural 
households. The IOF would be open to a broad range of FSPs. These would include financial sector 
service providers (e.g., banks, MFIs, SACCOS, leasing companies and insurance companies), as well 
as non-financial sector service providers (e.g., mobile network operators, input suppliers, agribusiness 
companies, warehouse operators and commodity exchanges). 
58.  Financial  Sector  Service  Providers  -  The  facility  would  support  a  broad  range  of  financial 
services including, but not limited to: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
Facilitating the access and maximizing the use of remittances, especially to rural areas, 
promoting financial inclusion and local business opportunities; 
Savings:  easily  accessible  products,  mobile-enabled  products,  commitment  savings 
products  for  agricultural  inputs,  investments  or  school  fees,  and  specific  products  for 
VSLAs, women, youth; 
Loans:  cash-flow  based  multipurpose  loans,  agricultural  production  loans,  postharvest 
and warehouse receipt financing, term loans and micro-leases, and specific products for 
women and youth; 
Insurance: crop and livestock insurance, health insurance; 
Low cost delivery mechanisms (ICT, low-cost branches, and agency models); and 
Structured  financing  arrangements  involving  value  chain  partners  (e.g.,  off  takers,  input 
providers, commodity exchanges, etc.). 
59.  Non-Financial  Sector  Service  Providers  -  Non-financial  institutions  would  be  eligible  for 
funding  if  they  are  engaged  in  financial  service  provision  (or  have  the  intention  to  do  so),  either 
directly  or  in  partnership  with  financial  institutions.  Partnerships  between  financial  institutions  and 
other  actors  will  be  encouraged,  as  they  often  manage  risks  and  reduce  transaction  costs  more 
effectively. Examples projects for non-financial service provider projects would include:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
In-kind input lending and equipment leasing, possibly combined with offtake agreements 
(through agribusiness or commodity exchanges); 
Upgrading  or  expansion  of  pre-harvest  financing  within  contract  farming  or  out  grower 
schemes,  through  improved  contract  design  (e.g.,  transparency  of  pricing)  to  enhance 
mutual trust, reduce side selling and enhance sale value to both parties;  
Blending  risk  management  services  (e.g.,  crop  insurance,  liquid  guarantees)  into  value 
chain finance arrangements); 
Structured  value  chain  finance  arrangements  involving  multiple  parties  initiated  by  non-
financial  operators  such  as  commodity  exchanges,  warehouse  managers,  and 
agribusiness; and 
81 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
v) 
Partnerships between mobile money  operators and financial  institutions or agribusiness 
companies to enable/upgrade digital payment solutions.  
60.  Non-financial  services  focused  activities  can  also  be  supported  for  either  financial  or  non-
financial  sector  partner  projects  if  deemed  critical  to  enhance  the  beneficiary  groups’  capacity  to 
access  and  use  the  financial  services  supported  under  the  Facility.  Examples  include:  i)  the 
establishment  and  strengthening  of  farmer  organizations;  ii)  financial  literacy,  management,  and 
business  development  training;  iii)  establishment  of  market  linkages;  and  iv)  targeted  extension 
services. Some funding could also be available in Component 3.0 to support macro and meso  level 
interventions deemed important to the success of IOF activities.  
61.  The facility will have three funding windows guiding project selection: 
i) 
ii) 
Market research and feasibility studies; 
Pilot testing of innovative products and delivery mechanisms; and 
iii) 
Scaling out successful financial services. 
62.  The windows together will offer funding support for product development at any point between 
conceptualization to commercialization. Prospective partners can choose to apply to the window that 
best suits the nature of development needs. 
63.  Window  1:  Market  research  and  feasibility  studies  –  This  window  will  support  RBM  in 
furthering  initiatives  on  weather  index  insurance;  ware  house  receipting  bill  and  micro  insurance 
among  other  interventions.  The  window  will  also  support  FSPs  in  identifying  market  opportunities, 
client needs, key product features and possible delivery mechanisms. It will also identify risks and risk 
mitigation  measures,  costs  and  revenues  estimates,  and  possible  partnerships  for  product 
introduction  and  roll-out.  Research  could  will  provide  insights  into  the  reasons  why  current  service 
provider products and services are not being used and how they could be improved. Research results 
will  provide  evidence  to  support  a  decision  to  move  to  a  pilot  stage,  upgrade  existing  products,  or 
expand successful existing products. They can also inform a proposal for window 2 and 3.  
64.  Support  under  this  window  will  allow  made  available  to  applicants  for  hiring  specialized 
Technical Service Providers well-versed in market research and human centred design techniques,142 
and to conduct in depth market research beyond what a FSP can achieve with its own resources. To 
ensure ownership and relevance of research/feasibility studies, the FSP would designate a team that 
would work together with the TSP in the design and implementation of the fieldwork and interpretation 
of the results.143 
65. 
In addition to market research, the TSP will conduct an institutional assessment of the FSP. This 
assessment  would  examine  the  capacity  of  the  FSP  to  introduce  the  proposed  products/delivery 
mechanisms  and  identify  key  bottlenecks  that  must  be  addressed  in  (e.g.,  training  requirements,  IT 
related challenges, other operational and procedural issues). Such assessment would be critical if the 
FSP wishes to request funding under the other two windows. 
66.  Depending  on  the  scope  of  research  and  relevance  to  project  objectives,  the  facility  could 
provide  financing  of  up  to  USD  50,000.  Eligible  expenditures  include  TA  and  logistic  costs  for 
undertaking fieldwork. The applicant would cover at least 20% of total costs through cash and/or in-
kind  contribution  of  staff  time  and  transport.  The  window  would  also  co-finance  study  tours  and 
exchange visits enabling FSP decision-makers and operational staff to get first-hand insights into the 
experiences of FSPs in other countries with innovative and successful rural financial services. Study 
tours would be eligible if there is a clear link to the component objective and if the FSP can make a 
142  Human  Centered  Design  is  an  innovative  approach  to  problem  solving  that  starts  with  people  and  ends  with  solutions 
uniquely  tailored  to  meet  their  needs.  See  https://www.cgap.org/publications/what-human-centered-design-means-financial-
inclusion for further information. 
143  In  exceptional  cases,  when  an  applicant  has  proven  capacity  to  conduct  high-quality market  research, this  would  also  be 
eligible for co-funding without external hiring an external TSP. In case, the applicant would want to apply to window 2 or 3, an 
institutional capacity assessment by an external TSP would be required. 
82 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
convincing case how the exchange would enhance its products and delivery mechanisms to the target 
population. The IOF would finance 50% of the total costs of and exchange to a ceiling of USD 10,000.  
67.  Window 2: Pilot Testing and Innovation – This window funding would support pilot-testing of 
product  innovations  and new low-cost delivery mechanisms. Based on  prior market research (either 
via  the  market  research  and  feasibility  studies  window  or  independently  undertaken),  funding  would 
co-finance  costs  of  piloting  of  researched  product(s).  It  will  finance  the  recruitment  of  a  qualified 
technical  service  providers  (s)  -  preferably  a  combination  of  international/regional  and  national 
expertise  -  to  work  with  a  dedicated  FSP  team.  Activities  would  include  developing  and  piloting 
product prototypes, conducting pilot tests, adjusting and refining product features, as well as costing, 
pricing and delivery mechanisms. Subject to commercial viability, a roll-out plan would be prepared to 
determine  the  human,  financial,  and  technical  resources  and  related  training  and  investment 
requirements. 
68.  Eligible costs to be covered by this window would include TA, logistics cost related to fieldwork, 
staff  training,  adjustments of  the  MIS  and  ICT  equipment.  Support  could  also  cover  costs  related  to 
developing  new  product  user  material  for  prospective  clients.  The  FSP  would  be  expected  to 
contribute at least 30% of total project costs, in cash or in kind. The matching grant ceiling would be 
USD 70,000. 
69.  Window  3:  Expanding  Outreach  –  This  would  support  scaling  up  of  proven  products  and 
delivery mechanisms. It can finance the rollout of products and services piloted under Window 2, but 
also existing products/services developed by FSP. Subproject proposals would be based on: i) proven 
product/delivery  mechanism  to  be  scaled  up  (in  terms  of  profitability  and  relevance  to  the  FARMSE 
target  groups); and  ii) a  well-defined outreach strategy  with clearly  defined performance targets and 
milestones, supported by an independent institutional capacity assessment. 
70.  Eligible expenses under this window include national and international TA for staff training, draft 
manuals, and institutional  change (e.g., adjusting processes and procedures and the MIS). The IOF 
could  co-finance  physical  investment  costs  related  to  the  roll-out,  such  as  Information  and 
communications  technology  (ICT)  equipment,  low-cost  branches  and  agencies,  vehicles,  as  well  as 
incremental operating costs on a declining basis (e.g., client relationship officers). Such costs must be 
directly linked to the outreach targets and supported by financial projections showing profitability over 
a  2  to  3-year  term.  Finally,  training  and  capacity  development  of  prospective  clients  could  be  co-
financed, if they  are critical to outreach and financial targets, and  enable the project target  group to 
use the products and services effectively. Training can include, for example, targeted financial literacy 
and business development, organisational strengthening, or technical/agronomic matters. 
71.  To  accommodate  high  impact  projects  which  could  lead  to  transformative  change  and  reach 
many  beneficiaries,  a  ceiling  for  matching  grants  under  this  window  would  be  set  at  USD  1  million. 
FSPs  would  be  required  to  contribute  to  50%  of  the  total  subproject  costs  of  which  at  least  30% 
should be in cash. Eligibility and selection criteria for proposals under each of the three windows will 
be developed during the next design mission. Selection criteria will include the following: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
Development  Impact:  proposed  activities  must  reach  a  defined  FARMSE  target  socio 
economic  stratum,  either  directly  or  indirectly  through  SMEs,  with  special  emphasis  on 
women and youth. 144  It must also be consistent with FARMSE’s theory of change; 
Prospects  for  commercial  viability:  proposed  product/delivery  mechanism  must  project 
commercial viability based on credible evidence (e.g., through pilots, existing operations, 
or feasibility studies with realistic financial projections); 
Innovativeness: Extent to which products, services or delivery mechanisms are: i) new to 
the country, target group and FSP (in that order); and ii) add value for the project target 
group and the FSP; 
144 By addressing key bottlenecks of related value chain actors or market partners resulting in increased access to inputs, 
markets, and finance by the target group. 
83 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
iv) 
v) 
Strategic fit with FSP strategic plan and market positioning: projects should be in line with 
the strategic orientation of the financial service provider; and 
Feasibility  and  implementation  capacity:  the  service  providers  and  partners  must  have 
the technical capacity  or credibly show they can develop the capacity to implement the 
project. 
IOF Implementation 
72.  The  IOF  would  will  be  managed  by  the  PMU  with  technical  support  from  the  Chief  Technical 
Advisor (CTA – a long term contracted technical expert attached to the PMU) with the support of Rural 
Finance/Microfinance  (RF/MF)  Specialist.  (See  below  for  overview  of  team  expertise)  These  two 
would have substantial experience implementing technical assistance projects in rural and agricultural 
finance  with a  variety  of FSPs,  agriculture  value chain actors,  and Technical  Service  Providers. The 
teams  main  tasks  would  include:  i)  fine-tuning  of  the  operational  procedures  of  the  facility; 
ii) screening the market and identifying high-potential partners that could be supported by the facility; 
iii)  creating  a  roaster  of  reputable  and  qualified  Technical  Service  Providers  (national,  regional, 
international); iv) actively reaching out to potential Technical Service Providers and applicants to raise 
their  awareness  on  the  IOF;  v)  providing  guidance  to  applicants  and Technical  Service  Providers  in 
preparing  proposals;  vi) screening  proposals  received  and  making  recommendations  to 
the 
Investment Committee; vii) negotiating performance-based grant agreements with winning FSPs; and 
viii) monitoring implementation progress and performance according to milestones.   
73.  Technical  Assistance  (TA).  All  TA  will  be  procured  on  a  needs  basis  following  GOM/IFAD 
procurement  guidelines.  Performance  of  TA  will  be  assessed  against  contract-specific  deliverables. 
The  Programme  will  require  a  variety  of  technical  assistance,  some  of  which  may  not  be  available 
locally. Where TA is not available locally, they will  be procured regionally/internationally, and in order 
to  build  local  capacity,  all  international TAs  will  be  paired  with  local TAs  to  the  extent  possible.  It  is, 
proposed that in order to ensure that procurement of TA does not slow down implementation, a pre-
qualification  system  will  be  employed.  This  would  entail  identification  of  key  capacity  areas  and 
advertisement  for  expressions  of  interest  in  local,  regional  and  international  media.  Expressions  of 
interest will be assessed based on the provided criteria and a database of pre-qualified TA produced. 
This  would  be  used  in  inviting  proposals  by  the  Programme  when  needed.  The  Programme  will  be 
able to create the data base of experts once they have tested the market and established what type of 
capacity areas the programme will need after assessing of EOIs being received in the first one year. 
Rigorous  internal  and  external  technical  review  will  be  built  in  by  subjecting  applications  that  pass 
initial screening for a detailed review by external technical specialists. A Proposals Review Committee 
(PRC)  will  be  established  with  the  authority  to  review  and  approve  or  disapprove  the  applications, 
while  ensuring  professional  confidentiality  so  that  innovations,  approached  and  products  test  and 
developed are not revealed to competitor or the general public. 
74.  Funding decisions will be made by the PRC comprised of 8 members including 3 independent 
experts on key thematic areas being covered by the facility to be recruited through a tender process, a 
representative  of  the  MOF,  a  representative  of  Malawi  Microfinance  Network,  a  representative  of 
Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  a  representative  of  National  Smallholder  Farmers Association  of  Malawi.  
The PMU Coordinator will serve as a convenor and Secretary to the PRC. ). The specific governance 
and decision-making structure of the Facility of the PRC are defined in the draft PIM in Appendix 11. 
75.  FARMSE  would  make  calls  for  expression  of  interest  (EOI  for  potential  IOF  Applicants.  IOF 
Applicants  passing  the  EOI  stage  would  be  invited  to  participate  in  a  Call  for  Proposals  (CfP)  for 
Window  1.  The  IOF  technical  team  (CTA  and  RF/MF  specialist  will  help  applicants  identify  suitable 
consultants for to support applicants as necessary. FSPs and their partners can apply several times to 
the  IOF.  While  a  sequencing  of  applications  to  the  three  windows  will  be  encouraged  (market 
research, followed by pilot testing, followed by roll-out), this will not be strictly required. For example, a 
FSP wanting to bring a proven and successful product to scale could apply directly to Window 3, if it 
can  prepare  a  high-quality  proposal  based  on  convincing  evidence  and  projections. An  independent 
84 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
institutional assessment to assess capacities and identify key areas for technical support will be a pre-
requisite  for  funding  of  outreach  plans.  In  practice,  most  applicants  are  likely  to  use  Window  1  to 
prepare  a  proposal  for  Windows  2  or  3  and  test  their  preferred  TSPs  on  the  job.  The  possibility  of 
receiving  follow-up  support  in  a  sequenced  manner  provides  strong  incentives  to  FSP  and  TSPs  to 
prepare strong proposals and meet agreed performance targets. 
IOF management 
76.  The IOF technical team will play a proactive role in promoting the facility, identifying Technical 
Service Providers and applicants, supporting them to prepare proposals, and, more importantly, back 
stopping  subproject  implementation.  The  latter  includes  monitoring  progress  and  quality  of  project 
implementation by applicant and services providers, providing advice and “troubleshooting” if needed, 
and  arbitrate  in  case  of  conflicts  between  Technical  Service  Providers  and  FSPs.  This  requires  the 
team  to  have  core  technical  skills  in  the  main  areas  supported  by  the  Facility.  In  view  of  the 
envisioned size of the Facility, a team of at least three technical experts would be required. 
77.  Chief  Technical  Advisor  (international/regional  advisor).  The  CTA  will  be  a  seasoned 
international/regional  micro/rural  finance  banking  specialist,  and  have  solid  knowledge  in  rural  and 
agriculture  finance.  The  incumbent  should  have  first-hand  experiences  introducing  rural  and 
agricultural  financial  products  and  outreach  mechanisms  and  in  managing  the  related  institutional 
change  processes  and  well  versed  with  agricultural  value  chains  and  rural  markets,  He/she  should 
combine  first-hand  experiences  and  expertise  in  finance  inclusive  business  models  and  MSME 
promotion as  well  as design and roll-out  of financial services targeting smallholder farmers, women, 
youth and rural MSMEs. Working experiences in the financial sector, preferably banks and or MFIs, in 
Africa,  as  well  as  technical  advisory  work  and  experiences  in  managing  contracts  with  Technical 
Service  Providers  would  be  requirements.  The  incumbent  should  be  well  versed  with  latest 
innovations and developments (e.g., digital finance and insurance) as well as proven models of rural 
financial services provision.  
78.  Rural  finance/Microfinance  specialist  (national).  The  incumbent  should  have  first-hand 
experiences  with  formal  financial  institutions,  particularly  microfinance  institutions,  and  related 
technologies  (e.g.,  MFIs,  microfinance  banks  and  SACCOs),  and  their  application  in  rural  areas. 
He/she  should  also  be  well  versed  with  digital  finance,  linkage  banking  and  other  low-cost  rural 
outreach  mechanisms.  Senior  positions  in  either  MFIs  or  mobile  network  operators  would  be  ideal. 
The incumbent should be current with national, regional and global developments in rural/agricultural 
finance and digital finance. 
79.  Expected  costs.  It  is  estimated  that  there  will  be  three  rounds  of  CfPs  during  the  project 
implementation period (year 2, 4 and 6). Each round is expected to fund an average of 10 subprojects 
under window 1, six subprojects under window 2 and three subprojects under window 3. The average 
grant sizes  under the three  windows  are estimated at USD 50,000. USD 70,000 and USD 500,000, 
respectively.  The  resulting  cumulative  grant  volumes  are  estimated  at  USD  1.5  million  (Window  1), 
USD  1.26  million  (Window  2)  and  USD  6.0  million  (Window  3).  The  total  subcomponent  costs 
excluding  the  facility  management  amount  to  USD  15.675  million.  Budget  might  be  reallocated 
between Windows depending on demand during implementation. 
Component 3 – Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy  
80.  The  outcomes  of  this  component  are  to  strengthen  institutions,  policies  and  regulations 
supporting greater financial sector outreach and innovation. There are three objectives: i) strengthen 
macro  level  regulatory  and  financial  sector  policy  guidance  and  institutional  capacity;  ii)  strengthen 
meso level financial sector infrastructure organizations/enterprise; and iii) produce and distribute rural 
finance  sector  knowledge  products  which  enhance  the  outreach  and  innovation  potential  of  sector 
stakeholders. 
85 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
Rationale 
81.  The  potential  outreach  and  innovation  capacity  of  financial  sector  actors  often  relies  on  the 
existence of macro level policies and regulations shaping the operating environment. This can require 
interventions  to  support  policy  development  and  supporting  actions  via  public  sector  actors  such  as 
line ministries, reserve or central banks, or quasi-public organizations such as para-state development 
banks or enterprise. Similarly, sector development can also depend on the capacity of institutions at 
the meso level  providing a range of services and can include bankers’ associations, credit bureaus, 
audit and consulting firms and agricultural input suppliers.  
82.  Some  sector  development  initiatives  at  these  two  levels  are  readily  identifiable  while  other 
become apparent as a sector develops. This component will support a range of macro and meso level 
interventions supporting Components 1.0 and 2.0. It will also fund a range of stakeholders at each of 
the macro and meso levels, as well as fund several knowledge products.  
Subcomponent 3.1 – Support for Poverty Graduation Policy/Strategy and Systems  
83.  Activities  for  this  subcomponent  will  support  on-going  efforts  at  the  Division  of  Poverty 
Reduction and Social Protection in MoF to: i) develop the necessary policy, strategies and systems, 
supporting  material  and  tools  related  to  the  identification  and  implementation  of  effective  graduation 
models for ultra-poor households; and ii) disseminate information among relevant GOM ministries and 
other stakeholders. Anticipated activities include technical assistance support for policy guidance and 
development.  It  will  also  include  a  participatory  process  to  develop  the  capacity  of  MOF  NSSP  and 
other  relevant  GOM  ministries  to  ensure  government  wide  buy-in  and  understanding  of  graduation 
programmes  and  models.  This  will  include  such  things  as  training  workshop  (both  national  and 
international).  It  will  also  include  commissioning  of  targeted  (participatory)  research  and  knowledge 
management diffusion tools for reaching out to various stakeholder groups. 
84.  The outcome of this subcomponent will be multi-ministerial support for good practice graduation 
approaches  to  poverty  alleviation  and  enhanced  capacity  within  the  MOF  NSSP  to  manage  good 
practice graduation programmes. 
Subcomponent 3.2 – Support for development/review of Broader and Inclusive  Rural 
Finance Policies/Strategies  
85.  This subcomponent has two activities one for each subcomponent of Component 2.0.  
Development /review of rural finance policies/strategies and research support 
86.  This subcomponent will support the Pensions and Financial Sector Policy Division to develop a 
and/or review inclusive rural finance policies/strategies which recognize ongoing work in agency and 
mobile money, collective efforts to improve the CBFO sector in order to improve rural financial access 
through  better  structured  CBFOs.  Such  structures  will  increase  benefits  of  participation,  group 
sustainability, and linkages to the formal financial sector. The outcome of this sub component will be 
broad access to good practice rural finance knowledge. It will also facilitate a formal GOM recognition 
of such practice/s.  
87.  Activities  will  support  sector  stakeholder  consultation/efforts  to  develop,  create  awareness, 
distribute and employ good rural fiancé practice  guidelines. It will also work to develop mechanisms/ 
tools for formal financial sector actors to better understanding and link with CBFO groups, individual 
members, and member enterprise (individual or collective) on a commercially viable basis. It will also 
support a rigorous qualitative and quantitative research effort to determine linkage strategies and the 
outcome and impact of different CBFO models.  
88.  Support  for  basic  CBFO  sector  data  aggregation  may  also  be  provided  (e.g.,  group  number, 
status, location, size, etc.). Funding of other knowledge products, stakeholder training and information 
dissemination activities, and CBFO sector activities will be considered. To implement these activities, 
the  programme  will  identify  and  support  an  appropriate  organization(s)  able  to  convene  and 
86 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed Programme Description 
coordinate  CBFO  sector  leaders  and  stakeholders  (e.g.,  MAMN,  MUSCCO,  etc.).  This  organization 
will provide rural finance and CBFO thought leadership. 
89.  Specific  activities  of  this  subcomponent  would  include:  i)  development  of  good  practice  Rural 
Finance Policy; ii) CBFO guidelines; iii) formal FSP guide to CBFO and a CBFO credit risk manual; iv) 
research  on  how  best  to  link  CBFOs  to  formal  financial  sector,  CBFO  impact  assessment,  and 
improving  CBFO  social  and  economic  impact;  v)  support  to  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  MoFEPD  and 
other  relevant  GOM  stakeholders  capacity/knowledge  of  rural  finance  via  workshops  and  trainings; 
and vi) support to informal CBFO working committee/s.  
Financial  service  providers  and  agro-Industry  sector  development,  policy  and 
research support 
90.  To reach out to more financial institutions than those directly supported under Component 2.2, 
the  project  would  establish  partnerships  with  industry  associations  such  as  MAMN,  BAM  and 
MUSCCO. Specific support activities will be defined but could include: i) knowledge management on 
key  innovations/lessons  from  the  field;  ii)  development  of  training  modules  related  to  rural  and 
agricultural  finance  for  different  target  audiences  (e.g.,  loan  officers,  credit  committee  members, 
executives and board members); iii) co-financing a feasibility study for a micro-finance Apex fund at 
MAMN;  and  iv)  partnering  with  agricultural  product  input  suppliers  or  warehousing  companies  to 
provide innovative smallholder finance products. 
91.  Through  on  site  and  possible  regional/international  trainings,  this  subcomponent  will  work  to 
strengthen the capacity of the Pensions and Financial Sector Policy Division of the MOF in the areas 
of  rural  and  agricultural  finance.  To  enhance  policy  and  programmatic  coherence  among  relevant 
GOM  ministries  and  development  partners,  a  high-level Agricultural  Finance  Working  Group  will  be 
established and chaired  by the MoF. In addition, relevant  public sector institutions and development 
partners,  industry  associations  and  financial  institutions  engaged  in  rural  agricultural  finance  could 
participate.  Such  a  working  group  could  identify  and  address  key  policy  and  regulatory  issues,  and 
serve as a conduit for knowledge management and information sharing. 
92.  Potential  activities  will  be  further  developed  during  the  next  design  mission.  Moreover, 
additional  activities  and/or  partnership  might  be  identified  during  program  implementation  on  a 
demand  driven  basis.  The  Knowledge  Management  Officer  of  the  PMU  would  manage  the 
partnerships. 
87 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 5: 
arrangements 
Institutional aspects and implementation 
1. 
The  lead  agency  for  project  implementation  would  be  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MOF)  with 
oversight  of  implementation  will  be  provided  by  the  Pensions  and  Financial  Policy  Division.  The 
programme will have the following implementation bodies: 
2. 
Programme Steering Committee - A multi-sector stakeholder programme steering committee 
(PSC),  chaired  by  the  Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  will  be  established  to  provide  overall  programme 
oversight,  direction,  and  advice.  The  PSC  will  be  made  up  of  representatives  of  key  stakeholders 
including, inter-alia, government ministries, farmer organisations, APEX bodies, the private sector, and 
development partners. The PSC would meet on a six-month basis to review work plans and budgets, 
financial  and  progress  reports,  receive  draft  annual  reports  and  approve  all  major  programme 
decisions.  The  multi-sectoral  composition  of  the  PSC  will  ensure  FARMSE’s  implementation 
complements  rather  than  duplicates  other  government  interventions  and  encourages  private  sector 
participation,  harmonizing  the  programme’s  contribution  with  the  GOM’s  strategic  priorities  and 
development objectives for the sector.    
Programme  Management  Unit  -  Day  to  day  coordination  of  project  activities  and  select  technical 
activities  will  be  delegated  to  a  stand-alone  project  management  unit  (PMU).  Reporting  to  the 
Principal  Sectary  of  MOF,  the  PMU  will  be  granted  authority  to  undertake  all  financial  and 
procurement  management  activities,  lead  implementation  and  provide  specialist  technical  inputs.  It 
will  be  responsible  for  project  accounting,  withdrawal  applications,  keeping  of  project  accounts, 
consolidating AWPBs,  consolidating  annual  reports,  correspondence  with  government  authorities  on 
issues  related  to  the  Financing Agreement  (excluding  technical  implementation  matters),  document 
depository,  procurement,  submission  of  reports  to  IFAD  and  other  related  agencies/stakeholders, 
monitoring and evaluation, preparation, guidance and supervision of the MTR mission, commissioning 
the  beneficiary  impact  assessment,  and  preparing  the  end-of-project  evaluation.  Other  activities 
comprise the preparation of and support to supervision missions.  
Figure 1 – FARMSE Programme governance and management structure 
89 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
The  PMU  will  be  staffed  with  a: 
3. 
financial  controller; 
iii) procurement officer; iv) monitoring and evaluation officer v) knowledge and communications officer; 
vi) rural/microfinance finance specialist vii) CBFO specialist; relevant support staff. In addition to this 
staffing,  a  highly  specialised  rural  finance  Chief  Technical  Advisor  (international/regional)  will  be 
required  on  a  long-term  basis  to  guide  and  support  activities  to  be  implemented  under  Component 
2.0, and support component 3.  
i)  programme  coordinator; 
ii) 
PMU  staff  will  be  recruited  through  a  competitive  process  following  GOM  procedures, 
4. 
acceptable  to  IFAD.  Staff  will  be  contracted  based  on  time-bound,  performance-based  contracts. 
While some key staff will transition from RLEEP to FARMSE under new contracts, the recruitment and 
renewal  of  all  key  PMU  staff  will  require  prior  consent  from  IFAD.  Long-term  technical  specialists 
attached to the PMU will be selected as part of the PMU start-up activities with support from the IFAD 
rural finance technical unit. The PMU will be in Lilongwe.  
5. 
The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  (a)  day  to  day  programme  coordination  and  management, 
including  technical  supervision  and  coordination  ,  overall  programme  planning,  quality  oversight, 
communication,  reporting,  procurement,  financial  management,  monitoring  of  programme  activities 
and  its  progress,  on  a  regular  basis,  and  impact  evaluation;  and  (b)  manage  fiduciary  issues  in 
conformity  with  the  standards  and  requirements  agreed  upon  with  IFAD  in  accordance  with  the 
Financing  Agreement  and  other  programme  documents,  such  as  the  programme  design/appraisal 
documents  and  the  PIM.  It  will  have  inter  alia  two  technical  tasks  to  oversee  and  support  the 
implementation of Component 1.0 and Component 2.0.through the support of a CTA. The CTA will be 
in  place  for  three  years  after  which  rural/microfinance  specialist  will  assume  responsibility  for 
component activities. Second, the programme coordinator will be responsible for the coordination and 
management  of  Component  3.0  (See  below).  This  will  require  substantial  technical  capacity  in  the 
fields of rural finance, agricultural finance, research/knowledge generation product development, and 
monitoring and evaluation.  
Component 1 - Ultra-poor graduation model development and scaling up. The programme 
6. 
will  partner  with  specialist  agencies  and/or  development  partners  in  collaboration  with  Poverty 
Reduction  and  Social  Protection  (PRSP)  Division  of  MoFEDP  for  the  implementation  of  Component 
1.0. A  working  partnership  agreement  will  be  signed  between  the  PMU  and  each  agency  outlining 
programmatic  implementation  responsibilities,  performance  metrics  and  benchmark  targets,  and 
reporting  responsibilities.  The  PMU  will  have  the  responsibility  to  oversight  the  performance 
agreement. The implementing agency will be responsible for providing the component implementation 
plan which will feed into the programme’s annual work plans and budgets, and will report monthly to 
the  PMU. The  implementing  agency  will  also  be  involved  in  and  support  all  thematic  reviews,  semi-
annual  reports/workshops,  the  MTR,  programme  completion  reporting,  and  learning  and  knowledge 
activities  as  required.  More  specific  terms  of  reference,  implementation  contract  memorandum  of 
understanding, as well as implementation plan will be determined at the start of the programme.  
Component 2.0 - Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 
Subcomponent 2.1 - Community based financial organization support 
The implementation of sub component 2.1 will be undertaken by the PMU in collaboration with 
7. 
CBFO support organizations. A dedicated CBFO Specialist will manage this subcomponent and report 
to the CTA. The specialist will have the responsibility to lead subcomponent 2.1 from writing terms of 
expression  of  interest,  recruiting  qualified  agencies,  writing/  distributing  call  for  proposals,  preparing 
selection  process  document  and  decision  making,  working  with  the  M&E  team  on  monitoring  and 
evaluation, to providing ongoing support to implementing partners. The specialist through the CTA will 
also  provide  input  to  the  FARMSE  annual  work  plan  and  budgets  and  will  participate/support  in 
FARMSE  monitoring  and  evaluation,  supervision,  evaluation  activities  as  required.  A  more  detailed 
term of reference will be completed during the next design mission.  
90 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Subcomponent 2.2 - Innovation and Outreach Fund 
8. 
The CTA and the RF/MF will support the Innovation and Outreach Fund. The CTA will  report  to 
programme  coordinator  (PC).  Together  they  will  be  responsible  for  proactivity  attracting  project 
partners,  writing terms of expression of interest, recruiting qualified agencies,  writing/distributing call 
for proposals, preparing selection process document and decision making, providing ongoing support, 
and  implementing  partners.  They  will  also  provide  input  to  the  FARMSE  annual  work  plan  and 
budgets  and  will  participate/support  in  FARMSE  monitoring  and  evaluation,  supervision,  evaluation 
activities  as  required.  A  more  detailed  term  of  reference  will  be  completed  during  the  next  design 
mission.  
Component  3.0  –  Strategic  Partnerships,  Knowledge  Generation,  and  Policy.  The  PMU 
9. 
will  be  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  activities  in  Component  3  which  will  fund  meso  and 
macro  level  support  mechanisms/developments  of  the  rural  financial  sector.  The  programme 
coordinator, with the support from the CTA will be responsible for the development of this components’ 
input  to  the  programme’s  annual  work  plan  and  budget  and  related  strategy.    Most  activities  in  this 
component will be outsourced to relevant stakeholder organizations, although some coordination and 
facilitation activities will be  the responsibility of team members. The team will be responsible for the 
selection  and  management  oversight  of  any  outsourced  activity  contracts,  as  well  as  monthly 
performance reporting.  
10.  Project Start-up Phase. To facilitate a prompt start-up, GOM supports transfer of a small core 
team from RLEEP (PC, FC, PO  & M&E officer) and some resources, so long  as  this is done in line 
with  GOM/IFAD  policies  and  procedures.  The  PMU  may  commission  technical  support  for  the 
required start-up activities immediately after the signature of the Financing Agreement. Resources will 
be allocated for part of this process, including:   
i) 
ii) 
assessment and recruitment of the core RLEEP team transitioning to FARMSE; 
recruitment other core PMU staff. Additionally, the CTA and the other technical specialists 
will also be immediately sourced to provide critical, and time sensitive program structuring 
and start up activities;   
iii)  procurement of essential goods and services required during the start-up phase;  
iv) 
formation of PSC; and  
v)  conduct  of  the  first  start-up  workshop  with  partners  (including,  e.g.,  representatives  of 
relevant  ministries,    Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  key  private  and  NGO  sector  stakeholders, 
donor organizations, and representative programme beneficiaries.  
11.  The MoFEPD will be responsible for start-up activities with the support of IFAD. Similarly, once 
contracted  the  implementing  agencies  will  also  provide  ongoing  support  as  necessary  to  ensure 
Component 1.0 start-up activities are undertaken successfully.  
12. 
IFAD start-up support. To improve start-up and early project performance, IFAD will support a 
three to five day facilitated start-up workshop where the project team and implementing agency staff 
will  work  together  to  understand  the  project  design  documents  and  develop  a  full  and  common 
understanding  of  the  project.  This  activity  will  be  reinforced  by  the  participation  of  government  and 
PMU, design mission staff, and key stakeholders. It will have the objective of communicating out the 
programme  design  and  participatory  mechanisms,  while  instilling  greater  ownership  in  the  design 
process and in the programme itself.   
13.  The  time  sensitive  nature  of  FARMSE  activities  and  the  demands  on  GOM  representatives’ 
time,  FARMSE  start-up  activities  are  particularly  critical  to  the  success  of  the  program.  Table A  5.1 
outlines major programmatic start up timing milestones. The launch of the graduation program is most 
critical  given  the  time  needed  to  select  not  only  the  operating  districts  but  the  target  beneficiaries. 
Similarly, timing for subcomponent 2.1 is equally critical if the targeted number of rural households are 
to be served with CBFO financial services. Subcomponent 2.2 or the Innovation and Outreach Fund 
91 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
(IOF)  will  require  substantial  proactive  developmental  work  with  potential  program  grantees  which 
makes  an  efficient  start  up  process  also  critical  to  its  long-term  success.  The  modest  absorption 
capacity  and  the  challenging  economic/development  context  in  Malawi  requires  considerable 
programmatic discipline if output targets and outcomes are to be met. 
14.  Conditions  for  disbursement. The  start-up  funds  require  a  designated  and  operating  accounts 
(in  USD)  in  a  commercial  bank  acceptable  to  IFAD  by  the  MOF.  The  first  disbursement  into  the 
designated account requires:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
A designated account and programme accounts will have been duly opened; 
The  PMU,  headed  by  the  Programme  Manager,  shall  have  been  fully  constituted  and 
adequately staffed with key staff including the Programme Coordinator and the Finance 
Director; 
A  draft  Programme  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  will  include  a  financial  management 
module which has been submitted to IFAD for review. The financial management module 
will include inter alia a chart of accounts; 
An  off-the-shelf  accounting  software  will  have  been  procured  and  coded  with  the 
FARMSE chart of accounts to facilitate generation of reports by component, expenditure 
category and financier; and 
The Programme Steering Committee (PSC) headed by the Secretary to the Treasury of 
the MoFEPD or his designate will have been established. 
FARMSE - Critical Start Up Activities  
Pre 
Project 
Month   
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  11  12  13  14  15 
Finalize GIZ Agreement 
Finalize 
IOF 
Management 
Agreement 
PMU Established 
PMU TSPs Hired 
Finalize  Component  1 
Three year WPB 
Finalize 
Plans 
IOF  Launch 
Call for EOI 
   Component 2.1 
   IOF 
Call for Proposals 
   Component 2.1 
   IOF 
Projects/Provider 
Selected 
   Component 2.1 
   IOF 
92 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Annex A – Attachment 1: Terms of Reference for key PMU staff 
Programme Coordinator 
Job Title: 
Recruitment:
Programme Coordinator 
National 
Contract: 
Reports to: 
Three-year contract, with six months’ probation period, and may be renewable 
based on identified need, performance targets and deliverables 
  Programme  Steering  Committee  (on  matters  related  to  the  Financing 
Agreement with IFAD) 
 
  Director, Pensions and Financial Sector Policy Division of the MoFEPD on 
technical matters 
Purpose 
As  a  member  and  head  of  the  Programme  Coordination  Office  (PCO),  the  Programme  Coordinator 
(PC)  has  the  overall  responsibility  for  the  smooth,  timely  and  high-quality  management  and 
implementation  of  the  FARMSE.  As  head  of  the  PCO,  the  PC  is  in  charge  of  the  day-to-day 
management  of  the  Programme  and  the  coordination  of  all  its  activities  and  partnerships.  The  PC 
liaises with relevant stakeholders in the government sector, financial sector (ranging from community-
based  finance  to  commercial  banking)  and  agricultural  and  agribusiness  sectors,  the  donor 
community as far as it supports or is interested in rural and agricultural finance, or financial systems 
development,  and  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  as  regards  all  matters 
pertaining  to  the  Financing  Agreement  signed  between  the  GOM  and  the  Fund.  The  PC  ensures 
coordination  with  the  Pensions  and  Financial  Sector  Policy  Division  of  the  MoFEPD  on  technical 
matters under the MoFEPD and maintains close ties with the Programme Design Group.   
Key Responsibilities and Duties 
1.  Develop  an  implementable  programme  of  activities  in  accordance  with  the  Financing 
Agreement and the Programme design documents; 
2.  Ensure  timely  submission  of  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPBs),  activity  reports, 
financial reports, audit reports and others in accordance with the stipulated requirements; 
3.  Ensure the smooth management of the Programme in all facets and dimensions;  
4.  Coach, guide, mentor, inspire, monitor and supervise all staff in the PCO;  
5.  Ensure  proper funding of activities all the time, and  adequate  use and  absorption of funds as 
allocated;  
6.  Ensure  that  proper  systems  and  procedures  are  established,  contained  in  the  respective 
manuals and fully adhered to by all respective persons and units;  
7.  Ensure updating of manuals, systems and procedures as required;  
8.  Maintain  excellent relationships  with partners and key actors in the government, financial  and 
private  sectors  as  well  as  with  the  relevant  donor  community,  and  coordinate  activities  with 
these as needed;  
9.  Assist potential and actual partners to conceptualize their projects, proposals and visions;  
10.  Introduce  innovations  generated  inside  and  outside  Malawi  to  other  possible  actors  and 
replicators;  
11.  Guide  and  inspire  the  national  dialogue  on  rural  and  agricultural  finance,  and  on  financial 
systems development, in particular as regards the ability of the financial sector to better serve 
the rural poor;  
12.  Provide oversight over the implementation of components 1 and 3;  
13.  Manage the knowledge management and technical assistance activities under component 3; 
14.  Provide guidance and expertise in the process of developing the Rural Finance Policy;  
93 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
15.  Ensure  a  proper  set-up  and  functioning  of  the  Planning,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (PM&E) 
systems  and  procedures,  and  that  PM&E  is  properly  anchored  in  all  projects  run  by  partners 
and grant recipients; 
16.  Prepare an annual report on the evolution of rural financial inclusion in Malawi and the progress 
made by the financial sector to improve the quality, outreach and depth of financial services to 
the  IFAD  target  groups,  including  an  overall  assessment  of  the  development  of  the  financial 
sector; this report shall be published annually on the website managed by the PCO;  
17.  Prepare the AWPB in accordance with the Financing Agreement and IFAD procedures; 
18.  Contribute  actively  to  the  knowledge  management  activities  of  IFAD  within  the  Eastern  and 
Southern Africa Division; 
19.  Conceptualize  all  knowledge  management  activities  under  the  FARMSE  and  ensure  their 
proper implementation and most widespread dissemination;  
20.  In collaboration  with the Financial Controller, ensure  effective management and accounting of 
the FARMSE financial resources;  
21.  Participate  in  and  lead  the  technical  review  and  appraisal  process  of  grant  and  partnership 
applications;  
22.  Ensure the most efficient and effective use of the financial resources provided by the GOM and 
IFAD;  
23.  Adequately  prepare,  guide  and  assist  all  incoming  supervision,  evaluation,  backstopping  etc. 
missions deployed by either GOM or IFAD;  
24.  Serve as secretary to the PSC;  
25.  Implement all written directions by the PSC, IFAD and MoFEPD as required;  
26.  Ensure  that  proper  financial  management  and  procurement  systems  are  set  up,  and  the  full 
compliance of all persons concerned with the respective regulations;  
27.  Excel  in  transparency  and  accountability  of  all  activities  and  duties  performed,  and  set  the 
standards for transparency and accountability in programme implementation; 
28.  Ensure  that  a  website  on  rural  finance  will  be  established  in  the  first  twelve  months  after 
programme start and regularly updated;  
29.  Assume  full  responsibility  over  the  assets  received  by  the  PCO  and  the  prudent  use  of 
Programme-funded assets and resources. 
Minimum Qualifications 
  MBA/MSc/MA degree in economics/ agriculture economics,, finance, or law;  
  At  least  10  years  of  professional  experience  in  national  and  regional  microfinance/rural  finance 
and other relevant fields;  
  Practical banking experience nationally/regionally is will be a competitive advantage  
  Excellent leadership qualities;  
  Practical experience in leading and managing teams;   
  Good understanding of accounting practices; 
  Excellent communication skills;  
  Excellent interpersonal skills; 
  Full proficiency in English 
Skills and Experience 
  Proven technical leadership in banking and finance, micro and macroeconomics, and agriculture;   
  Good  understanding  of  agriculture,  value  chain  development  value  chain  finance,  and  rural 
development issues;  
  Experience  in  the  provision  of  technical  assistance,  supervision  or  evaluation  of  projects  and 
programmes, in the private and/or public sectors;  
  Good  understanding  of  networking  principles,  lobbying  and  advocacy  mechanisms,  and  the 
creation of alliances for joint initiatives; 
  Good understanding of PM&E, planning approaches, results-based management, and similar;  
94 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  Proven  capacity  in  the  formulation  and  production  of  high  quality  written  material,  including 
among others research studies, impact assessment reports, publications for media, etc.; 
  Demonstrable capacity to  work with private sector, civil society, media and government sectors 
on  evaluation  and  monitoring  programs  at  a  national  scale,  and  to  develop  appropriate 
communication strategies  and  be  an  effective communicator in  working  with a  diverse range  of 
stakeholders; 
  Strong  people  management  skills,  willing  and  able  to  foster  cross-sector  collaboration  and 
partnerships to enhance program results; 
Selection Criteria and Maximum Scores 
No. 
Criterion 
Maximum score 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Depth and relevance of educational background and publication records 
Length,  depth  and  relevance  of  professional  and  practical  experience  in 
rural, agricultural and microfinance, banking, leasing etc.  
Extent of expertise in the technical domains of the Programme 
Depth and length of management experience, in particular of donor-funded 
projects/programmes 
Length and level of management positions held  
Level  of  accounting,  financial  management  and  procurement  experience 
and skills 
Depth  of  understanding  of  rural  and  agricultural  development  issues  and 
experience with value chain development and value chain finance 
Depth  of  experience  in  designing,  delivering  and  evaluating  training  for 
adults 
Strong writing, analytical and interpersonal skills  
Depth of experience in qualitative and quantitative research 
Depth of experience with result-management and PM&E 
TOTAL 
15 
30 
20 
20 
10 
5 
5 
5 
10 
10 
10 
140 
95 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Chief Technical Advisor (CTA) 
Job Title:  Chief Technical Advisor 
No. of positions: 1 
Recruitment: International/Regional 
Contract: Three-year contract, renewable based on need 
Reports to: Programme Coordinator 
Purpose 
The Programme’s development objective is to ‘increase is to increase access to, and use of, a range 
of sustainable financial services by rural households and micro, small, and medium enterprises. The 
Programme  will  make  investments  under  three  components;  (i)  Ultra-poor  graduation  model 
development  and  testing  at  scale  (ii)  Support  to  Financial  Innovation  and  Outreach  (iii)  Strategic 
Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy.  
The Programme will be implemented through a wide range of institutions including; MoF, RBM, Apex 
Institutions,  NGOs,  banks,  microfinance  Institutions,  other  financial  service  providers  including 
insurance  and  leasing  companies,  value  chain  developers,  farmer  organisations  and  community 
based financial institutions (groups, cooperatives, associations, clubs, VSLAs,  etc). The Programme 
will  interact  and  collaborate  with  various  government  ministries  and  departments,  and  other 
programmes  within  Malawi  including  other  IFAD-funded  programmes  (PRIDE,  SAPP,)  and  those 
under, UNDP, World Bank and USAID.  
To strengthen the capacities of the PCO and the Pensions and Financial Sector Policy Division of the 
MOF  to  implement  and  oversee  this  Programme,  it  is  proposed  to  hire  an  international  Chief 
Technical  Advisor  for  a  period  of  three  years,  with  an  option  for  extension.  The  location  will  be 
Lilongwe, Malawi, with at least 25% field travel. 
Key Responsibilities and Duties of the Chief Technical Advisor (CTA) 
Maintaining a good understanding of the technological, operational, institutional and other innovations 
and good international practices on rural, agricultural and microfinance in the region and globally, the 
responsibilities include (but are not limited to) the following;  
1.  Advise the PMU on the logical and effective implementation of activities under component 2.2 
2. 
and when needed support the system development of other components  
Identify the capacity building needs of different implementers and advise on how these needs 
can be addressed to ensure their effectiveness in terms of Programme outcomes  
3.  Advise the PMU on how to enhance overall performance under the Programme  
4.  Support the PCO in developing appropriate strategies to inform potential partners of available 
project support under component 2.2, and also other components on need basis 
5.  Support the review and refinement of the Project Implementation Manual  
6.  Provide  technical  advice  to  implementing  institutions  on  how  to  improve  their  products, 
processes, business strategies, research and other proposals in pursuance of their business 
and programme objectives and targets  
7.  Advise  the  RUFEP  on  how  to  enhance  synergies    with  other  programmes  and  review  draft 
MOUs between the Programme and other partners  
8.  Advise  the  Programme  to  identify  the  best  learning  options  for  study  tours  and  exchange 
visits 
9.  Coach mentor and train the rural/microfinance experts in all aspects of rural finance in general 
and effective implementation especially of component 2,2.  
10.  Review TORs, capacity interventions including training and ensure quality of deliverables  
11.  Support the PC and MoFEPD in coordinating and facilitating development to the rural fiancé 
policy.  
96 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
12.  Attend  meetings/workshops  under  the  Programme  and  offer  advice/technical  opinion  with 
special focus on those that may affect Programme performance  
13.  Deal with any other matter relevant to Programme objectives as may be identified by the PMU 
and  MoFEPD  including  training  stakeholders  on  aspects  immediately  related  to  Programme 
implementation; 
Qualifications for the Chief Technical Advisor (CTA) 
Formal  academic  qualification  in  banking,  rural  banking,  microfinance,  management  or  financial 
economics  with  at  least  10  years  at  a  senior  level  in  microfinance  or  rural  banking  institution  or 
managing  large  rural  finance  projects  with  multiple  partners    in  a  developing  country  preferably  in 
Africa.  He/She  should  have  extensive  exposure  to  policymaking  in  rural  finance,  microfinance  and 
financial inclusion. Experience with value chain financing, institutional strengthening and/or innovation 
in rural financial institutions will be strong advantages.  
The  person  should  be  mature,  team  oriented  professional  with  good  analytical  and  good 
communication  –  able  to  make  easily  understandable  technical  inputs  on  rural  finance  and  financial 
sector.  He/  She  should  be  able  to  strike  rapport  with  personnel  at  different  levels  including  policy 
makers international organizations and other stakeholders. A strong self-motivated individual working 
with no or minimal supervision and able to travel to the rural areas and meet tight deadlines. Excellent 
written and spoken English, fully conversant with computer use. 
Minimum Qualifications 
  MSc, MBA or MA in economics, banking and finance, social sciences, agricultural economics, 
or similar discipline; 
  At  least  10  years  of  practical  experience  in  banking,  leasing,  microfinance,  agricultural 
finance, of which at least 5 in managing a large programme, institutional; 
  Good  understanding  of  the  functions  of  a  financial  system,  the  different  types  of  financial 
institutions and their services, financial systems development, inclusive finance, value/supply 
chain finance principles and approaches as well as extensive exposure to innovations; 
  Good  understanding  of  institutional  strengthening  concepts  and  methods  as  well  as  how  to 
operate an innovation facility; 
  Excellent knowledge of innovations regionally and worldwide 
Selection Criteria and Maximum Scores 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
Criterion 
MA, MBA or MSc  
Length  and  variety  of  practical  experience  in  banking,  rural  finance  and 
innovation within the financial sector (at least 10 years experience) 
Depth of familiarity with the respective core knowledge: 
Component 2 
Experience  in  Financial  Inclusion,  Institutional  Capacity  building,  Training, 
Analysis, Report Writing, Workshop Facilitation, Networking 
Component 2: 
Experience  in  managing  or  working  with  matching  grants,  innovation  facility 
with  extensive  knowledge  of  community  based  finance  and  agent/cell-
phone/electronic- based products 
Component 3: 
Experience  in  in  policy  engagements,  workshop  facilitation  and  bringing 
different stakeholder groups together 
Maximum score 
15 
20 
10 
10 
10 
97 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
4 
5 
Experience  with  project  management, 
International Finance Institutions 
in  particular 
those 
funded  by 
International/regional experience 
Experience in/knowledge of M&E functions 
TOTAL 
10 
15 
10 
100 
15. 
Rural  finance/Microfinance  specialist  (national).  The  incumbent  should  have  first-hand 
experiences  with  formal  financial  institutions,  particularly  microfinance  institutions,  and  related 
technologies  (e.g.,  MFIs,  microfinance  banks  and  SACCOs),  and  their  application  in  rural  areas. 
He/she  should  also  be  well  versed  with  digital  finance,  linkage  banking  and  other  low-cost  rural 
outreach  mechanisms.  Senior  positions  in  either  MFIs  and  have  some  knowledge  in  mobile  money 
operations.  The  incumbent  should  be  current  with  national,  regional,  and  global  developments  in 
rural/agricultural finance and digital finance. 
16. 
CBFO  specialist  (national).  The  incumbent  should  have  first-hand  experience  with  CBFO 
group  and  group/network  formation.  She/he  will  have  deep  knowledge  of  the  most  used  CBFO 
models  and  strong  understanding  of  community  development 
financial  sector  outreach. 
Understanding  of  socio  economic  impacts  of  CBFO  models  and  model  innovation  will  be  required. 
Must be well versed with the concept of linking CBFOs to the formal financial system. 
98 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
National Rural Finance/Microfinance Specialist 
Job Title: 
No. of positions:  1 
Recruitment:
National 
National Rural Finance/Microfinance Specialist 
Contract: 
Reports to: 
Three-year contract, renewable based on performance 
Programme Coordinator 
Purpose  
FARMSE  is a Programme funded by  GOM, IFAD and communities. The Programme’s development 
objective is to ‘increase is to increase access to, and use of, a range of sustainable financial services 
by  rural  households  and  micro,  small,  and  medium  enterprises.  The  Programme  will  make 
investments  under  three  components;  (i)  Ultra-poor  graduation  model  development  and  testing  at 
scale  (ii)  Support  to  Financial  Innovation  and  Outreach  (iii)  Strategic  Partnerships,  Knowledge 
Generation, and Policy.  
The Programme will be implemented through a wide range of institutions including; MoF, RBM, Apex 
Institutions,  NGOs,  banks,  microfinance  Institutions,  other  financial  service  providers  including 
insurance  and  leasing  companies,  value  chain  developers,  farmer  organisations  and  community 
based financial institutions (groups, cooperatives, associations, clubs, VSLAs,  etc). The Programme 
will  interact  and  collaborate  with  various  government  ministries  and  departments,  and  other 
programmes  within  Malawi  including  other  IFAD-funded  programmes  (PRIDE,  SAPP,)  and  those 
under, UNDP, World Bank and USAID.  
Key Responsibilities and Duties of the Rural Finance/Microfinance Specialist  
Attain  and  maintain  a  good  understanding  of  the  technological,  operational,  institutional  and  other 
innovations and good national/regional/international practices on rural, agricultural and microfinance, 
and  facilitate  adoption  of  the  same  by  FARMSE.  He/she  will  work  closely  and  understudy  the  Chief 
Technical Advisor. The specific responsibilities include (but are not limited to) the following;  
1.  Support/facilitate  awareness  creation  of  the  programme  and  its  objectives  and  goals  among 
relevant stakeholders 
2.  Together with the CTA, develop/ensure implementation of relevant systems within the programme 
3.  Advise  the  PCO  on  the  logical  and  effective  implementation  of  activities  under  the  different 
4. 
components, and in line with the GOM Financial inclusion strategy and/or relevant policies; 
Identify the capacity building needs of different implementers and advise on how these needs can 
be addressed to ensure their effectiveness in terms of Programme outcomes  
5.  Advise the PCO on how to enhance overall performance of the Programme  
6.  Support  the  PCO  in  developing  appropriate  strategies  to  inform  potential  partners  of  available 
project support under all components 
7.  Support review and refinement of the Project Implementation Manual  
8.  Provide technical advice to implementing institutions on how to improve their products, processes, 
business strategies, research and other proposals in pursuance of their business and programme 
objectives and targets  
9.  Support the CTA to enhance synergies with other programmes and review draft MOUs between 
the Programme and other partners  
10.  Review  TORs,  capacity  interventions  including  orientation/training  and  ensure  quality  of 
deliverables In collaboration with the CTA  
11.  In  collaboration  with  the  PC  support  the  pensions  financial  sector  policy  division  in  the 
development, planning and implementing rural finance calendar of events and knowledge forums 
12.  Assist in the preparation and management of supervision, backstopping and evaluation missions; 
99 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
13.  Attend meetings/workshops under the Programme and offer advice/technical opinion with special 
focus on those that may affect Programme performance  
14.  Deal  with  any  other  matter  relevant  to  Programme  objectives  as  may  be  identified  by  the  PCO 
and  PFSPD  including  training  stakeholders  on  aspects  immediately  related  to  Programme 
implementation 
Qualifications of the Rural Finance/Microfinance Specialist 
Formal academic qualification in banking, finance, project management or financial economics with at 
least  10  years  at  a  senior  level  in  microfinance  or  rural  banking  institution  or  managing  large  rural 
finance  projects  with  multiple  partners  in  a  developing  country  preferably  in  Malawi  and/or  other 
African countries. He/she should have extensive exposure to policymaking in rural/agriculture finance, 
microfinance  and  financial  inclusion.  Experience  with  institutional  strengthening  and/or  innovation  in 
rural financial institutions will be added advantage.  
The  person  should  be  mature,  team  oriented  professional  with  good  analytical  and  good 
communication  –  able  to  make  easily  understandable  technical  inputs  on  rural  finance  and  financial 
sector.  He/she  should  be  able  to  strike  rapport  with  personnel  at  different  levels  including  policy 
makers, international organizations and other stakeholders. A strong self-motivated individual working 
with no or minimal supervision and able to travel to the rural areas and meet tight deadlines. Excellent 
written and spoken English, fully and also conversant with computer use. 
Minimum Qualifications 
MSc,  MBA  or  MA  in  economics,  banking  and  finance,  social  sciences,  agricultural  economics,  or 
similar discipline; 
At  least  5  years  of  practical  experience  in  rural  and/or/agricultural  finance,  microfinance,  banking, 
leasing, 
Good understanding of the functions of a financial system, the different types of financial institutions 
and  their  services,  financial  systems  development,  inclusive  finance,  value/supply  chain  finance 
principles and approaches as well as extensive exposure to innovations; 
Good understanding of institutional strengthening concepts and methods as well as how to operate an 
innovation facility; 
Excellent knowledge of innovations nationally and within the region and other parts of the world; 
Selection Criteria and Maximum Scores 
No.  Criterion 
1 
2 
MA, MBA or MSc  
Length and variety of practical experience in banking, rural/agriculture 
finance and innovation 
3 
Depth of familiarity with the respective core knowledge: 
General  
Experience  in  Financial  Inclusion,  Institutional  Capacity  building, 
Training, Analysis, Report Writing, Workshop Facilitation, Networking 
Component 2: 
Experience in managing or working in an matching grants, innovation 
facility  with  extensive  knowledge  of  community  based  finance  and 
agent/cellphone/electronic- based products 
Component 3: 
Policy  level  engagements,  knowledge  management,  supply/value 
Maximum score 
20 
15 
15 
15 
15 
100 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
chain  finance,  research  and  studies,  organisation  of  public  debates, 
workshops and fora, website management; 
Experience  with  project  management,  in  particular  those  funded  by 
International Finance Institutions 
Experience/knowledge of M&E functions 
TOTAL 
10 
10 
100 
4 
5 
101 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Community Based Financial Organization Specialist 
Job Title: 
No. of positions:  1 
Recruitment:
National 
CBFO Specialist 
Contract: 
Reports to: 
Three-year contract, renewable based on performance 
Programme Coordinator 
Purpose  
FARMSE  is a Programme funded by  GOM, IFAD and  communities. The Programme’s development 
objective is to ‘increase is to increase access to, and use of, a range of sustainable financial services 
by  rural  households  and  micro,  small,  and  medium  enterprises.  The  Programme  will  make 
investments  under  three  components;  (i)  Ultra-poor  graduation  model  development  and  testing  at 
scale  (ii)  Support  to  Financial  Innovation  and  Outreach  (iii)  Strategic  Partnerships,  Knowledge 
Generation, and Policy.  
The Programme will be implemented through a wide range of institutions including; MoF, RBM, Apex 
Institutions,  NGOs,  banks,  microfinance  Institutions,  other  financial  service  providers  including 
insurance  and  leasing  companies,  value  chain  developers,  farmer  organisations  and  community 
based  financial  institutions  (groups,  cooperatives,  associations,  clubs,  VSLAs,  etc). The  Programme 
will  interact  and  collaborate  with  various  government  ministries  and  departments,  and  other 
programmes  within  Malawi  including  other  IFAD-funded  programmes  (PRIDE,  SAPP,)  and  those 
under, UNDP, World Bank and USAID.  
Key Responsibilities and Duties of the CBFO Specialist  
Attain  and  maintain  a  good  understanding  of  developments  and  principles  of  community  based 
financial  institutions  that  include  but  are  not  limited  to  cooperatives,  village  savings  and  loans 
associations. The specific responsibilities include (but are not limited to) the following;  
1.  Support/facilitate awareness creation of the programme and its objectives and  goals among 
relevant CBFO stakeholders 
2.  Support development of and implementation of relevant CBFO systems within the programme 
3.  Advise the PCO on the logical and effective implementation of activities under component 2.1, 
4. 
and in line with the GOM Financial inclusion strategy and/or relevant policies 
Identify the capacity needs of different of CBFO promoters/CBFOs and advise on how these 
needs can be addressed to ensure their effectiveness in terms of Programme outcomes  
5.  Support the PCO in developing appropriate strategies to inform potential partners of available 
project support under component 2.1 
6.  Provide technical advice to implementing CBFO promoters on how to improve their services, 
and processes,  
7.  Advise the FARMSE  on  how to enhance synergies  with other  programmes and review draft 
MOUs between the Programme and CBFO promoters  
8.  Support review and refinement of the Project Implementation Manual  
9.  Assist  in  the  preparation  and  management  of  supervision,  backstopping  and  evaluation 
missions; 
10.  Attend  meetings/workshops  under  the  Programme  and  offer  advice/technical  opinion  with 
special focus on those that may affect Programme performance  
11.  Deal with any other matter relevant to Programme objectives as may be identified by the PCO  
Qualifications of the CBFO Specialist 
Formal  academic  qualification  in  community  and  rural  development,  rural  finance,  agriculture 
economics with at least 5 years at a mid- senior management level in microfinance or rural banking 
102 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
institution.  He/she  should  have  extensive  exposure  to  financial  inclusion  through  cooperatives  and 
VSLAs. Experience with institutional strengthening and/or innovation in rural financial institutions will 
be an added advantage.  
The  person  should  be  mature,  team  oriented  professional  with  good  analytical  and  good 
communication  – able to  make easily understandable technical  inputs on rural  finance, especially in 
regard  to  cooperatives  and  VSLAs.  He/she  should  be  able  to  strike  rapport  with  cooperatives 
networks/associations,  VSLA  promoters,  relevant  GOM  ministries  and  other  stakeholders.  A  strong 
self-motivated individual working with no or minimal supervision and able to travel to the rural areas 
and meet tight deadlines. Excellent written and spoken English, fully conversant with computer use. 
Minimum Qualifications 
BSc/  BA  in  economics,  social  sciences,  community  development,  agricultural  economics,  or  similar 
discipline; 
At least 3  years of practical experience in cooperative/VSLA management, rural/agricultural finance, 
microfinance 
Good  understanding  of  financial  inclusion,  the  different  types  of  financial  institutions  and  their 
services,  financial  systems  development,  value  chain  finance  principles  and  approaches  as  well  as 
extensive exposure to sector innovations; 
Selection Criteria and Maximum Scores 
Maximum score 
25 
20 
25 
10 
10 
10 
100 
No.  Criterion 
1 
in  social  science/community  development/  agriculture 
BA/  BSc 
economics and /or relevant degree from a recognized university 
Length  and  variety  of  practical  experience  in  cooperative  and  village 
banking, rural/agriculture finance and innovation 
2 
3 
Depth of familiarity with the respective core knowledge  
Experience in with cooperatives and VSLAs: 
Financial  Inclusion,  Institutional  Capacity  building,  Training,  Analysis, 
Report Writing, Workshop Facilitation, Networking 
4 
5 
Experience in managing or working in an matching grants 
Experience  with  project  management,  in  particular  those  funded  by 
International Finance Institutions 
Experience/knowledge of M&E functions 
TOTAL 
103 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Financial Controller 
Job Title: 
Recruitment:
Financial Controller 
National 
Contract: 
Reports to: 
Three-year  contract,  with  six  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on 
agreed performance targets and deliverables 
Programme Coordinator  
Purpose  
The  Financial  Controller  reports  directly  to  the  Project  Coordinator,  and  is  responsible  for  financial 
management of the Programme and for maintaining all project accounts in good order. As head of the 
finance unit, the financial controller will take charge of all matters in the Programme accounting cycle. 
The  Programme  accounting  cycle  to  be  overseen  by  the  Financial  Controller  starts  from  financial-
related  inputs  in  AWPB  preparation  and  budget  control,  committing  funds,  disbursements  and  cash 
flow management in an effective and efficient manner, financial reporting to ensuring smooth audits 
and facilitation for supervision missions on all financial management aspects. 
Key Responsibilities and Duties 
1. 
Installation of appropriate accounting/reporting systems to ensure that the PCO and especially 
the  Programme  Coordinator  are  regularly  informed  of  on-going  financial  activities  and 
transactions.  Ensure  the  FARMSE  structure  in  terms  of  its  components,  sub-components, 
categories,  activities,  approval  limits  are  accurately  profiled  in  the  GOM  Integrated  Financial 
Management System.  
2.  Ensure  timely  capture  of  FARMSE  in  the  GOM  budget  as  required  by  the  GOM  budgeting 
processes and calendars. 
3.  Communicate to all implementing partner institutions, service providers and grantee recipients 
their financial responsibilities, the funds available and how to access it, and the requirements of 
reporting  and  record  keeping  in  accordance  with  prevailing  government  practices  which  are 
acceptable to IFAD. 
4.  Maintain all accounting records in a form appropriate for regular auditing (at least once a year). 
5.  Ensure  that  all  project  funds  are  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  loan 
agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for the purposes for which 
the funds were provided; 
6.  Ensure that counterpart funds have been provided and used in accordance with the conditions 
of  the  loan  agreements,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and  efficiency,  and  only  for  the 
purposes for which they were provided; 
7.  Ensure that all necessary supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect of 
all  project  activities,  with  clear  linkages  between  the  books  of  account  and  the  financial 
statements presented to the financiers; 
8.  Ensure that designated accounts are maintained in accordance with the provisions of the loan 
agreement and in accordance with the financier’s rules and procedures; 
9.  Ensure  that  the  financial  statements  are  prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Public 
Sector Accounting Standards as adopted in Malawi; 
10.  Liaise with external auditors to audit the Programme accounts to meet the required submission 
dates by IFAD; 
11.  Oversee  tax  matters  of  the  Programme,  ensuring  that  tax  exemptions  for  the  procurement  of 
goods for the Programme are secured at the appropriate time; 
12.  Process  documentation  and  follow  up  on  disbursements  from  the  government  and  IFAD  to 
ensure  that  releases  are  not  delayed.  Ensure  that  funds  for  Programme  implementation  are 
disbursed in a timely manner to enable Programme interventions to be carried out on time; 
13.  Prepare  and  submit  regular  withdrawal  applications  to  IFAD  and  follow  up  to  ensure  that  the 
Programme does not run short of liquidity; 
104 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
14.  Follow  up  on  all  project  funds  released  to  implementing  partners  for  timely  retirement  and 
proper utilization; 
15.  Ensure  that  statements  of  expenditure  (SOEs)  are  carefully  compared  for  eligibility  with 
relevant  financial  agreements  and  the  disbursement  handbook,  and  with  budget  control 
discipline; 
16.  Ensure  that  fixed  assets  are  well  accounted  for  and  annual  verification  is  undertaken  of  the 
condition of assets and their location; 
17.  Prepare informative management accounts in the form of monthly, quarterly, semi-annual and 
annual reports regarding aspects of Programme financial monitoring bringing out variances and 
advising implementers as to the limits of expenditure; 
18.  Act  as  a  counter-signatory  to  Programme  fund  releases  as  required  for  Porgramme  financial 
transactions and also sign as witness to contracts as much as possible; 
19.  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Programme Coordinator. 
Minimum Qualifications 
The  candidate  should  have  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  accounting,  and  must  be  certified  chartered 
accountant (ACCA/CIMA).  
Skills and Experience 
  At least eight years of relevant work experience, including at least four as a financial manager or 
accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions; 
  Strong managerial skills and demonstrated capacity to manage people and interact with a wide 
range of private sector partners and government representatives; 
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting; 
  Excellent quantitative and analytical skills; 
  Computer-literate including accounting packages and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word and 
basic data base set-ups. 
Selection Criteria and Maximum Scores 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
5 
9 
Criterion 
Depth  and  relevance  of  educational  background  -  accounting  background 
training at university level 
Membership  of  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  Malawi  or 
equivalent 
Depth and length of project financial management experience, in particular 
of donor-funded projects/programmes 
Level of understanding of project accounting software 
Strong writing, analytical and interpersonal skills  
TOTAL 
Maximum score 
20 
20 
30 
10 
20 
100 
105 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Procurement Officer 
Job Title: 
Recruitment:
Procurement Officer 
National  
Contract: 
Reports to: 
Three-year  contract,  with  six  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on 
agreed performance targets and deliverables 
Programme Coordinator  
Purpose 
The  Procurement  reports  directly  to  the  Programme  Coordinator,  and  is  responsible  for  managing 
procurement  processes  and  contract  administration  aspects.  As  head  of  the  procurement  unit,  the 
incumbent  will  be  tasked  to  ensure  compliance  with  GOM  Procurement  regulations  and  ensure  due 
diligence to comply with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and handbook. 
Key Responsibilities and Duties 
1. 
Installation  of  appropriate  procurement  systems  and  procedures  for  effective  planning  and 
monitoring of procurements under the project;  
2.  Oversee preparation and consolidation of inputs to the Annual Procurement Plan; 
3.  Finalize,  within  three  months  after  start  of  duty,  a  draft  manual  on  procurement  by  partners 
(under  component  2)  and  grant  recipients  (under  component  2),  which  sets  the  minimum 
standards of compliance for the procurement of goods and services under FARMSE financing; 
4.  Continuously  train  (on  the  job)  implementers  in  the  preparation  of  terms  of  reference, 
specifications and proactive follow-up of these inputs in the bidding processes; 
5.  Prepare bidding documents based on acceptable bidding standards; 
6.  Ensure  all  prior  review  requirements  such  as  obtaining  of  the  No  Objections  from  IFAD  are 
complied with in a timely manner; 
7.  Ensure  that  all  the  due  tendering  processes  are  adhered  to:  sufficient  publications,  strict 
adherence  to  deadlines,  transparency  in  communications  with  bidders,  publication  of  bid 
results, etc.; 
8.  Ensure acceptable record keeping in procurement with at least a complete procurement file for 
each procurement from start to contract finalisation. Maintain all procurement records in a form 
appropriate for regular auditing and spot checks by supervision missions; 
9.  Communicate  to  all  implementing  entities  and  service  provider  their  responsibilities  and 
requirements  with  respect  to  procurement  in  keeping  with  prevailing  government  practices 
which are acceptable to IFAD; 
10.  Oversee  the  contracting  process,  including  ensuring  that  Evaluation  Committees  have  people 
with appropriate expertise; 
11.  Monitor implementation of contracts: report status and problems to the Programme Coordinator 
on a monthly basis; and intervene to address problem upon request by the Coordinator; 
12.  Ensure  that  goods  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in  accordance  with  the  loan 
agreement and the GOM procurement regulations; 
13.  Work with the Financial Controller to ensure that tax exemptions for the procurement of goods 
for the project are secured at the appropriate time;  
14.  Prepare  quarterly  reports  of  progress  with  implementation  of  the  Procurement  Plan,  and 
regularly  inform  the  Programme  Coordinator  of  problems  and  make  proposals  to  overcome 
bottlenecks; 
15.  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Programme Coordinator. 
Minimum Qualifications 
The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in procurement and supplies and must be a member 
of the Malawi Institute of Procurement and Supply or equivalent. 
106 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Skills and Experience 
  At least five years of relevant work experience, preferably including experience in procurement in 
government/donor projects or large institutions; 
  Appreciation of the evolution of the public sector procurement reforms in Malawi; 
  Ability  to  work  well  in  teams  and  to  interact  with  a  wide  range  of  private  sector  partners  and 
government representatives; 
  Knowledge and experience of matching grant processes; 
  Knowledge of work planning and reporting; 
  Excellent quantitative and analytical skills; 
  Computer-literate and well-versed in the use of Excel and Word. 
Selection Criteria and Maximum Scores 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
5 
9 
Criterion 
Depth and relevance of educational background- procurements 
Membership of the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supplies  
Depth and length of project/ public procurement management experience, 
in particular of donor-funded projects/programmes 
Level of understanding of management of matching grants 
Strong writing, analytical and interpersonal skills  
TOTAL 
Maximum score 
20 
30 
30 
10 
10 
100 
107 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Monitoring and Evaluation Officer 
Job Title: 
Monitoring and Evaluation Officer 
Recruitment:
National or international, National preferred 
Contract: 
Three-year  contract,  with  six  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on 
agreed performance targets and deliverables 
Reports to: 
Programme Coordinator 
Purpose 
As  a  member  of  the  Programme  Coordination  Office  (PCO),  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Officer 
(ME  Officer)  ensures  that  the  FARMSE  has  a  robust,  effective  and  manageable  framework  in  place 
for planning, monitoring and evaluation. The ME officer also ensures that key implementing partners 
are  capable  of,  and  timely  responding  to  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation  needs  with  respect  to 
tracking  and  reporting  against  targets  laid  out  in  financing  and  partnership  agreements,  and  agreed 
results-based  indicators  as  per  the  FARMSE  logframe.  The  ME  Officer  will  develop  and  maintain  a 
strong  communication  and  operational  framework,  which  supports  the  PCO  and  programme 
implementation  partners  to  work  jointly  in  adhering  to  ME  protocols,  which  leads  to  enhanced 
programme implementation and success in achieving the programme development objective. The ME 
officer  also  has  a  mandate  to  instil  quality  assurance,  integrity,  and  accountability  across  ME 
functions. 
Key Responsibilities 
 
 
In close collaboration with the FARMSE Programme Coordinator, develop, refine and roll out 
a  robust  and  effective  M&E  system,  which  supports  operationalisation  of  the  FARMSE  with 
respect to the programme logframe, M&E targets and indicators of success, and which meets 
the approval of key programme stakeholders; 
Integrate  results-based  management  principles  and  approaches  into  the  M&E  system  and 
processes  to  enhance  intervention  strategies,  effective  use  of  people  and  resources, 
mechanisms  and  approaches  for  results-based  decision-making,  and  transparency  and 
accountability throughout the programme life cycle; 
  Provide  necessary  training,  orientation  and  technical  oversight  to  ensure  implementing 
partners  have  appropriate  M&E  tools  and  capacities  to  meet  agreed  M&E  tracking, 
assessment and reporting requirements; 
  Ensure  timely  and  responsive  action  where  partners  are  failing  to  comply  with  M&E 
operational and/or reporting requirements, including support to enhance internal systems and 
coordinated action with PCO to review financing and partnership agreements as required; 
  Ensure  systematic  approaches  and  practical  linkages  for  using  M&E  data/information  to 
inform  and  enhance  PCO  decision-making,  and  interventions  and  activities  under  the 
Knowledge Management sub-component. 
Specific Duties 
1.  Support  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  a  M&E  system  based  on  key  FARMSE 
programming tools including the logframe, programme design report and operation manuals;  
2.  Actively support in integrating use of the M&E system across programme operations, financing 
and partnership agreements and reporting frameworks within three months of programme start-
up; 
3.  Support in the development and implementation of the Programme baseline data collection and 
analysis, including the design, testing and refinement of tools, identifying and sourcing credible 
data on Malawi’s financial sector, managing partner input, data consolidation and production of 
a final baseline report; 
108 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
4.  Lead in the development of tools and approaches that the PCO and implementing partners can 
apply  to  enhance  and  facilitate  data/information  collection.  Intensive  support  during  first  six 
months with on-going support on an as need basis thereafter. This will include among others: 
guidelines  in  understanding  key  FARMSE  terminology,  including  financial  terminology, 
guidance  and application  of sampling techniques, formats for standardizing  and collating  data 
information,  templates  for  reporting,  case  study  development,  impact  survey  tools,  and  other 
relevant tools; 
5.  Support  integration  of  RIMS  into  the  M&E  system  by:  working  with  stakeholders  and 
implementing  partners 
to  ensure  understanding  and  awareness  of  RIMS;  ensuring 
implementing  partners  are  capable  of  providing  input  for  first-  and  second-level  indicators  (as 
incorporated  into  the  FARMSE  logframe);  ensuring  performance  measurement  of  mandatory 
indicators; 
6.  Ensure  timely  completion  of  the  RIMS  reporting  form  in  accordance  with  IFAD  reporting 
deadlines;  
7.  Support results-based management approaches across all implementing partners by: calling for 
appropriate analysis in advance of setting targets and defining realistic expected results; clearly 
identifying  beneficiaries  and  ensuring  planned  interventions  and  activities  will  meet  their 
interests and needs; regular and systematic monitoring of progress towards results and based 
on programme indicators; working closely with partners to identify and manage risk in line with 
available resources; ensuring timely and proficient reporting in results achieved and resources 
involved; 
8.  Organise the reporting of all Programme implementing partners and assemble the quarterly and 
annual programme reports; 
9.  Develop  a  diverse  range  of  mechanisms  to  support  participatory  PME  and  oversee  their 
implementation. This could include regular partnership reviews, field-based activities to capture 
lessons  learnt  and  input  and  ideas  from  target  groups,  as  well  as  organizing  forums,  which 
capture Programme challenges, constraints and promote dialogue and identification of locally-
owned solutions; 
10.  Establish  robust  procedures  for  performance  reporting  in  accordance  with  the  current  Annual 
Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), including support for partners in developing relevant reporting 
procedures, formats, and quality assurance mechanisms; 
11.  Lead  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  field-based  M&E  initiatives  such  as  field  missions, 
evaluation and impact assessments, case study development, etc.; 
12.  Assist  the  Programme  Coordinator  in  the  planning  and  implementation  of  research  and 
development  initiatives  supported  under  the  FARMSE  including  support  in  study  design, 
sampling, qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis, and reporting; 
13.  Assist  in  organizing  and  implementing  learning  events  for  sharing  results  of  M&E  exercises 
conducted by the Program and/or implementing partners; 
14.  Develop  tools  and  instruments  for  the  evaluation  of  training  activities  supported  under  the 
FARMSE; 
15.  Conduct  evaluation  polls  immediately  after  training  sessions  and  within  3-4  months  after  the 
end of a course or session, e.g. by using surveymonkey and similar tools; 
16.  Support  in  contracting  and  selecting  a  website  development  and  management  partner  and 
assist with online data management and data monitoring. 
Minimum Qualifications 
  MSc  degree  in  economics  or  social  sciences  with  a  minimum  of  10  years’  professional 
experience or BSc degree with minimum of 15 years professional experience; 
  Demonstrable  capacity  to  design  and  manage  M&E  systems,  including  the  design  of  an 
appropriate implementation framework, development and testing of M&E tools and approaches, 
planning and overseeing field-based M&E activities, data management and reporting;  
  Proven ability to design and manage diverse research initiatives from inception through to report 
writing; 
109 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
  Sound  understanding  of  and  experience 
in  supporting 
rural  economic  development 
programming; 
  Proficiency in English. 
Skills and Experience 
  Strong capabilities in data collection, including instrument testing, field data collection, data entry, 
random quality control testing, data compilation and analysis;  
  Extensive experience in designing and delivering training and capacity building in PME systems 
operationalisation,  including  development  of  training  curricula,  operational  guidelines,  and 
performance management; 
  Proven  ability  and  expertise  in  working  with  data  management  software  and  web-based 
applications for use in M&E management; 
  Experience  in  establishing  and  managing  robust  M&E  performance  reporting  across  a  diverse 
range and large volume of partners; 
  Ability  to  plan  and  conduct  structured  and  supportive  field  monitoring,  including  formal  partner 
performance assessments, stakeholder reviews, etc.; 
  Proven  capacity  in  the  formulation  and  production  of  high  quality  written  material,  including 
among  others  research  studies,  impact  assessment  reports,  stories  from  the  field,  publications 
for media; 
  Demonstrable capacity to  work with private sector, civil society, media and government sectors 
on  evaluation  and  monitoring  programs  at  a  national  scale,  and  to  develop  appropriate 
communication strategies  and  be  an  effective communicator in  working  with a  diverse range  of 
stakeholders; 
  Strong  people  management  skills,  willing  and  able  to  foster  cross-sector  collaboration  and 
partnerships to enhance program results; 
  Strong communication skills, especially writing skills; 
Selection Criteria and Maximum Scores 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Criterion 
Depth and relevance of educational background  
Length, depth and relevance of professional and practical experience in ME  
Extent of proven skills and experience in critical areas of ME system design 
and management 
Depth and length of management experience 
Ability  to  understand  the  position,  the  programme  and  his/her  role  in 
contributing to successful delivery 
Depth of understanding of rural and agricultural development issues 
Experience in designing training packages and delivering trainings for adults 
Strong writing, analytical and interpersonal skills  
Experience in qualitative and quantitative research 
Working experience in bi- or multilateral projects 
TOTAL 
Maximum score 
15 
15 
10 
5 
10 
5 
5 
10 
10 
5 
100 
110 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Knowledge Management and Communication Officer 
Job Title: 
Duration: 
Recruitment:
Knowledge Management and Communication Officer 
Aligned to the Programme duration 
National 
Contract: 
Reports to: 
Purpose 
Two-year  contract,  with  six  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on 
agreed performance targets and deliverables 
Programme Coordinator  
As a member of the Programme Coordination Office (PCO), the  Knowledge Management (KM) and 
Communication  Officer  will  lead  the  development,  implementation,  evaluation  and  continued 
improvement  of  KM  and  communication  in  the  Rural  Finance  Expansion  Programme  (RUFEP).  The 
officer will report to the RUFEP Programme Coordinator and will work closely with the Programme’s 
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Officer.   
RUFEP is a Programme funded by GRZ, IFAD and the participating communities. The Programme’s 
development objective is to ‘increase access to and use of sustainable financial services by poor 
rural men, women and  youth’. It is estimated that  about 190,000 rural persons in Zambia over an 
eight-year period will, commencing from 2014, benefit from Programme activities. The Programme will 
make investments under two components: (i) Strategic Partnerships  – by strengthening the capacity 
of policy, apex and financial service providers (FSPs) in the financial sector to address challenges that 
affect  delivery  of  financial  services  in  the  rural  areas;  (ii)  Innovation  and  Outreach  Facility  –  by 
supporting  institutions  to  pilot  and  roll  out  innovative,  demand-driven  rural  and  agricultural  products 
and services. The Programme will be implemented through a wide range of institutions and, therefore, 
knowledge management and communication will be quite crucial. 
Key Responsibilities and Duties of the Knowledge Management and Communication Officer 
1.  Conduct the research, including stakeholder analysis and needs assessment, and consultation 
needed to develop the communication and knowledge management strategy for RUFEP;  
2.  Undertake  a  study  of  the  ICT  environment  in  Zambia  to  assess  the  appropriateness  of  using 
modern ICTs as tools to support communication and KM in Programme activities; 
3.  Develop  the  strategy  (using  consulting  services,  if  needed),  building  on  the  findings  of  the 
research and on own past experience; 
4.  Validate the strategy with the Programme Coordination Office and the Rural Finance Unit staff 
and key RUFEP stakeholders;  
5.  Develop an annual implementation plan and budget for the strategy; 
6.  Develop campaigns and information materials to support awareness raising and sensitization of 
key stakeholders; 
7.  Develop  key  messages  about  the  Programme  and  articulate  them  in  ways  appropriate  to  the 
various target audiences; 
8.  Prepare  user-friendly  information  sheets  that  detail  key  facts  and  figures  about  RUFEP  in 
particular and rural finance in Zambia in general; 
Interact with MoF communication unit staff and advise RUFEP staff on media engagement; 
9. 
10.  Oversee development and continued updating of a Programme website; 
11.  Support  the  development  of  appropriately  targeted  communication  materials  to  support 
extension activities and to communicate new and relevant findings in the rural finance sector; 
12.  Synthesize  reports  and  write  thematic  case  studies,  lessons  learned  and  stories  about 
successes emerging from Programme implementation; 
13.  Ensure that success stories, lessons and examples of best practice are packaged and shared 
within the country, with the Government and other development partners in Zambia, throughout 
the region and at IFAD corporate level;  
14.  Act as a link between RUFEP and the relevant IFAD's regional knowledge networks; 
111 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
15.  Ensure  that  systematic  learning  and  knowledge  sharing  are  fully  embedded  in  Programme 
management and implementation; 
16.  Advise and support the Programme Coordinator, PM&E Officer and the other RUFEP and RFU 
staff, as may be required, on how to integrate knowledge management and communication into 
their daily work; 
17.  Design  and  implement  a  training  programme  for  RUFEP  staff,  relevant  government  partners 
and other RUFEP stakeholders, as required, on KM and communication approaches, methods 
and tools; 
18.  Ensure  that  the  Programme  communication  and  KM  strategy  is  continuously  monitored  and 
improved; 
19.  Undertake any other task as may be assigned by the Programme Coordinator. 
Education and Experience 
  University degree in communications, journalism or a related discipline. Higher education in a field 
related to rural finance or rural development would be an advantage; 
  Minimum  of  five  years  of  experience  in  communications  and/or  knowledge  management  in  the 
rural development sector; 
  Proven  experience  in  designing  and  implementing  successful  communication  and  knowledge 
management strategies for sustainable development; 
  Experience  in  or  solid  understanding  of,  use  of  modern  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) in development; 
  Experience  in  the  sphere  of  rural  development  project  management  and  implementation,  in 
particular a good basic knowledge of project M&E systems, will be a distinct advantage. 
Competencies 
  Strong written and oral communication skills; 
  Strong analytical skills; 
  Self motivated and creative thinker; 
  Proven ability to work in teams; 
  Strong social skills and open-minded; 
  Excellent knowledge of modern communications tools, in particular web-based technology; 
  Ability to work independently and with limited supervision. 
Selection Criteria and Maximum Scores 
NO. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
CRITERION 
Depth and relevance of educational background  
Length,  depth  and  relevance  of  professional  and  practical  experience  in 
Knowledge Management and Communication  
Extent  of  proven  skills  and  experience  in  critical  areas  of  Knowledge 
Management system design 
Depth and length of management experience 
Ability  to  understand  the  position,  the  Programme  and  his/her  role  in 
contributing to successful delivery 
Depth of understanding of rural finance issues 
Depth of understanding of rural and agricultural development issues 
Experience in designing training packages and delivering trainings for adults 
Strong writing, analytical and interpersonal skills  
Experience in qualitative and quantitative research 
Working experience in bi- or multilateral projects 
TOTAL 
MAXIMUM SCORE 
10 
30 
10 
5 
10 
10 
5 
5 
15 
15 
15 
130 
112 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge 
management 
1. 
FARMSE’s  approach  to  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  will  be  compatible  with 
corresponding GOM and IFAD policies and tools (e.g., IFAD Results and Impact Management System 
- RIMS). Guided  by the Programme’s logical framework, the M&E function  will  systematically record 
data  and  performance  information  at  various  levels  as  required  (e.g.,  areas,  districts),  as  well  as 
household surveys. 
Planning 
2. 
Planning  cycle.  The  main  planning  tools  for  SIRP  comprise  the  Logical  Framework,  M&E 
framework - including its indicators and targets - and the Results Based Annual Work plan and Budget 
(RB-AWPB).  The  FARMSE  Logframe  provides  indicators  and  targets  of  the  overall  project 
implementation from output over outcome, development objective to impact levels. The RB-AWPB will 
disaggregate  targets  by  year  and  attach  financial  resources  (IFAD  loan,  IFAD  grant,  Government 
budget)  to  them.  The  RB-AWPB  shall  present  financial  and  physical  outputs  and  outcomes  of  the 
project for the given  year,  and report on cumulative achievements. The execution of the RB- AWPB 
will  be  monitored  along  the  M&E  framework  of  the  project  and  reported  to  the  Project  Steering 
Committee  (PSC)  and  IFAD  in  regular  intervals  (e.g.,  from  quarterly  to  semi-annuals  reports).  The 
planning,  monitoring  and  reporting  cycle  is  essential  for  efficient  management  of  the  project  and  for 
achieving the agreed upon results.  
3. 
Results-Based Annual Work Planning and Budgeting (RB-AWPB) development. The PMU 
will  draft  RB-AWPBs  involving  each  level  of  programme  participants,  beginning  with  primary 
stakeholders.  RB-AWPBs  will  identify  activities  per  priorities  areas  through  participatory  planning. 
Together with the PMU, project partners will provide input to the RB-AWPB plans for review (to some 
extent these  will follow partner performance based contracts). The PMU  will review and consolidate 
project AWPBs  based  on  the  programme’s  overall  operational  and  financial  targets,  and  produce  a 
programme-wide AWPB to be submitted to the PSC for review and approval. The RB-AWPB would be 
submitted to IFAD at least 60 days before the beginning of the proceeding programme year, for review 
and expression of ‘No Objection’. The annual planning and implementation cycle will be aligned with 
GOM’s planning cycle. The fiscal year goes from 01 July to June 30. A template in Excel will be made 
available in the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) to facilitate the process and reporting.  
Annual reviews and planning. Starting with the preparation of the RB-AWPB for Programme 
4. 
Year  2,  the  PMU  will  begin  a  process  to  review  the  previous  year’s  performance,  generate  lessons 
learned  and  incorporate  the  experience  in  the  proceeding  year’s AWPB. The  review  will  summarize 
performance  and  challenges,  highlighting  the  rationale  and  recommendations  for  the  proposed 
activities.  It  will  also  reflect  and  document  the  planning  system  including  project  planning  and 
approval  processes  (as  applicable).  The  RB-AWPB  would  present  programme  background, 
experiences,  and  results  as  the  basis  for  forward  planning.  It  would  also  present  the  upcoming 
programme year’s plan in summary, including costs (the financial summary with a Procurement Plan), 
and  details  of  planned  activities. An  annotated  RB-AWPB  will  be  provided  to  the  PMU  and  relevant 
project  partners  (i.e.  project  partners/  stakeholders  as  required).  The  plan  will  provide  for  staff 
capacity development and training as warranted. 
Coordination. Each programme participant would ensure maximum co-ordination is achieved 
5. 
between the various activities at the project level. Co-ordination with governmental projects and other 
relevant  on-going  projects  and  programmes,  particularly  those  of  IFAD  will  be  sought.  Efforts  to 
ensure  overlap  between  Component  1.0  and  subcomponent  2.1  but  subcomponent  2.2  will  be 
targeted.  This  will  require  some  inter-project  communications.  A  consolidated  implementation  plan 
would  be  prepared  annually  based  on  project  participants  AWPB  to  ensure  synergies  and 
113 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
complementarities  are  identified.  There  would  be  semi-annual  coordination  meetings  between  all 
project partners along with additional meetings during supervision missions. 
Supervision 
6. 
FARMSE  would  be  directly  supervised  by  IFAD.  Direct  supervision  would  encompass  four 
discrete  processes:  i)  loan  and  grant  administration;  ii)  procurement  review;  iii)  audit  review;  and 
iv) supervision  and  implementation  support.  Direct  supervision  would  be  applied  as  a  continuous 
process which requires on-going communication and engagement with the GOM and the PMU. Key 
supervision processes which would be applied are outlined below. 
7. 
Loan and Grant administration would ensure fiduciary compliance, with focus on: i) compliance 
with  legal  covenants;  and  ii)  financial  management.  The  procurement  review  will  focus  on:  ii)  the 
procurement planning and processes; and ii) management and monitoring of contracts. Audit reviews 
will  focus  on:  i)  prior  review  of  the  ToR  and  appointment  of  the  project  audit;  and  ii)  quality  of  the 
project audit.  
Programme  supervision  with  focus  on:  i)  implementation  performance  and  progress  towards 
8. 
project objectives;  ii) project investments, outputs, outcomes, and  impact; iii)  quality  of AWPB, M&E 
and  reporting;  iv)  effectiveness  of  the  steering  committee,  project  management,  implementing 
institutions  and  service  providers;  v)  good  governance:  transparency  and  participation;  and 
vi) targeting  and  gender.  Associated  implementation  support  will  provide  advice  for  the  following: 
i) efficient achievement of project objectives; ii) implementing and mainstreaming new approaches for 
example  the  integration  of  climate  resilience  as  a  core  element  across  all  IPs  and  component 
activities; iii) addressing operational issues and problems; and iv) generating lessons and articulating 
best practices. 
9. 
The  supervision  process  would  guide  the  programme  towards  the  achievement  of  strategic 
objectives  and  broader  poverty  reduction  outcomes,  while  ensuring  fiduciary  compliance  and 
responsiveness  to  the  accountability  framework.  Several  instruments  would  be  applied  to  influence 
implementation:  i)  on-going  policy  dialogue  with  the  GOM;  ii)  adjustment  of  annual  work  plans  and 
budgets;  iii) revision of implementation manuals; iv) undertaking  of supervision and mid-term review 
missions; and v) legal amendments as appropriate. 
10. 
IFAD  will conduct joint field supervision missions  with the  MOFED  twice per  year. In addition, 
the  MOFED  will  commission  an  independent  external  review  at  mid-term  and  end-of  term.  The 
evaluations will assess processes and results and draw lessons for future programming.   
11.  Results based monitoring and evaluation.  Preliminary baseline and target values are to be 
established for the major indicators based on the data used for the economic and financial analysis. 
Regular  partner  project  reports,  semi-annual  Logframe  base  reports,  and  the  Learning  and 
Knowledge  Management  (L&KM)  function  will  facilitate  learning  and  adaptation  for  improved 
performance.  
12.  The PMU will conduct a baseline survey of targeted areas to benchmark key indicators at the 
beginning  of  programme  implementation  and  set  targets  against  which  programme  progress  will  be 
monitored and impact assessed. The PMU will develop a detailed M&E plan at start up to guide the 
implementation of the programme at all levels.  
13.  Programme  M&E.  FARMSE’s  approach  to  planning,  M&E  and  knowledge  management 
system will be designed to generate comprehensive and reliable information, and to improve planning 
and  decision-making  for  effective  programme management  towards  results  and  impact. The  system 
will inform FARMSE overall and project performance specifically.  Both, programme and Results and 
Impact  Management  System  (RIMS)  indicators  will  be  used  to  guide  programme  management  and 
performance.  The 
the  Programme 
Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  for  guidance.  The  PMU  will  have  the  responsibility  for  M&E  system 
management. 
IFAD-  RIMS  manual  and 
templates  will  be  placed 
in 
114 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
14.  The integrated M&E system will: i) measure the achievement of the logical framework indicators 
(including  the  RIMS);  ii)  assess  the  relevance  of  the  project  strategy,  methodologies  and 
implementation processes; iii) assess the performance of implementing agencies and external service 
providers; iv) assess project outcomes and impacts partner stakeholders including clients, specifically 
women and youth; v) identify successes and good practices; and vi) share knowledge as appropriate 
with  project  stakeholders  to  support  dialogue  and  decision  making.  The  system  will  provide 
performance transparency, respecting as necessary sensitive/proprietary partner information.  
15.  Beyond RIMs and Logical Frame work measures, other programme and project metrics will be 
developed  by  the  PMU  with  the  input  of  project  stakeholders.  This  will  include  indicators,  data 
collection, analysis and results dissemination.   
16.  Component 1.0 will have two streams of complementary data. First it will undertake a baseline 
study  structured  to  provide  the  basis  for  a  random  control  group  trial  research  assessment  of 
graduation  impact.  This  will  be  used  as  a  part  of  a  longitudinal  impact  study  of  the  targeted  test 
graduation  households.  Second,  two  qualitative  study  of  graduation  model  households  will  be 
undertaken to better understand the effect of graduation on household time use, productive decision 
making, gender relations impacts, etc.  
17.  Component 2.0 will require the development of a set of project partner performance metrics. A 
set of cores metrics will apply to all 2.2 projects (i.e., around profitability, efficiency, etc.). Another set 
of metrics  will  apply  only  specific  projects  (e.g.,  non-financial  sector  partners  versus  financial  sector 
partners).  All  metrics  beyond  those  related  to  FARMSE  Logframe,  will  be  developed  with  the 
concomitant  aim  of  providing  project  partner,  project  partner  stakeholders  and  the  programme  with 
performance  data  in  support  of  improving  project  management.  The  will  include  development  of  a 
monitoring  progress  and  provision  of  timely,  actionable  problem  and  opportunity  identification  (e.g., 
identify a growing client need or demand for service, identify market  bottlenecks, etc.). It will also be 
used  to  support  relevant  policy  dialogue.  Performance  data  will  be  collected  by  partners  and 
aggregated by the PMU.  
18.  Logical framework. The identification of appropriate indicators and methodologies to measure 
progress  is  critical.  The  FARMSE  logical  framework  has  been  developed  with  the  results  hierarchy 
elaborated as per agreed programme components. It will constitute the basis for results-based M&E, 
and include an initial list of indicators to track programme progress and achievements. The Logframe 
provides measures for disaggregated performance by gender and youth. The list of indicators will be 
reviewed during project implementation, and can be adjusted. 
19.  Programme Baseline Study. A baseline will be designed and carried out at programme start-
up in areas likely to be selected for activities related to at least one but preferably two components. 
The  baseline  studies  will  form  the  basis  for  assessing  programme  effectiveness  and  results 
achievement.  The  household  survey  shall  be  repeated  at  mid-  term  (programme  year  3-4)  and  at 
programme  completion.  Repeated  measurements  allow  for  obtaining  data  and  information  required 
for assessing the performance and  achievements of the programme over time. Baseline studies  will 
include  a  target  group  and  a  control  group,  and  will  incorporate  the  Multi-dimensional  Poverty 
Assessment  Tool  (MPAT).  This  will  be  essential  to  determine  attribution  of  results  to  programme 
activities.  
20.  Responsibilities.  Overall  the  responsibility  for  M&E  activities  will  rest  with  the  PMU  M&E 
Officer  and  other  assigned  staff,  with  reporting  to  the  PMU  Manager.  The  M&E  Officer  will  be  also 
responsible  for  collecting  and  analysing  data  gathered  from  project  service  providers  on  an  agreed 
reporting format and timeframe. The M&E officer will work with a short-term M&E technical expert to 
set up a simple, functioning reporting format, data aggregation system, report analytical process and 
reporting format. This will be done starting the first month after the M&E Officer is hired.  
21.  Reporting. The M&E staff will produce three core reports: i) a quarterly progress report by each 
implementation  partner  and  service  provider;  ii)  a  semi-annual  progress  report;  and  iii)  an  annual 
progress  report.  The  programme  Logframe  includes  the  draft  indicators  against  which  programme 
115 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
performance  would  be  monitored  and  the  sources  of  data  to  be  used.  These  indicators  would  be 
discussed  and  agreed  at  programme  start-up.  Draft  reports  will  be  shared  with  programme  project 
partners  and  other  relevant  stakeholders.  Comments  and  input  would  be  consolidated  by  the  PMU 
M&E  staff,  reviewed,  and  approved  by  the  PSC  prior  to  its  submission  to  IFAD,  and  the  GOM.  In 
addition  to  these  reports,  the  M&E  team  will  also  consolidate  project  performance  input  for 
Component  2.0  subcomponents  monthly,  providing  trend  analysis  as  projects  are  implemented. 
Aggregate core data and limited, non-proprietary project partner performance will be published on line 
monthly to update stakeholders on project performance and to foster friendly competition. 
22.  Start-up  workshop.  MoFEPD  will  organize  a  FARMSE  start-up  workshop,  with  the  aim  of 
presenting  programme  objectives  and  scope,  roles  and  responsibilities  to  potential  stakeholders, 
service  providers  and  samples  of  beneficiaries.  The  workshop’s  timing  and  agenda  will  be  agreed 
between GOM, IFAD and project partners and relevant stakeholders). The objective will be to have full 
buy-in  and  ownership  of  FARMSE  by  all  stakeholders.  The  programme  design  report  needs  to  be 
disseminated  prior  to  a  wide  audience  within  the  GOM,  among  potential  project  partners,  and  other 
stakeholders. Invitations to the workshop should be equally inclusive.  
Learning and knowledge management (L&KM) 
23.  Learning system. Capturing and documenting lessons and  innovations through ongoing data 
collection,  monthly/semi-annual  reports,  and  thematic  studies  will  be  an  integral  part  of  the  L&KM. 
Disseminating reports and studies (in full or synthesized) will enable sharing of information and dialog 
facilitation  with  stakeholders.  (See  Component  3.0  for  specific  knowledge  management  activities). 
FARMSE  will  also  have bi-annual  and  annual review  meetings/workshops. Workshops  will report on 
programme  progress,  lessons  learned,  challenges  and  solutions  to  implementation  constraints. 
Workshops  will  be  learning  events  as  well,  presenting  the  opportunity  to  influence  the  programming 
performance  reviews.  A  short  report  of  discussions  will  capture  workshop  results  and  provide 
feedback  to  the  programme’s  planning  and  RB-AWPBs  as  a  part  of  FARMSEs  commitment  to 
participatory, demand-driven planning and implementation commitment.  
24.  Knowledge development and diffusion - FARMSE will support the creation of replicable and 
scalable  graduation  approaches.  It  will  also  support  the  development  of  several  innovative  rural 
financial  products,  services,  and  delivery  mechanisms.  The  PMU  will  work  closely  with  project 
partners and the M&E function to capture the process, technical, management and impact learnings 
of these programme/ project experiences. The knowledge management function of FARMSE M&E will 
document  and  share  knowledge  through  both  internal  (e.g.,  learning  events,  stakeholder  workshop 
featuring  project 
meetings,  etc.)  and  external  mechanisms  (e.g.,  website,  blogs,  podcasts 
stakeholders,  etc.).  In  addition,  the  programme  would  publish  a  semi-annual  programme  update 
online/newsletter based on good practices and human interest stories, ensuring information is gender 
sensitive,  and  reflects  the  success  stories  related  to  vulnerability  reduction  and  livelihood 
diversification as a means of risk management. 
116 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement 
arrangements 
PART I: Introduction   
Summary of Financial Management arrangements 
1. 
A Financial Management Assessment (FMA) was undertaken as part of the programme design 
in  accordance  with  IFAD  requirements  and  Financial  Management  Division  (FMD)  guidelines  on 
financial  management  assessment.  The  assessment  is  based  on  review  of  operation  of  the 
Programme Support Unit (PSU) of the IFAD financed Rural Livelihoods and Economic Enhancement 
Programme  (RLEEP),  Ministry  of  Local  Government  and  Rural  Development  (MLG&RD),  the  IFAD 
financed  Sustainable  Agricultural  Production  Programme  (SAPP)  mainstreamed  in  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture,  the  Programme  for  Rural  Irrigation  Development  (PRIDE),  the  National  Audit  Office 
headed by the Auditor General and the Internal Audit of the Ministry of Finance. A review of previous 
supervision mission reports on financial management was also undertaken during the design mission.  
Summary of strengths and weaknesses of the proposed FM arrangements 
Summarised  below  are  the  key  strengths  and  weaknesses  based  on  proposed  financial 
2. 
management arrangements under the Programme design. 
Strengths 
i)  A stand-alone Programme Management Unit (PMU) will be established; 
ii)  Programme  specific  financial  management  staff  will  be  recruited  on  performance  based 
contracts.  This  will  facilitate  periodic  performance  evaluations  prior  to  contract  renewal  and 
the staff will not be affected by mandatory transfers thereby ensuring continuity and retention 
of  knowledge.  The  Financial  Controller  will  be  a  chartered  accountant  and  will  have 
experience with project/donor financial management procedures; 
iii)  SAPP  implemented  TOMPRO  stand-alone  accounting  software  and  RLEEP  used  Sage-
ACCPAC  accounting  software,  and  these  have  facilitated  real  time  data  processing  and 
reporting  per  component,  expenditure  category  and  by  financier.  FARMSE  will  also  use  a 
stand-alone accounting software as adaptation of a good lesson learned. It  is proposed that 
TOMPRO be adopted (as it will in the new IFAD  Programme PRIDE. This will allow for joint 
trainings, support, and programme knowledge sharing; 
iv)  Programme funds will flow into a designated account held at the Reserve Bank of Malawi with 
an operating account held in a Malawian commercial bank acceptable to both GOM and IFAD. 
To mitigate against delays in accessing of funds by PMU,  the operating account will not be 
subjected to the Credit Control Authority (CCA) where withdrawals from the commercial banks 
are done by form of overdraft as in the case of SAPP; 
v)  Counterpart  funds  will  be  provided  in  a  separate  bank  account  accessible  by  the  PMU  with 
funds  allocated  on  a  quarterly  basis  to  finance  the  welfare  activities  under  GOM  financing, 
while  the  Programme  will  be  provided  with  an  exemption  letter  from  the  National  Revenues 
Authority for taxes and duties; 
vi)  The  Programme  will  transact  on  the  designated  account  held  at  the  Reserve  Bank  with 
permission  from  the Accountant  General’s  Office  to  meet  expenditure  on  contracts  entered 
into in USD and foreign travel trips; and 
vii)  The  Auditor  General  will  carry  out  statutory  audits  of  the  programme.  This  will  ensure 
coverage of a good scope and timely submission of audit reports as in the case of SAPP.  
Weaknesses 
i) 
FARMSE is a rural finance programme for which MoFEPD, has limited staff capacity to handle 
technical requirements of the project; 
117 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
ii)  MoFEPD has an Internal Audits Unit, it has limited human resources to cover the audit of the 
MoFEPD and all the projects under the ministry; and 
iii)  As a practice in the portfolio, SAPP and RLEEP have not been submitting semi-annual interim 
financial reports to facilitate review of financial status of the programmes on a regular basis. 
This practice partially contributes to delays in finalising annual reports. 
Capacity constraints to be addressed and operating changes to be made 
i) 
There is a need to open a designated account at the Central Bank denominated in USD and 
an  operating  account  denominated  in  MWK  in  a  commercial  bank  acceptable  to  both  IFAD 
and GOM to facilitate smooth funds flow. Under RLEEP, a designated account was opened in 
the Reserve Bank with an operating account being used as a drawing account with a Credit 
Ceiling  Authority  (CCA).  The  operations  of  the  programme  were  characterised  with  funds 
transfer delays from the designated account to the operating account. There were challenges 
with reconciliations as the commercial bank (standard bank) would take long to claim refunds 
from  or  leave  out  some  cheques  in  the  claims  leading  to  a  number  of  queries  at  point  of 
processing  withdrawal  applications.  FARMSE  operating  account  will  not  be  subjected  to  the 
CCA but rather funds will be transferred to the operating account on regular basis based on 
cash projections; 
ii)  There will be a need to provide training to the PMU and the LPA as neither will have previous 
experience  with  IFAD  financial  management  procedures/requirements,  and  management  of 
rural finance projects; 
iii)  The  project  is  complex  with  participation  of  a  number  of  stakeholders  including  Community 
Based  Organisations  (CBOs)/NGOs.  These  have  different  systems  and  controls  which  may 
not be well managed to ensure proper use of financial resources.  Internal Audit department of 
the Ministry will provide internal audit services to enhance internal controls of the programme. 
Internal  audit 
implementation  of  
recommendations  will  be  shared  with  IFAD  on  a  semi-annual  basis  as  part  of  the  FARMSE 
reporting requirements; 
together  with  action  plans 
reports  produced 
for 
iv)  The  programmes  in  Malawi  have  been  associated  with  start-up  delays  mainly  arising  out  of 
protracted processes in setting up of PMUs, particularly recruiting the required staff like it has 
been  under  PRIDE.  To  address  this  shortcoming,  FARMSE  PMU  will,  build  on  the  existing 
structures  and  mechanisms  of  RLEEP,  allowing  a  seamless  transition  of  key  personnel  and 
possibly some equipment relevant under the project  by  bringing into FARMSE key systems, 
lessons  and  experiences  and  fast  track  implementation  start  as  other  technical  expertise  of 
the  programme  are  being  recruited  as  a  mitigation  measure  against  delays.  The  staff  being 
transitioned will be subjected to assessment as may be required to determine their suitability 
for the positions; and 
to  enabling  Government 
v)  Further, this can be addressed by providing start-up funds on the grant to accelerate start-up 
activities  with  a  view 
to  achieve  accelerated  programme 
implementation. It is proposed that IFAD will provide an advance of USD 0.5 million from the 
grant portion of the IFAD financing envelope in the form of start-up funds to facilitate a quick 
start-up of Programme activities. Start-up financing will be used to facilitate the transition from 
signing  of  financing  agreement  to  entry  into  force  when  ratification  takes  place  and 
implementation.  
vi)  Start  – up advance  will support some of the key start-up activities even  in the pre-entry  into 
force period to ensure basic systems and capacity will be in place by the time programme is 
declared having entered into force. The  start-up advance will not be subject to conditions of 
effectiveness  or  disbursement.  The  advance  will  finance  international  and  national  technical 
assistance,  temporary  logistic  support,  LPA  staff  orientation,  finalization  of  the  draft 
Programme  Implementation  Manual  (PIM),  preparation  of  the  first  Annual  Work  plan  and 
Budget  (AWPB)  and  procurement  plan,  procurement  of  accounting  software,  and  a  start-up 
workshop, Programme launch and staff salaries of transitioned staff from RLEEP.  
3. 
Country  context  and  inherent  risk.  Malawi’s  inherent  risk  is  high  as  measured  by 
Transparency  International’s  Corruption  Perceptions  Index  (CPI).  The  country’s  annual  CPI  score  in 
118 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
2016 was 31(on a scale where 0 = high risk and 100 = low risk). This had been maintained from 2015 
and is a decline, down from 33 in 2014. The 2016 CPI ranked Malawi at 120th of 176 countries, putting 
it  in  the  medium  -risk  category.  The  publicly  available  2011  Public  Expenditure  and  Financial 
Accountability  (PEFA)  assessment  report  shows  an  overall  deterioration  in  Public  Financial 
Management  performance  since  2008  in  the  country.  This  change  is  most  marked  in  the  areas  of 
budget  credibility,  accounting,  recording  and  reporting,  and  external  scrutiny  and  audit.  After 
considering  mitigation  measures,  the  project  level,  the  residual  risk  is  assessed  as  medium.  (See 
Table 2 below) 
Programme  design  has  taken  into  consideration  this  risk  profile  and  included  mitigating 
4. 
measures at programme level. The main considerations include: 
i)  Programme  Financial  Controller  will  be  a  Chartered  Accountant  with  experience  in  project 
management; 
ii)  The  PMU  will  be  supported  with  financial  management  and  accounting  technical  assistance 
hired on performance-based contracts as part of implementation support; 
iii)  Where  funds  are  required  at  district  level,  activity  based  advances  will  be  transferred  to  the 
existing district bank accounts and subsequent advances will be done upon 100% justification 
of previous advances; 
iv)  A USD designated account will be  opened  in the Reserve  Bank of Malawi and an operating 
account in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD and GOM. To facilitate smooth funds flow, 
the  operating  account  in  the  commercial  bank  shall  not  be  subjected  to  the  Credit  Control 
Authority; and 
v)  The Programme will procure an off-the-shelf accounting software with modules necessary to 
facilitate  budget  control,  ageing  of  advances  and  production  of  financial  reports  by 
component,  expenditure  category  and  financier  and  facilitate  generation  of  SMART 
statements of expenditure (SoEs).  
Financial  Management  conditions  or  covenants  for  Board  presentation  and  conditions  for 
5. 
withdrawal include: 
i) 
The PMU shall have been fully constituted and adequately staffed with key staff including the 
Programme Coordinator, Monitoring and Evaluation Officer, Procurement Officer, a Technical 
Advisor (Rural Finance Specialist) and the Financial Controller; 
ii)  A  Programme  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  including  a  financial  management  module  will 
have been drafted in the form and substance acceptable to IFAD. The financial management 
module of the PIM will include inter alia a chart of accounts; 
iii)  An  off-the-shelf  accounting  software  will  have  been  procured  and  coded  with  the  FARMSE 
chart of accounts to facilitate generation of reports by component,  expenditure category and 
financier; and 
iv)  The  Programme  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  headed  by  the  Secretary  to  the Treasury  of  the 
MoFEPD will have been established. 
6. 
As an exception to Section 4.08(a) (ii) of the general conditions, specific eligible expenditures of 
up  to  the  equivalent  of  five  hundred  thousand  United  States  Dollars  (USD  500,000)  for  start-up 
activities proposed above. There are no further proposed exceptions to the conditions.  
Part II: Programme Financial Profile 
Nature  of  programme  eligible  expenditures.  FARMSE  expenditure  categories  will  be 
7. 
assigned with respect to the guidance provided by standard flexcube expenditure categories. Eligible 
expenditures  include  the  following  expenditure  categories:  i)  vehicles;  ii)  equipment  and  materials; 
iii) consultancies; iv) training; v) workshops; vi) grants and subsidies; vii) salaries and allowances; and 
viii) operating costs. The summary costs and financing plan are shown in Table 1. Detailed cost tables 
are presented in Appendix 9. 
119 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
8. 
Financing Plan. Total FARMSE costs are estimated at USD 57.7 million over the seven –year 
programme implementation period.  IFAD  will finance 73 percent (USD 42 million) of the programme 
costs. Half of IFAD funding will be provided on loan at highly concessional terms, while the other half 
of IFAD funds will be provided as a grant. The Government will contribute USD 9.6 million (17%) out 
of which about USD 3.1 million (5%) will be financed from its Social Cash Transfer fund and USD 6.5 
million (11%) will finance taxes and some duties145. Domestic private sector will contribute 11 percent 
of total project costs, USD 6.1 million through in-kind and cash contributions to sub-projects financed 
under the Innovation and Outreach Facility. 
Table 4: Programme Financing Plan by Components (USD ‘000) 
9. 
Beneficiary/Private sector contribution will be both in-kind and in cash, mainly to match grants 
received from the programme for Rural Finance Innovation and Outreach Facility. These contributions 
will mainly fall under the grants and  subsidies, and training expenditure categories. The contribution 
ratios will vary from window to window details of which are provided under component 2.2. 
10.  Programme activities will be implemented at different levels. At programme design, no funding 
has  been  earmarked  to  specific  geographical  location  such  as  regional  or  district  levels  as  the 
programme will be demand driven with the bulk of resources going to competitively awarded grants. 
Any private sector grantee will match grant amounts  with  a proportional contribution as provided for 
under the respective windows.  
Implementation arrangements 
Implementing  and  participating  organisations  with  fiduciary  responsibilities.  The 
11. 
MoFEPD is the lead ministry, the borrower, and the LPA. Implementation will be through a standalone 
Programme  Management  Unit  (PMU)  composed  of  programme  specific  recruited  staff  headed  by  a 
Programme  Coordinator.  The  Pensions  and  Financial  Sector  Policy  Division  of  MoFEPD  will  be 
charged  with  the  responsibility  of  overall  administration  and  supervision  of  the  PMU.  A  PSC  will  be 
formed  and  will  be  chaired  by  the  Secretary  to  the  Treasury  (MoFEPD  -  or  his/her  nominee),  with 
other members including representatives from other Ministries and institutions with direct relevancy to 
the  achievement  of  FARMSE’s  goal  and  development  objective.  The  PSC  will  provide  strategic 
guidance towards the achievement of Programme objectives and contribute to financial sector policy 
and strategic goals. 
12.  The FARMSE  PMU professional team responsible for fiduciary  aspects of the programme will 
be  composed  of  a  Programme  Coordinator,  Financial  Controller,  Accountant  and  a  Procurement 
Officer.  Other  professionals  and  staff  have  been  listed  under  programme management  section.  The 
FARMSE PMU will be the central financial management hub of the Programme, responsible for data 
processing, reporting and archiving of documents. Payments will be centralised at the PMU but where 
(if)  district  level  payments  are  required,  activity  tagged  advances  will  be  transferred  to  the  district 
existing accounts. 
13.  The following will be the roles and responsibilities of the other implementing organisations: 
145  Under  the  current  practice,  portions  of  taxes  and  duties  in  the  programme  costs  are  reimbursed  by  the  government. 
However, duties and import excises are not reimbursed. This has been taken into account when preparing financing plan.  
120 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Components by Financiers GovtGovt cashIFADPrivate(USD '000) taxestransferIFAD LoanGrantSectorTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmount1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 2,0943,0595,3375,337-15,8292. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 3,340-12,35212,3526,15134,1953. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 261-693693-1,6484. Programme Management and Coordination 822-2,6182,618-6,057Total PROJECT COSTS 6,5173,05921,00021,0006,15157,728 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
i)  Strategic  partners  will  be selected to  implement component 1.  within the  PMU management 
structure, and on the basis of agreed AWPB that will form part of the programme AWPB. The 
agencies    will  separately  enter  into  an  MOU  with  GOM  on  the  delivery  mechanisms  of  the 
activities  and  will  report  to  the  PMU.  Financial  management,  procurement  and  reporting 
arrangements will be in line with the MOU. Funds flows will be on a performance basis and to 
a bank account as shall have been agreed with GOM; and 
ii)  Any  involvement  of  public/private  institutions  in  the  delivery  of  Programme  activities  will  be 
treated  as  service  provision,  and  will  be  translated  into  output-based  contracts/MOUs  with 
payments treated as reimbursable to the Consultant/Technical Support Team. Performance-
based  contracts  will  be  the  basis  for  payments  to  contractors  and  private  Service  Providers 
(SP). Any advance payment will be in line with public procurement provisions and stipulated in 
the  contracts  for  service  provision.  For  a  service  provider  to  be  paid,  an  invoice  will  be 
submitted with evidence that agreed upon milestones have been achieved and full justification 
of reimbursable costs is provided. This will apply for direct supply of goods and services; and 
under grants where FARMSE will call for expression of interest to select grantees. 
14.  The MoFEPD has little direct experience with IFAD financial management procedures. Both the 
PMU  and  the  MoFEPD  staff  involved  in  financial  management  of  FARMSE  will  require  training  in 
IFAD  financial  management  procedures.  The  financial  management  capacity  under  SAPP  has  not 
been  adequate  for  the  management  of  justifications  which  have  persistently  been  received  late 
(especially from the district level), negatively impacting the turnover of withdrawal applications. 
15.  FARMSE  is  a  national  programme.  Programme  implementation  will  be  demand  driven  and 
selection of grantees, under grants an expenditure category to which most Programme costs will be 
applied. The granting process will be competitive and centrally managed by the PMU with support of 
technical  service  provider(s).  Accordingly,  a  centralised  financial  management  structure  has  been 
proposed. 
Financial Management Risk Assessment 
16. 
Inherent risks, country issues, entity risks and project design. Major country accountability 
issues  affecting  fiduciary  environment  and  government  accountability,  transparency,  and  corruption 
factors are summarized as follows: 
i) 
Transparency International's Global Corruption Perception Index score for 2016 was 31 (scale 
0-  high  risk  and  100  -low  risk)  in  which  Malawi  ranked  120th  of  the  176  countries monitored 
and can be classified as medium risk; 
ii)  The Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG) rates Malawi as having deteriorated in its 
overall  governance  quality  with  a2015  ranking  of  11th  out  of  54  countries  on  the  continent, 
and  7th  out  of  the  12  countries  in  Southern  Africa.  146  The  country  has  exhibited  a  slight 
downward trend of -0.2 points since 2011. Malawi’s Sustainable Economic Opportunity score 
was the weakest under of the IIAG with a score of 36.3 down from 39.4, a deterioration of  -
3.1; 
iii)  The  Accountability  sub  category  of  the  IIAG  index,  which  considers,  among  other  factors, 
accountability,  transparency  and  corruption,  access  to  information,  online  services,  and 
bureaucracy, was scored at 35.1%; and  
iv)  The  Public  Expenditure  and  Financial Accountability  (PEFA)  is  a  methodology  for  assessing 
public financial management performance, and provides an evidence-based measurement of 
countries’ public financial management systems. A Public Financial Management Assessment 
(PFMA)  was  undertaken  under  the  auspices  of  the  PEFA  Program  in  2011  as  a  follow-on 
146 A composite index based on four sets of concepts: (a) safety and rule of law, (b) participation and human rights, (c) 
sustainable economic opportunity, and (d) human development. See the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, Country 
Insights, Malawi, 2015 (http://www.moibrahimfoundation.org/iiag). 
121 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
assessment to one made in 2008. Compared to the 2008, Malawi saw a notable deterioration 
in  9  of  31  parameters  considered.  Notable  weaknesses  were  found  for:  budget  credibility; 
accounting, recording and reporting; and external scrutiny and audit. 
17.  Overall Malawi can be considered a high-risk country, characterized by  deteriorating quality of 
governance and low quality of public financial management. FARMSE design has considered this risk, 
and  proposed  appropriate  financial  management  safeguard  measures  to  be  put  in  place  at  project 
level.  The  FARMSE  PMU  will  be  a  standalone,  operate  separate  designated  bank  account  in  the 
Reserve Bank of Malawi and Operating bank account in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD, and 
run a dedicated off-the-shelf accounting software. Substantial attention will be paid to the training of 
MOF. 
Table 2. Summary of FM risks and mitigating actions 
Initial 
Assessment 
Risk 
Proposed 
mitigation 
Final 
Assessment 
Risk 
Inherent Risk 
1.  TI Index 
Control Risks 
Internal Controls 
1.  Organisation and Staffing 
2.  Budgeting 
3.  Funds Flow and Disbursement arrangements 
4. 
5.  Accounting systems, Policies and Procedures 
6.  Reporting and Monitoring 
Internal Audit 
7. 
8.  External Audit 
FARMSE Fiduciary Risk at Design 
- 
H 
M 
H 
H 
M 
H 
H 
M 
H 
- 
Par 19 - 20 
Par 21 - 23 
Par 24 - 28 
Par 29- 39 
Par 40 - 42 
Par 43 - 44 
Par 45 - 46 
Par 47 
M 
M 
M 
M 
H 
M 
H 
M 
M 
M 
Financial Management and Disbursement arrangements 
18.  Organisation  and  staffing.  The  MoFEPD,  which  is  the  representative  of  the  borrower,  has 
been nominated as the Lead Programme Agency (LPA). It will take overall fiduciary responsibility of 
on  all  matters  pertaining  to  FARMSE  and  ensure  overall  oversight  for  the  implementation  of 
Programme.  This  would  include  the  provision  of  general  policy  directions  for  the  implementation, 
coordinating,  implementing,  and  ensuring  coordination  with  other  relevant  agencies  and  supervision 
of the PMU (headed by the Programme Manager). 
19.  The  PMU  finance  team  shall  be  composed  of  a  Financial  Controller  and  an  Accountant.  The 
PMU finance team will be  responsible for the accounting function of the  Programme, such as funds 
flow (including following up justifications), preparation of annual financial statements, periodic financial 
reporting  and  overseeing  the  arrangements  for  audits  in  accordance  with  GOM  procedures  and 
IFAD’s audit guidelines. The engagement of the finance team will be on performance based contracts 
and  their  responsibilities  will  be  defined  in  TORs  which  will  form  the  basis  of  annual  performance 
evaluations. Sample TORs will be included in the draft Financial Manual. MoFEPD will be responsible 
for recruiting the programme staff. The selection process of the technical staff will be subject to IFAD 
No  Objection.  As  part  of  start-up,  the  PMU  finance  team  and  relevant  MoFEPD  staff  involved  in 
financial  management  processes  of  FARMSE  will  receive  training  on  the  Programme  accounting 
requirements  including  IFAD  procedures  and  guidelines.  They  will  also  receive  regular  technical 
support including on the job training. 
20.  Budgeting. The programme will be implemented based on the approval of Annual Work Plans 
and  Budgets  (AWPBs).  The  budgeting  process  will  be  done  jointly  between  PMU,  participating 
programme  partners  and  implementing  agencies  using  a  participatory  approach.  Led  by  the 
Programme  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Officer  (M&E  Officer),  the  PMU  will  consolidate  the  AWPB, 
present it for approval by the Project Steering Committee (PSC) and submit the estimates to MoFEPD 
for  onward  submission  with  request  of  No  Objection  to  IFAD.  The  M  &  E  Officer  will  ensure  that 
122 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
budgets are prepared in sufficient detail to facilitate monitoring of programme results. A No Objection 
from IFAD will be required for each AWPB throughout programme implementation. The key risks are 
delays  in  submission  of  the  AWPB  for  a  No  Objection,  inadequate  budget  control  and  low 
performance on budgets arising out of slow activity implementation. 
21.  To  facilitate  good  budget  monitoring  and  control,  PMU  will  provide  budget  templates  to 
programme  parties  including  implementing  agencies  that  mirror  its  code/chart  of  accounts  reflecting 
components, categories, and activities together with funding sources  (IFAD and GOM, beneficiaries) 
as  part  of  preparation  for  implementation  readiness.  Budgetary  controls  will  be  ensured  through 
proper use and of the functionality of the off the shelf accounting software, timely posting of approved 
budget  into the accounting software, producing budget performance reports and advancing funds to 
programme implementing partners, with indicative budget amounts on the activities to be carried out.  
22.  The  annual  planning  and  implementation  cycle  will  be  aligned  with  GOM’s  planning  cycle, 
following the fiscal year from January to December. Detailed budget schedules will be included in the 
PIM.  
23.  Disbursement  arrangements  and  Flow  of  Funds.  Programme  design  has  taken  into 
consideration financial management requirements that will ensure loan and grant proceeds, and other 
financing  sources  will  be  used  for  intended  purposes.  The  following  summarises  fund  flow 
arrangements: 
i)  Bank  Accounts  –  One  USD  designated  account  will  be  opened  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Malawi  specifically  to  receive  loan  and  grant  proceeds.  This  account  will  be  managed  by 
PMU in accordance with GOM procedures; 
ii)  One  programme  operating  account,  in  MWK  will  be  opened  in  a  commercial  bank 
acceptable  to  both  IFAD  and  GOM.  To  facilitate  real  time  transfers  from  the  designated 
account to the operating account, the operating account will not be subjected to the Credit 
Control  Authority  arrangements.  The  MWK  operating  account  will  be  used  for  all  local 
currency  transactions  while  for  transactions  in  respect  of  procurements  undertaken/ 
contracts  entered  in  USD  and  foreign  travel/foreign  trainings  authority  will  be  sought  from 
the Accountant General to draw USD from the designated account; 
iii)  Based on projected disbursements per semester, authorised allocation of USD 3 million has 
been  proposed  for  the  first  two  years  of  programme  implementation.  If  this  is  deemed 
insufficient during implementation it can be increased. The threshold of direct payments from 
IFAD will be limited only to large payments of or over the equivalent of USD 100,000; 
iv)  The  funds  flow  chart  attached  depicts  the  use  of  the  standard  disbursement  methods 
including:  i)  direct  payment  method  for  bigger  payments  over  USD  100,000;  ii)  use  of 
designated  account; and  iii)  reimbursement if the GOM has pre-financed  any transactions. 
Detailed instructions for disbursements will be included in the Letter to The Borrower (LTB) 
issued for FARMSE and the PIM; and 
v)  Programme grantees will be required to open Programme specific accounts to facilitate easy 
reconciliation of the grants and traceability of funds. Bank statements for these accounts will 
be required as part of support documents to the periodical reports. The PMU will provide a 
report template for common use.  
24.  FARMSE  Funds  Flow  Chart.  The  Programme  will  have  external  and  domestic  funding 
sources. External funding sources are the IFAD loan and grant, while domestic funding sources which 
include GOM, project implementation partners, and beneficiaries. IFAD loan and grant disbursements 
will  be  through  a  designated  bank  account  in  USD  opened  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi.  One 
Programme operating account will be opened one in MWK, at a commercial bank acceptable to both 
IFAD  and  GOM,  and  managed  by  the  PMU.  The  FARMSE  PC  and  the  Director,  Pensions,  and 
Financial Sector Policy Division, MoFEPD will be the principal signatories with a mandate of either to 
sign  payments.  Domestic  funding  from  the  private  sector  will  be  earmarked  for  specific  activities,  to 
123 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
match  funding  coming  from  FARMSE.  GOM  will  fund  taxes  and  duties.  Experience  with  SAPP  and 
RLEEP show that the GOM has not been financing taxes on most procurements. Taxes have been 
pre-financed  from  loan  and  grant  funds  and  the  GOM  has  not  been  refunding  the  same  to  the 
programmes.  Accordingly,  to  mitigate  this  risk  and  as  agreed  during  the  financing  agreement 
negotiations,  the  programme  will  be  provided  with  tax  and  duty  exemption  from  the  National 
Revenues  Authority.  Beneficiary  financing,  both  cash  and  in  kind  will  be  managed  by  beneficiaries, 
and  as  such  will  not  require  the  opening  of  a  bank  account  by  FARMSE.  The  funds  flow  chart  is 
attached Annex 1. 
Key aspects of funds flow arrangements. 
i)  A  single  designated  account  handling  all  the  principal  funding  sources,  i.e.  IFAD  loan  and 
IFAD grant funds; 
ii)  Joint withdrawal applications for the IFAD loan and IFAD grant in proportions to be defined in 
Schedule  2  to  the  Financing Agreement  with  clear  instructions  of  where  to  charge  indicated 
on each withdrawal application (see Fund Flow Chart, Annex 1); 
iii)  Co-financing will be on a parallel basis; 
iv)  The  designated  account  will  be  opened  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  while  an  operating 
account  will  be  opened  in  commercial  bank.  There  will  be  one  operational  bank  account 
managed by the PMU; 
v)  Private service providers will be paid in accordance to contract stipulations; 
vi)  Project  expenditures  shall  be  eligible  for  financing  if  they  are  incurred  during  the 
Implementation  Period.  However,  FARMSE  expenditures  may  be  incurred  before  entry  into 
force. In this case – but on an exceptional basis and with the approval of the Executive Board 
–  the  project  would  benefit  from  start-up  advance,  in  accordance  with  Section  4.08  of  the 
General Conditions (GC). 
25.  Financial  management  risk  under  disbursement  and 
management risks under the area of funds flow and disbursement include the following: 
funds 
flow.  The 
financial 
i)  The nature of the Programme will result in some financial management difficulties particularly 
collating expenditure justification documents to support the statements of expenditure (SOEs) 
given  the  experience  of  SAPP  where  disbursements  have  been  slow  due  to  slow 
justifications; 
ii)  There  is  a  risk  of  unsystematic  capture  of  beneficiary  contribution  and  counterpart  funds, 
particularly that beneficiaries are required to manage their own contribution and maintain their 
own records; 
iii)  The  programme  is  designed  to  deal  with  so  many  stakeholders  including  community  based 
organisations  and  private  sector  who  will  receive  financing. There  is  a  risk  that  utilisation  of 
funds  and  financial  management  by  these  stakeholders  may  not  meet  the  requirements  of 
GOM and IFAD; and 
iv) The proposed mitigations for the financial management risks under the area are:  
a.  In the TORs of the FC there will be follow up of justifications. This will enable PMU to carry 
out  field  visits  to  follow  up  justifications  and  handle  posting  of  transactions  from  manual 
records submitted by implementing agencies and grant beneficiaries;  
b.  Contracts  and  MOUs  will  specify  the  reporting  requirements  including  formats  and 
documents required by PMU; and 
c.  PIM will include a clear approach on accounting and forms for capture of beneficiary and 
counterpart contributions. 
124 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
26.  The  use  of  designated  account  reconciliation  as  part  monthly  management  account.  This  will 
reflect amounts withdrawn and not yet claimed clearly identifying advances.  
Internal Controls.  At the programme level, internal controls will be established to ensure that 
27. 
programme resources are utilised for intended purposes and that funds reach intended beneficiaries. 
GOM  internal  control  systems  appropriate  for  the  PMU  will  be  applied  during  implementation  of 
FARMSE, modified to suit IFAD requirements. The general key controls should include: 
i) 
Financial management manuals, policies, and procedures;  
ii)  Defined processes of Authorization;  
iii)  Fixed assets register, maintenance records and inventory checks;  
iv)  Periodic cash and bank reconciliations and review; 
v)  Evidence  of/documents  showing  that  funds,  goods,  or  services  have  reached  intended 
beneficiaries; 
vi)  Segregation  of  duties  for  budget  control,  proper  use  of  accounting  software,  data  backup, 
and storage of accounting records, etc.; and 
vii)  Established and rigorous monitoring, review, and reporting functions details of which will be 
included in the financial management manual. 
28.  The FM risks under the area of internal controls include the following: 
i)  Recruiting the personnel to manage grants and related activities, as MoFEPD does not have 
a pool of resources in rural finance; 
ii)  Selection  and  managing  of  the  grantees  to  ensure  the  right  grantees  are  appropriately 
selected and grants are used as proposed; 
iii) 
iv) 
Inadequate  scope  of  internal  audit  which  may  not  help  enforce  the  prescribed  internal 
control environment given the Programme scope and budgets; and 
Improper  handling  and  storage  of  accounting  records  for  a  programme  of  national  scope 
that is housed in rented premises. 
29.  To mitigate these risks, the following is proposed: 
i)  Adherence to the internal control framework will be verified during the internal and external 
audit exercises and reported to IFAD in the form of an internal audit report and Management 
letter,  in  line  with  IFAD’s  audit  guidelines.  Compliance  to  the  internal  controls  will  also  be 
part of the fiduciary checks performed during supervision missions and external Audit; and 
ii)  As  part  of  the  controls,  budget  monitoring  and  control  will  be  supported  through  the 
Programme accounting software and reflected in the financial programme partner reporting 
templates. Details on internal controls shall be provided in the PIM. 
30. 
Internal  controls  related  to  Innovation  and  Outreach  Facility  (IOF)  –  The  IOF  will  be 
implemented  through  matching  grants.  The  IOF  will  be  managed  by  a  service  providers  (SPs) 
competitively  selected  for  capability  of  managing  similar  matching,  innovation  or  challenge  grant 
programmes, and will operate under the direct supervision  of the PMU. The matching  grants  will be 
replenished  at  point  of  disbursement  to  grantees  and  not  when  the  grantees  have  fully  utilised  the 
grants. A performance-based (not input-based) payment schedule against which grants will have to be 
monitored  will  be  included  in  grant  contracts.  Grantees  shall  have  a  clear  business  objective  and 
operate in the formal sector (e.g. have a Bank account, keep financial records). They will be provided 
with  trainings  and  reporting  guidelines  (including  templates)  to  build  their  capacity  to  accurately 
account for the funds received before disbursements. 
31.  A grants manual, with a set of specific measures will be developed to guarantee transparency 
of the entire process and minimize the risk of fraud. These should include: i) detailed selection criteria 
125 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
(through  a  transparent  process);  ii)  grant  approval  process;  iii)  grant  management  and  monitoring 
system;  iv)  arrangements for  linking  disbursements  with  payment  of  the  beneficiary’s  contribution  (if 
required),  including  meeting  any  down  payment  requirement for contribution  before  disbursement  of 
grant  funds;  v)  involvement  of  commercial  banking  institutions;  and  vi)  provision  of  technical 
assistance for beneficiaries.  
32.  Further,  after  the  allocation  of  the  grants  under  their  respective  windows,  the  borrower  shall 
ensure that audits of the grant allocation process, approval and use of grant funds are carried out by 
the programme Auditor for small grants but recipients of large grants will be required to submit audit 
reports  audited  by  independent  service  provider  acceptable  to  IFAD.  Provision  of  audit  reports  by 
large  grantees  will  not  exempt  them  from  being  visited  or  inspected  by  the  FARMSE  auditors  and 
staff. Withdrawals from the grants category may only be made on condition that IFAD has determined 
that such audits are satisfactory. 
33.  Beneficiary contribution: Grantees will open specific bank accounts for receipt of grant funds 
and for banking their own contribution. They will however not be required to deposit their respective 
contribution  into  their  own  bank  account  in  the  same  tranches  as  they  expect  to  receive  from  the 
programme.  Instead,  they  will  keep  analytical  records  as  regards  their  own  contributions  and  justify 
these where needed. Specific templates on the format and content of the reports will be provided by 
PMU.  Transfers  of  grants  will  be  in  tranches  based  on  achievements  of  certain  milestones  by  the 
grantees as defined in the grant agreements. For bigger grants, it will also be allowed for FARMSE to 
pay  the  suppliers  directly  after  the  grantee  has  confirmed  that  they  have  paid  the  supplier  their 
contribution on the matching grant.  
34.  Matching  grants  will  be  expensed  at  the  point  of  disbursements  and  will  be  included  in  the 
withdrawal  application  at  that  point.  If  the  programme  was  to  wait  for  the  grantees  to  submit  their 
returns as was at the early years of implementation of RLEEP, it would quickly deplete the authorized 
allocation as the bulk of activities will be financed through matching grants. 
35.  Since grants will be expensed at the point of disbursement, the off the shelf accounting system 
will  be  able  to  provide  ledgers  for  each  grant  thus  necessitating  a  separate  grant  data  base.  The 
objective  is  to  ensure  that  grantees  are  not  paid  beyond  the  grant  ceiling  and  the  agreed  milestone 
bases payment is adhered to. A replication of the data base used under RLEEP will be done. 
36.  Taxes  and  Grants:  The  tax  element  in  grants  does  not  cause  ineligibility  for  IFAD  financing 
purposes  as  in  other  transactions.  It  will  be  taken  that  the  tax  element  is  paid  from  the  portion 
contributed by the beneficiary. 
37.  Nature of Accountability from Grantee: The matching grant represents an arrangement of equal 
partnership between FARMSE and grantee and the accountability will be output-based as opposed to 
a series of paper work. 
38.  Accounting  Systems,  policies,  and  procedures.  The  TOMPRO  accounting  software  that  is 
being  used  by  SAPP  and  has  been  proposed  for  PRIDE,  will  be  used  by  FARMSE.  Programme 
financial management will be guided by the financial management manual that will be part of the PIM.  
39.  The financial management risks under this area include the following:  
i) 
The  risk  that  the  software  may  not  be  appropriately  configured  to  facilitate  production  of 
required reports in the required formats and may not provide adequate budget control; and 
ii)  The software may not be procured on a timely basis. 
40.  To  mitigate  accounting  systems  risk  for  initial  and  residual  risk  FARMSE  will  procure  the 
software during the early  part of the start-up period.  IFAD  will undertake an  implementation start-up 
mission(s)  to  progressively  support  the  PMU’s  accounting  capacity.  This  will  allow  the  PMU  to  fulfill 
requirements  of  the  Smart  SoEs  approach.  As  part  of  start-up  activities,  FARMSE  also  develop  a 
specific chart of accounts to be applied in TOMPRO. Under this area, the risk remains medium. 
126 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
41.  Financial  monitoring  and  reporting.  The  objective  of  monitoring  and  reporting  is  to  ensure 
that  complete,  accurate  and  timely  reports  are  produced  in  accordance  with  International  Public 
Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS).  The  programme  will  use  IPSAS  cash  basis  accounting  as  is 
case  with  SAPP  and  RLEEP.  The  PMU  will  be  the  financial  management  and  reporting  hub, 
responsible for posting, reconciling, and reporting on programme finances. The PMU will prepare and 
present  draft  financial  statements  and  statutory  audit  terms  of  reference  for  presentation  to  the 
National Audit Office, which upon completion will be submitted to IFAD in accordance with IFAD audit 
guidelines. In addition, to the annual audited financial statements, the Programme will submit interim 
financial  reports  on  a  six-monthly  interval  as  per  IFAD’s  interim  financial  reporting  guidelines.  Key 
financial  management  risks,  assessed  as  high  under  the  area  of  accounting  systems  include  the 
following: 
i) 
  Failure to submit interim financial management reports by the Programme (under SAPP 
it has not been a requirement);   
ii)  Failure by the accounting software to produce reports in the required format and details; 
iii)  The PMU will provide IFAD with consolidated financial reports within agreed timeframes as 
follows:   
a.  Quarterly or semi-annual consolidated interim financial reports (IFRs) as agreed with IFAD  
consisting  of  the  following:  Sources  and  Uses  of  Funds,  Summary  of  Expenditures  by 
Loan  Categories  and  by  Financing  source  (IFAD  grant  loan  only),  Financial  performance 
by Financier  and by Component,  Statement of Expenditures/Disbursements  - Withdrawal 
Application  Statement,  List  of  payments  against  contracts,  Special/Designated  Account 
report  on  Audit 
Reconciliation  Statement,  Cash 
recommendations  (The  exact  format  and  content  will  be  agreed  between  the  PMU  and 
IFAD).  The  IFRs  must  also  disclose  any  unjustified  advances  given  to  implementing 
partners. The IFRS are to be submitted to IFAD within 45 days following the end of each 
reporting period;  
forecast  and  Progress 
flow 
b.  Annual  consolidated  Financial  Statements  within  four  months  after  the  end  of  the  fiscal 
year,  prepared  in  compliance  with  International Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS  cash)  and 
IFAD requirements. These Financial Statements are recommended to include: i) statement 
of  project  management  responsibilities  including  a  Management  Assertion  that  project 
funds have been expended for the intended purposes as specified in the relevant financing 
agreements;  ii)  statement  of  cash  receipts  and  payments  (by  category  and  by  financier); 
iii) statement of cash receipts and payments (by component); iv) statement of comparative 
budget and actual amount; v) statement of Designated Account movements; vi) Statement 
of  Designated  Account  Reconciliations;  vii)  SOE-Withdrawal  Application  Statement;  and 
viii) Notes to the Financial  
c.  Statements. The  Financial  statements must  also  disclose  any  unjustified  advances  given 
service providers/implementations partners (if any); and 
d.  Annual consolidated audit report and a management letter within six months after the end 
of the borrower’s fiscal year.   
42.  Mitigations, Initial and residual risk in relation to financial reporting. The PMU will provide 
technical backstopping to service providers to provide them with reporting templates reflecting budget 
activities  for  which  activity  tagged  advances  have  been  transferred.  In  addition,  trainings  for  the 
MOFED at start up and during implementation will cover among other aspects reporting requirements 
including a reporting calendar. Entities failing to submit justifications within the required timeframe will 
not  receive  additional  funding  until  full  compliance  has  been  achieved.  The  residual  risk  level  is 
medium.  
43. 
Internal  Audit.  Internal  audits  will  be  conducted  to  provide  assurance  that  the  programme  is 
being  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  PIM,  complies  with  GOM  regulations  and  Programme 
127 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
financing  covenants.  The  key  risk  is  that  internal  audits  will  not  be  monitored  to  ensure  adequate 
scope,  reasonableness  of  recommendations  and  implementation  of  recommendations.  There  is 
inadequate  experience  with  financial  management  and  disbursement  requirements  of  IFAD  by  the 
team at MOFED. The risk that internal audit, currently considered weak, may not provide the required 
service has been assessed as high. 
44.  Considering  this  risk,  internal  audit  of  the  programme  will  be  included  in  the  audit  plan  of  the 
internal  audit  department  of  MOFED  to  cover  programme  audits  twice  every  year.  Internal  audit 
reports and action plans to implement audit recommendations will be shared with IFAD as a reporting 
requirement.  FARMSE  will  include  the  department  in  the  start-up  trainings.  Internal  Audit  services 
may be outsourced to a private firm. 
45.  External  Audit. The programme statutory audits will be conducted on an annual basis by the 
National  Audit  Office  (NAO)  in  accordance  to  IFAD  audit  guidelines.  Statutory  audits  will  provide 
mandatory opinions on the general purpose financial statements, operation of the designated account 
and  the  use  of  the  SoE  procedure.  For  the  year  ended  30  June,  2015  the  GOM  Auditor 
General/National  Audit  Office  audited  SAPP  and  the  report  was  acceptable  to  IFAD.  For  the  year 
2016,  the  NOA  has  audited  both  SAPP  and  RLEEP  and  has  expressed  willingness  to  take  on 
FARMSE.  In  accordance  with  the  Auditor  General’s  mandate,  the  office  of  the  National  Audit  Office 
will  carry  out  the  audits  or  will  have  the  discretion  to  appoint  an  independent  private  audit  firm 
acceptable  to  the  Fund  which  will  be  managed  by  the  NAO.  Statutory  audit  terms  of  reference  will 
require the Fund’s ‘No Objection’ on an annual basis. 
Part VI: Implementation Readiness 
46.  The actions needed to mitigate financial management risks are summarised in the table below. 
Table 3: Financial management risk mitigations 
Action 
1  Constituting a PMU headed by a Programme 
Coordinator and obtaining IFAD No  Objection 
on the recruitment. 
Responsible 
Party / Person 
Target Date / Covenants 
MoFEPD/IFAD 
Within first six months. 
2  Compile 
the 
first  AWPB  and 
its  related 
MoFEPD/PMU 
Withdrawal condition. 
Procurement plan. 
3  Open the required bank accounts. 
4  Finalise 
the  PIM 
that  should 
include  a 
comprehensive financial management manual 
with  a  comprehensive  FARMSE  chart  of 
accounts. 
5  Establish  a  Programme  Steering  Committee 
to  Treasury, 
the  Secretary 
headed  by 
MoFEPD. 
6  Procure  TOMPRO  accounting  software  and 
reporting 
to  meet 
the 
it 
configure 
requirements. 
MoFEPD 
PMU 
Withdrawal condition. 
Within first six months. 
ST/MoFEPD 
Within six months. 
with 
Part of start-up activities. 
PMU 
Technical 
assistance 
7  MoFEPD  internal  auditors  to  provide  audit 
MoFEPD 
services to FARMSE twice every year. 
From 
implementation. 
inception 
throughout 
8  Office of the Auditor General to audit E-SAPP 
in accordance to IFAD audit guidelines. 
MoFEPD/NOA/ 
IFAD 
As  part  of  each 
statutory audit requirements. 
year’s 
47.  FM Supervision plan. The risk profile described above requires IFAD  implementation support 
especially in the first years of implementation. Start-up resources should include sufficient support for 
facilitating the PMU to put in place the systems and controls to manage fiduciary aspects of FARMSE. 
In the first two years, it is proposed that there should be at least two IFAD missions supplemented by 
128 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
fiduciary  follow-up  missions  to  ensure  financial  management  systems  and  tools  are  in  place  and 
implemented. The supervision plan for the first two years of programme will focus - subject to change 
- on the following actions:  
i)  At  least  two  on-site  visits  that  will  involve  inter  alia  visits  to  the  implementing  partners  and 
conducting/updating the FM assessments;  
ii)  Detailed review of adequacy of the staffing arrangements at the PMU;  
iii)  Detailed  review  of  the  Project  Financial  Management  and  accounting  procedures  and 
performance of the financial staff of PMU and key implementing partners;  
iv)  Detailed review of the accounting software and financial reports produced by the accounting 
software and the use of budget controls by the PMU;   
v)  Review of flow of funds (and resolving any bottlenecks);  
vi)  Detailed review of the fixed asset register of the PMU;  
vii)  Detailed  review  of  the  operation  of  the  designated  and  project  accounts  (including  monthly 
reconciliations) at the PMU and key implementing partners;  
viii) Detailed review of records management, back up and the use of the SOE procedure and the 
applicable SOE-thresholds (adequacy of supporting documentation) by the PMU;  
ix)  Follow-up on contracting the project (independent) external auditors; and 
x)  Follow-up on work performed by the internal audit function.   
48.  The  supervision  process  will  be  complemented  by  desk  review  of  progress  and  financial 
reports, the program’s annual financial statements, internal audit reports, and annual audits.    
129 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Annex 1: Funds Flow Chart 
V.     
IFAD 
Direct payment 
D 
A 
Authorised Allocation 
and later 
Replenishment 
GOM 
Quarterly allocations to 
meet GOM 
contribution 
F 
MWK Counterpart 
account 
PMU 
Accounts management 
USD Designated 
account 
B 
Transfers to the 
operating account 
MWK Operation 
account 
1. 
The funds flow described above is as follows: 
A.  Authorised Allocation by IFAD for the first six months of implementation, to be  
C 
E 
C 
  Payments for goods, works and services 
  Payments to Implementing partners as per MOUs and agreements 
The funds flow described above is as follows: 
Authorised Allocation by IFAD estimated at USD 3 million for the first six months of implementation, 
A. 
to be followed by periodic replenishments made based on withdrawal applications submitted by the PMU. 
Withdrawal applications will follow the signatory mandate as submitted to and approved by IFAD; 
B. 
Periodical transfer from the USD Designated Account to MWK Operation account. The designated 
account  and  programme  operating  accounts  will  be  managed  by  the  PMU  and  will  follow  the  approved 
signatory  mandate. Withdrawals  from  the  programme  operating  account  will  require  the  signatures  from 
the Programme Coordinator and the Financial Controller; 
130 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Payments  to  suppliers,  contractors,  consultants  or  implementing  partners  by  the  PMU.  These 
C. 
payments will be made from the operations account and the counterpart funds account. 
Direct payment by IFAD for goods, works and services received by the PMU for amounts equal to or 
D. 
greater  than  equivalents  of  USD  100,000.  These  will  be  made  on  the  basis  of  withdrawal  applications 
submitted by the PMU. 
E. 
Payments by the PMU in USD to suppliers, contractors, consultants or implementing partners. 
Quarterly transfers from the Government for counterpart funds to meet GOM portion of expenditure 
F. 
in respect of taxes and duties where waivers will not apply. 
131 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement arrangements 
Appendix 8:  Procurement arrangements 
1. 
IFAD’s General Conditions provide for use of the Borrower’s procurement regulations, provided 
they are deemed to be consistent with IFAD’s guidelines. This is in line with the various commitments 
of  the  international  donor  community  to  work  towards  the  increasing  use  of  national  systems  where 
compatible  with  the  donor  requirement.  Thus,  procurement  of  goods  and  services  including  human 
resources  to  be  financed  from  the  proceeds  of  the  loan  will  be  done  in  accordance  with  the 
Government  of  the  Republic  of  Malawi  (GOM)  procurement  procedures.  To  ensure  consistency,  an 
assessment  of  the  IFAD  procurement  guidelines  and  handbook  and  the  national  procurement 
systems  is  required  as  part  of  project  design.  This  assessment  has  been  done  in  two  stages: 
(i) overarching country assessment; and (ii) project specific assessment. 
2. 
Overarching  Country  assessment.  The  GOM  has  enacted  a  procurement  law  that  governs 
public  procurement  in  the  Country.  The  applicable  law  and  regulations  are  contained  in:  i)  Public 
Procurement  Act  Number  8,  2003;  ii)  the  Malawi  Government  Public  Procurement  Regulations  of 
2004; and iii) Desk Instructions for Public Procurement. 
3. 
The  GOM’s  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  will  be  used  in  the  implementation  of 
procurement  activities  under  FARMSE  in  as  far  as  they  are  consistent  with  IFAD’s  procurement 
guidelines. This is consistent with Part I, article 3(3) of the Public Procurement Act which provides that 
“To  the  extent  that  this  Act  conflicts  with  procurement  rules  of  a  donor  or  funding  agency,  the 
application  of  which  is  mandatory  pursuant  to  an  obligation  entered  into  by  the  Government,  the 
requirements of those rules shall prevail; but in all other respects, the procurement shall be governed 
by the Act”. 
4. 
The  Public  Procurement  Act  introduced  a  legal  framework  governing  public  procurement  in 
Malawi.  The  framework  provides  for  the  establishment  of  the  Office  of  Directorate  of  Public 
Procurement (ODPP), which, since becoming operational, has taken the lead on public procurement 
reform.  Among  the  changes  to  the  procurement  system  introduced  by  ODPP  was  the  complete 
decentralisation  of  the  procurement  process  to  the  level  of  each  public  entity.  There  was  also  a 
concerted effort to raise awareness of the newly established framework among public sector officials, 
the private sector, civil society, and the general population. 
5. 
The  design  mission  found  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  to  be  sound  for  efficient  public 
procurement.  The  Public  Procurement  Act  and  Regulations  adequately  establish  the  institutional 
framework required to support public procurement, the stages of the procurement process, the main 
methods  of  procurement  and  their  conditions  for  use,  and  the  conditions  for  review  and  auditing. 
Moreover, Regulations and Desk Instructions serve as a manual for procuring entities providing easy 
and  simplified  explanations  and  guidance.  Finally,  a  comprehensive  set  of  Standard  Bidding 
Documents  (SBDs)  for  a  wide  range  of  goods,  works,  and  services  has  been  issued  to  assist  the 
procuring  entities  in  the  procurement  process.  The  legal  and  regulatory  framework  in  place  thus 
represents a key asset in the development of sound and efficient procurement. 
A  Country  procurement  assessment  by  the  UNDP  indicates  issues  that  still  need  to  be 
6. 
addressed  to  ensure  that  procurement  processes  in  practice  are  fully  compliant  with  the  legislative 
and regulatory framework. These include: i)  few procuring  entities use the  SBDs; ii) many procuring 
entities  do  not  have  a  copy  of  the  Regulations  and  Desk  Instructions;  iii)  the  quality  of  technical 
specifications  is  often  poor;  iv)  evaluation  criteria  are  often  poorly  specified;  v)  awareness  of 
procedures  for  review  is  limited;  and  vi)  some  procuring  entities  have  experienced  political 
interference in the procurement process. 
7. 
Procurement  is  not  integrated  in  the  budget  formulation  process. At  present,  there  is  no 
linkage  between  budget  and  the  procurement  planning.  Thus,  procurement  plans  are  made  after 
budget  allocation  and  approval  –  if  made  at  all.  ODPP  is,  however,  making  procurement  planning 
compulsory. 
132 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement arrangements 
8. 
Procurement  plans  are  not  followed.  For  those  procuring  entities  that  have  developed 
consolidated  procurement  plans,  carrying  out  procurements  in  accordance  with  the  plan  remains  a 
major challenge. Poor planning skills, time constraints, and to some extent external interference and 
unplanned procurements constitute major obstacles. 
9. 
No  completion  reporting  mechanism  exists.  There  is  no  feedback  mechanism  providing 
completion reports on the execution of major contracts. The procedures related to the preparation of 
completion reports appear to differ between procuring entities. Some entities report that: i) completion 
reports are prepared; ii) the process of preparing completion reports is often delayed; and iii) they do 
not  prepare  completion  reports  for  major  contracts.  Also,  most  procuring  entities  have  inadequate 
procurement competence levels and record keeping in procuring entities remains poor. 
to  the  compliance  and 
10.  The  assessment  by  ODPP  encountered  weaknesses  related 
performance of the established control mechanisms. The following key issues were noted: i) auditors 
lack  procurement  proficiency;  ii)  weak  enforcement  of  audit  recommendations;  iii)  internal  audit 
committees are not yet established; and iv) compliant decisions are currently not being published.  
A.  Project specific assessment 
11.  During the design mission, a procurement assessment was carried-out on SAPP operations in 
found 
accordance  with 
procurement processes to be partially satisfactory. A summary of the assessment is found in Table 1. 
IFAD  procurement  guidelines  and  handbook.  The  assessment 
the 
Table 1: Summary of Procurement Risks /Findings and Actions (Risk Mitigation Matrix) 
Major findings 
Actions proposed 
Responsibility  Targeted date 
Inadequate procurement 
planning and monitoring and 
follow-up of procurement 
activities. 
a)  Make procurement planning a requirement as part of the 
annual work plan and budget and involve procurement 
officers in planning. The first 18-month procurement plan 
will be adopted from the project design document and 
amended as appropriate following the IFAD recommended 
format. 
b)  IFAD will provide training to procurement staff in the 
preparation and updating and monitoring of procurement 
plans in the IFAD recommended format. 
c)  Make the use of simplified procurement plans mandatory for 
use in the local authorities. 
Programme 
Coordinator and 
Procurement 
Officer. 
During Project 
implementation. 
Lack of capacity in 
procurement data 
management and 
maintenance of procurement 
audit trail at districts. 
Lack of experience in 
contract administration and 
management. 
a)  Procurement clinic on procurement records keeping to be 
provided to procurement staff of the FARMSE by IFAD at 
start up and during implementation by implementation 
support missions. 
Programme 
Coordinator and 
Procurement 
Officer. 
At start up 
workshop and 
during Project 
implementation. 
b)  As part of implementation readiness, IFAD will facilitate 
development of a checklist of procurement records that 
must be on each procurement file and make it a filing 
requirement. 
Provide training to staff in contract management. 
IFAD. 
At start-up. 
12.  Under FARMSE procurement methods will differ as it relates to the spending thresholds found 
in Table 2. 
133 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement arrangements 
Table 2:  Procurement Thresholds* 
Threshold 
USD 
Procurement Method 
Up to 10,000 
Request for Quotation (RFQ) using pre-qualified list. 
Goods 
>10,000 -  200,000 
National  Competitive  Bidding  (NCB)  prior  review  for  goods  or  equipment 
contracts with a value of USD 50,000 and above. 
>200,000 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB). Prior review by IFAD 
Up to 10,000 
Least  Cost  Selection  (LCS)  -  Other  methods  such  as  Fixed  Budget  and 
Quality Based Selection (QBS) may be used depending on the assignment. 
Services 
>10,000 – 20,000 
Quality and Cost Based selection (QCBS) 
>20,000 – 100,000 
QCBS- Expression of Interest/ Prior review by IFAD for services of value of 
USD 50,000 and above 
>100,000 
QCBS- Expression of Interest/ International advertisement and Prior review 
by IFAD  
Up to 50,000 
Request for Quotation (RFQ) using prequalified list. 
Works 
>50,000 - 1,000,000 
NCB and prior review for works of USD 100,000 and above. 
>1,000,000 
ICB and prior review. 
*All goods, services and works procured through direct contracting will require IFAD prior review. 
13.  Procurement  organisation  structure.  FARMSE  procurement  will  be  managed  by  a 
Procurement  Officer  at  PMU.  A  Procurement  Officer  will  be  responsible  to  the  Programme 
Coordinator.  He/she  will  handle  all  procurement  aspects  of  FARMSE.  The  procurement  officer  will 
undergo appropriate training in IFAD procurement procedures during inception phase. 
14.  Procurement planning. Procurement planning will follow the GOM planning calendar. Due to 
the medium inherent risk ranking of the GOM procurement systems, IFAD prior review thresholds for 
FARMSE will be the equivalent of USD 50,000 for goods, services and works over the equivalent of 
USD 100,000. This may be reviewed depending on changing circumstances and on the performance 
of the project during implementation 
15.  The  procurement  plan  for  each  year  will  be  consistent  with  the  project’s AWPB  and  its  target 
date  of  implementation  including  list  of  procurement  of  works,  goods,  and  services  to  be  procured 
under  the  project  yearly  with  estimated  cost  and  method  of  procurement  detailed  in  appropriate 
formats for each budget year. Items procured outside the procurement plan and the related AWPB will 
be declared misprocurement and the related expenditure will be ineligible for financing from the grant 
proceeds. 
16.  To  ensure  all  required  procurement milestone  steps  are  given  due  attention,  the  procurement 
plan template in the IFAD procurement handbook will be adopted. The first Procurement Plan (PP) will 
cover  requirements  of  18  months  with  subsequent  plans  covering  12  months.  The  PP  will  require 
IFAD  No  Objection  when  a  new  plan  is  prepared  or  a  new  procurement  item  is  included  into  an 
already  approved  PP.  The  PP  will  require  constant  updating  to  reflect  any  changes  in  procurement 
status and new procurement actions. 
17.  The Secretary to Treasury will delegate powers to PMU to procure, and will appoint an Internal 
Procurement  Committee  (IPC)  comprised  of  officers  from  MoFEDP  and  PMU.  The  IPC  will  be  the 
overall approval authority as it will approve: i) all procurement plans; ii) draft advertisements and other 
bidding documents; iii) specific terms and conditions relating to contract amounts, completion periods, 
stages,  and  conditions  of  part  payments;  iv)  all  the  contracts  above  US$10,000  (or  as  shall  be 
specified  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower);  and  v)  variations/amendments  of  contracts  that  have  been 
cleared. 
134 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement arrangements 
IFAD  Procurement  guidelines.  All 
18.  FARMSE  procurement  will  follow  the  methods  provided  for  in  the  public  procurement  act  and 
regulations  and 
International  Competitive  Bidding  (ICB) 
procurements  will  be  carried  out  and  managed  centrally  at  the  PMU.  National  Competitive  Bidding 
(NCB) and local shopping may be carried out at the district level in case bulking opportunities may not 
be feasible at the PMU. In this regard, any implementing agency must submit PPs for inclusion in the 
consolidated FARMSE PP. Efforts should be made by the Procurement Officer to ensure that the best 
contract  packaging  possible,  including  consideration  of  what  lots  can  be  bulked  in  a  package  for 
which it is possible to find a supplier or bulking opportunities. 
19.  The  consolidated  PP  will  be  submitted  together  with  the  AWPB  to  the  Programme  Steering 
Committee for approval and thereafter to MoFEPD for inclusion in the annual Procurement Plan and 
later to IFAD for a No Objection as part of the FARMSE project AWPB. 
20.  Bidding Documents: The conduct of a transparent and successful procurement is dependent 
on the quality of bidding documents. Thus, to guard against misprocurements, it will be essential that 
bid documents are appropriately prepared. Under FARMSE, the GOM standard bid documents will be 
used  and  adapted  to  suit  each  specific  procurement  item.  IFAD  clearance  of  the  Standard  Bidding 
Documents  under  FARMSE  will  be  a  requirement.  For  ICB,  the  World  Bank’s  Standard  bidding 
document will be used. 
21.  All procurement financed from proceeds of the loan and grant will be exempt from national and 
local  duties  and  taxes.  All  procurement  will  be  executed  only  against  approved  PPs  and  AWPBs, 
specifying items to be procured, responsibility for the  procurement and the appropriate procurement 
methods. IFAD missions and annual  external audits  will, on a sample basis review the procurement 
processes including bid documents. A detailed procurement cycle will be included in the PIM. 
22.  Selection  of  consultants.  Consultants  will  be  selected  using  the  Quality  and  Cost  Based 
Selection method in most cases. In special cases as specified in the Procurement Plan, the following 
methods  could  be  used:  i)  Quality-Based  Selection;  ii)  Least-Cost  Selection;  iii)  Selection  Based  on 
the Consultants’ Qualifications; and iv) ICB procedures will be applied for contracts estimated above 
USD  100,000.  Contracts  estimated  at  less  than  USD  50,000  will  be  awarded  through  NCB 
procedures. Shopping procedures will be applied for services below USD 10,000.  
23.  At the beginning of each year, the PMU will submit its proposed staff training, workshops, and 
study tours plan in the form of an annual action plan for the coming year, to be reviewed by IFAD as 
part of its No Objection to the AWPB. The plan will indicate the persons or groups to be trained, the 
type  of  training  to  be  provided,  indicative  learning  outcomes,  the  provider  and  the  location  of  the 
training, and its estimated total cost.   
24.  Contract  Management.  The  PMU  will  be  held  responsible  for  overall  contract  management, 
including: i) monitoring of performance of the implementing agencies and the local authorities; and ii) 
establishing  contract  management  systems.  The  PMU  contract  management  system  will  include:  i) 
management of contract start-up issues; ii) opening and updating a contracts register; iii) monitoring 
of  contract  implementation;  iv)  claims  management;  v)  contract  amendments;  and  vi)  contract 
completion. Details for these responsibilities will be included in the PIM. 
25.  Procurement  records  shall  include  the  rationale  for  method  of  procurement,  solicitation 
document including TOR/ specifications/bid documents, selection of the contract type, advertisement, 
record  of  sale  of  bids,  record  of  receipt  of  bids,  record  of  opening  of  bids,  evaluation  minutes  and 
report,  the  justification  for  the  award,  award  letter,  acceptance  letter,  contract,  and  other 
correspondences related to the procurement. This is consistent with  section 27 (1) – (4) of the GOM 
Public  Procurement  Act  which  require  procuring  entities  to  maintain  records  of  its  procurement 
proceedings, including decisions taken and the reasons for them and that such records shall be kept 
for  a  period  of  not  less  than  five  years  from  the  date  of  completion  of  the  procurement,  or  under 
special circumstances be kept beyond the period specified in that section in the manner and duration 
prescribed in the regulations. A checklist for the key information to be included in a procurement file 
135 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement arrangements 
will  be  included  with  more  details  in  the  PIM.  Related  legal  requirements  will  be  included  in  the 
Financing Agreement and the Letter to the Borrower. 
It should be noted that whereas the Public Procurement Act requires storage of documents for 
26. 
five years, IFAD requirement as provided for in the General Conditions is 10 years. In this case, IFAD 
requirements as contained in the General Conditions will prevail. 
136 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme cost and financing 
Appendix 9:  Programme cost and financing 
I. 
Introduction 
1. 
This  appendix  describes  the  assumptions  underlying  the  estimation  of  programme  costs  and 
financing  plan  for  the  Facility  to  Assist  Rural  Markets,  Smallholders,  and  Enterprises  (FARMSE). 
Detailed tables are annexed to this appendix. 
2. 
FARMSE  will  be  implemented over the seven-year period starting from mid-2018. Costs have 
been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing at the time of the first and final design missions that 
took place in late 2016 and 2017.  
II. 
Key assumptions 
3. 
Programme duration. The Programme implementation period will be seven years starting from 
around  July  2018. The  Programme  completion  and  closure  dates  will  be  December  2024  and  June 
2025, respectively.  
Programme  structure.  The  programme  has 
4. 
technical  and  one  non-technical 
components:  (a)  Graduation  of  Ultra-Poor  Households;  (b)  Support  to  Financial  Innovation  and 
Outreach;  (c)  Strategic  Partnerships,  Knowledge  Generation  and  Policy;  and  (d)  Programme 
Management  and  Coordination.  Details  of  each  component  are  described  in  the  relevant  Working 
Papers. 
three 
5. 
Inflation. Largely due to negative climate events (droughts, dry spells and erratic rainfall) which 
significantly increased food inflation, an average local inflation rate over the past five years remained 
above 20 per cent. The inflation rate fell to 14.9 per cent in April 2017 in response to the Government 
interventions  in  stabilization  of  maize  prices  and  tight  monetary  policies  that  decelerated  both  food 
and  non-food  inflation  rates.  The  Economic  Intelligence  Unit  (EIU)  forecasts  further  deceleration  of 
inflation rates to reach 8.1 per cent in 2021 provided that the Government’s commitment to tight fiscal 
policy  will  remain  unchanged  and  continued  stabilization  of  currency  outlook.  The  forecast  however 
assumes no negative climatic events and no appreciation in US dollar. Measured in Consumer Price 
Index (CPI), annual average local inflation rates expected to be around 9.9 per cent in 2018, 9.2 per 
cent in 2019, 8.6 per cent in 2020 and 8.1 per cent in 2021. Furthermore, the EIU forecasts that the 
US  CPI  will  decelerate  from  its  current  rate  at  2.5  per  cent  (2017)  to  1.9  per  cent  in  2021.  These 
foreign and local inflation rates projections are used in the programme costing.   
6. 
Exchange rate. At the time of the final design mission, an average official exchange rate was 
recorded at Malawian Kwacha (MKW) 720 =USD 1.0. This exchange rate was used to convert 2017 
unit prices from MKW to USD. An exchange rate forecast of the EIU was used for the period of 2018- 
2020. The forecast suggests a further Kwacha depreciation against the USD reaching MKW 905 per 
USD 1.0 by 2020. Table 1 below presents the local and foreign inflation and exchange rates used for 
the analysis. 
Table 1. Inflation and Exchange Rates 
137 
Up toProgramme Start2018201920202021202220232024Inflation (in %'s) Annual rates Local 7.09.98.68.18.18.18.18.1Foreign 1.02.11.31.71.91.91.91.9Exchange rates (Local/Foreign) Rates actually used 720.0792.2850.8908.1964.31,023.01,085.31,151.3Constant purchasing parity rates 720.0792.2850.8908.1964.31,023.01,085.31,151.3_________________________________\a Yearly values are within Each Project YearSource: a. Economic Intelligence Unit, Country Report: Malawi, August 2017, United Kingdomb. World Bank, Malawi Economic Monitor May 2017. Harnessing the Urban Economy, 2017, Lilonwe, Malawi 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme cost and financing 
7. 
Unit  costs.  The  Programme  cost  is  expressed  in  2017  constant  prices.  Costs  of  goods, 
services and consultants are based on costs recorded in ongoing contracts and on prevailing market 
prices. Salary rates of national staff are based on the current salary levels of RLEEP and PRIDE staff. 
8. 
Physical  and  price  contingencies.  Physical  contingencies  of  5  per  cent  are  applied  to  all 
costs  except  social  cash  transfers,  vehicles  and  studies,  consultancies  and  salaries.  Price 
contingencies are based on the forecasted annual local and foreign inflation rates, and applied to all 
cost items. 
9. 
Taxes  and  duties.  Current  Value  Added  Tax  (VAT)  rate  at  a  16.5  per  cent  is  applied  to  all 
goods, services and inputs. Imported goods, services and inputs will be subject to import duties and 
excises  in  the  range  of  41.5  per  cent  and  96.5  per  cent.  Highest  import  duties  and  excises  will  be 
applied  to  vehicles  at  96.5  per  cent  inclusive  of  import  duty  of  25  per  cent,  import  excise  of  55  per 
cent, and VAT of 16.5 per cent. No income taxes on international technical assistance are assumed 
because of short-term nature of their assignments. Social insurance charges at 15 per cent applied to 
salaries  of  national  staff  of  the  Programme  Management  Unit.  As  training  activities  will  involve 
purchase  of  goods  and  services,  a  5  per  cent  of  training  costs  assumed  to  be  in  taxes.  Taxes  and 
duties applied in the programme costing are summarized in Table 2. 
Table 2: Taxes, duties and foreign exchange by expenditure category 
Expenditure category 
Civil works 
Vehicles (3000 cc and above) 
Other Equipment and Materials 
Studies and consultancies 
Training 
Co-funding 
Operations and maintenance 
Salaries and allowances 
% 
Taxes 
16.5 
96.5 
30 
16.5 
5 
0 
16.5 
15 
%  
Duty/Taxes 
0 
17 
55 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
% foreign  
 exchange 
50 
60 
20 
50 
20 
50 
10 
0 
10.  Social cash transfers.  The Government is expected to contribute to  implementation costs of 
Ultra-poor graduation models under the component 1. Total amount of the contribution, which will be 
directly paid by the Government to ultra-poor households, is estimated at USD 3.1 million.     
III. 
Programme Costs Summary 
11.  Total  programme  cost  inclusive  of  price  and  physical  contingencies,  duties  and  taxes,  is 
estimated at USD  57.7 million. The cost includes a  base cost of USD  54.8 million and physical  and 
price contingencies of USD 2.9 million. The programme cost comprises of USD 20.7 million  in  local 
costs,  USD  28.2  million  in  foreign  exchange  costs,  and  USD  8.8  million  in  taxes  and  duties. 
Investment  costs  represent  93  per  cent  of  the  base  costs,  with  recurrent  costs  accounting  for  the 
remaining  7  per  cent.  Programme management  and  coordination  costs  account  10  per  cent  of  total 
programme costs.  
12.  A summary breakdown of programme costs by components is presented in Table 3.   
Table 3: Programme Cost by Components (USD ’000) 
13.  The Programme’s  summary  and detailed cost tables  are presented respectively in Annexes 1 
and 2 to this Working Paper. 
138 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD '000) Totals Including Contingencies18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 8992,4063,7064,3553,2621,1782315,8292. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 1536,2504,6885,8185,6667,0084,44934,0323. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 292193547393511751,8144. Programme Management and Coordination 8527978498238988559846,057Total PROJECT COSTS 1,9069,5459,43511,54310,2199,5525,53157,731 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme cost and financing 
IV. 
Financing Plan 
14.  FARMSE  will  be  financed  by  the  Government  of  Malawi  (GOM),  IFAD,  and  private  sector 
participants. The Government’s contribution is estimated at USD 9.6 million (17%) out of which about 
USD  3.1  million  (5%)  will  be  financed  from  its  Social  Cash  Transfer  fund  and  USD  6.5  million  will 
finance taxes and some duties (11%)147.    
15. 
IFAD  will  finance  USD  42.0  million  (73%)  of  the  programme  costs  to  be  equally  distributed 
between  grants  and  loans. An  IFAD  loan  of  USD  21.00 million  (36%  of  the  total  programme  costs), 
would finance: 34 per cent of the Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households component (USD 5.3 million), 
36  per  cent  of  the  Support  to  Financial  Innovation  and  Outreach  component  (USD  13.3 million),  42 
per cent of Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy component (USD 0.8 million); 
and 43 per cent of Project Management and Coordination (USD 2.6 million).  
16.  An IFAD  grant  of USD 21.0 million (36%  of the total  programme costs) would finance:  34 per 
cent  of  the  Graduation  of  Ultra-Poor  Households  component  (USD  5.3 million),  36  per  cent  of  the 
Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach component (USD 13.3 million), 42 per cent of Strategic 
Partnerships,  Knowledge  Generation,  and  Policy  component  (USD  0.8  million);  and  43  per  cent  of 
Project Management and Coordination (USD 2.6 million). 
Local private sector participants  are  expected to contribute USD 6.1 million (11%) through in-
17. 
kind and cash contributions to sub-projects financed under the Innovation and Outreach Facility.  
18.  The  programme  cost  does  not  include  contributions  of  any  potential  partner  in  Graduation  of 
Ultra-Poor Households component as this contribution will be implemented as parallel financing. 
19.  Programme Financing Plan by components and subcomponents are presented in Table 4.  
Table 4: Programme Financing Plan by Components (USD ‘000) 
20.  Expenditure  accounts  and  rules.  The  expenditure  accounts  and  financing  rules  (total 
allocation net of taxes) are summarised in Table 5 below. 
147 Under the current practice, portions of taxes and duties in the programme costs are reimbursed by the government. 
However, duties and import excises are not reimbursed. This has been taken into account when preparing financing plan.  
139 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Components by Financiers GovtGovt cashIFADPrivate(USD '000) taxestransferIFAD LoanGrantSectorTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmount1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 2,0943,0595,3375,337-15,8292. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 3,316-12,28312,2836,15134,0323. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 289-763763-1,8144. Programme Management and Coordination 822-2,6182,618-6,057Total PROJECT COSTS 6,5203,05921,00021,0006,15157,731 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme cost and financing 
Table 5: Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (USD’ 000) 
140 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Expenditure Accounts by Financiers GovtGovt cashIFADPrivate(USD '000) taxestransferIFAD LoanGrantSectorTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountI. Investment Costs A. Vehicles 49-125125-300B. Equipment and Materials 11-2727-65C. Goods, Services and Inputs 4,681-11,84611,846-28,373D. Studies and consultancies 1,149-7,1697,1696,15121,638E. Trainings and Workshops 13-124124-262F. Grants&Subsidies -3,059---3,059Total Investment Costs 5,9043,05919,29119,2916,15153,696II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance 122-308308-738B. Salaries and allowances 495-1,4011,401-3,297Total Recurrent Costs 616-1,7091,709-4,035Total PROJECT COSTS 6,5203,05921,00021,0006,15157,731 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Annex 1: Summary cost tables 
Table 1: Programme Components Summary 
141 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise (MK Million)(USD '000)Components Project Cost Summary %% Total%% TotalForeignBaseForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 6,3444,34110,68541278,8116,02914,84041272. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 10,73512,78923,523546014,90917,76232,67154603. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 5056961,2025837029671,6695834. Programme Management and Coordination 2,5001,5314,03138103,4732,1265,5993810Total BASELINE COSTS 20,08419,35739,4414910027,89526,88454,77949100Physical Contingencies 1672330-23103330-Price Contingencies 6,8605,78312,64346321,5841,3362,920465Total PROJECT COSTS 26,96125,14652,1074813229,50128,23057,73149105 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 2: Expenditure Accounts Programme Cost Summary 
142 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise (MK Million)(USD '000)Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary %% Total%% TotalForeignBaseForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles 4216720980158232290801B. Equipment and Materials 9374680-13516480-C. Goods, Services and Inputs 9,4519,45118,903504813,12713,12726,2545048D. Studies and consultancies 5,7939,52615,31962398,04513,23121,2766239E. Trainings and Workshops 1383517320-1924824020-F. Grants&Subsidies 2,106-2,106-52,925-2,925-5Total Investment Costs 17,53919,21636,755529324,36026,68851,0495293II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance 329141470301457196652301B. Salaries and allowances 2,216-2,216-63,078-3,078-6Total Recurrent Costs 2,5451412,686573,5351963,73057Total BASELINE COSTS 20,08419,35739,4414910027,89526,88454,77949100Physical Contingencies 1672330-23103330-Price Contingencies 6,8605,78312,64346321,5841,3362,920465Total PROJECT COSTS 26,96125,14652,1074813229,50128,23057,73149105 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 3: Expenditure Accounts by Components (USD’000) 
Table 4: Programme Components by Year (USD’000) 
143 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Support toStrategicExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies GraduationFinancialPartnerships,Programme(USD '000) ofInnovationKnowledgeManagementUltra-PoorandGeneration,andHouseholdsOutreachand PolicyCoordinationTotal I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles ---300300B. Equipment and Materials ---6565C. Goods, Services and Inputs 11,59416,779--28,373D. Studies and consultancies 1,06516,5751,7212,27721,638E. Trainings and Workshops 110-9358262F. Grants&Subsidies 3,059---3,059Total Investment Costs 15,82933,3541,8142,70053,696II. Recurrent Costs A. Operations and maintenance ---738738B. Salaries and allowances -679-2,6193,297Total Recurrent Costs -679-3,3574,035Total PROJECT COSTS 15,82934,0321,8146,05757,731  Taxes 2,0945,6052898228,809Foreign Exchange 6,45818,4241,0512,29728,230Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD '000) Totals Including Contingencies18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households 8992,4063,7064,3553,2621,1782315,8292. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 1536,2504,6885,8185,6667,0084,44934,0323. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy 292193547393511751,8144. Programme Management and Coordination 8527978498238988559846,057Total PROJECT COSTS 1,9069,5459,43511,54310,2199,5525,53157,731 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 5: Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD ‘000) 
Table 6:  Financing Plan  
144 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Disbursement Accounts by Financiers GovtGovt cashIFADPrivate(USD '000) taxestransferIFAD LoanGrantSectorTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmount1. Works ------2. Vehicles 49-125125-3003. Equipment and Materials 11-2727-654. Studies and consultancies 1,149-7,1697,1696,15121,6385. Trainings and Workshops 13-124124-2626. Goods, Service and Inputs 4,681-11,84611,846-28,3737. Grants & Subsidies -3,059---3,0598. Operations and Maintenance 122-308308-7389. Salaries and allowances 495-1,4011,401-3,297Total PROJECT COSTS 6,5203,05921,00021,0006,15157,731Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Financing Plan (USD '000) ForeignLocalTotalPercent Govt taxes 06,5206,52011.3 Govt cash transfer -3,0593,0595.3 IFAD Loan 13,8997,10121,00036.4 IFAD Grant 13,8997,10121,00036.4 Private Sector 4325,7196,15110.7Total 28,23029,50157,731100.0 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 7. Local/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers (USD ‘000) 
145 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Local/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers GovtGovt cashIFADPrivate(USD '000) taxestransferIFAD LoanGrantSectorTotalAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountI.   Foreign 0-13,89913,89943228,230II.  Local (Excl. Taxes) 03,0597,1017,1013,43020,692III. Taxes 6,520---2,2898,809Total Project 6,5203,05921,00021,0006,15157,731 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 8. Financing Plan by Years (USD ‘000) 
146 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Financing of Investment/Recurrent Costs and Financial Charges by Year (USD '000) Financing18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25TotalI. Investment Costs  Govt taxes 1427101,0581,3021,2008925995,904 Govt cash transfer 4981,0121,027523---3,059 IFAD Loan 3772,8293,0714,0353,7473,3091,92319,291 IFAD Grant 3772,8293,0714,0353,7473,3091,92319,291 Private Sector -1,5095421,0501,0001,5095426,151Total Investment Costs 1,3958,8898,76910,9459,6949,0184,98753,696II. Recurrent Costs  Govt taxes 7810010291808283616 Govt cash transfer -------- IFAD Loan 2172782822532232262301,709 IFAD Grant 2172782822532232262301,709 Private Sector --------Total Recurrent Costs 5116566665985265345444,035III. Financial Charges  Govt taxes -------- Govt cash transfer -------- IFAD Loan -------- IFAD Grant -------- Private Sector --------Total Financial Charges --------Total Financing of Costs 1,9069,5459,43511,54310,2199,5525,53157,731 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Annex 2: Detailed cost tables 
Table 1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households Component: Physical Quantities and Base Cost    
147 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Table 1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households Detailed Costs (USD '000) QuantitiesBase CostUnit18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total I. Investment Costs A. Stock-taking of graduation models to be rolled out Stock-taking exercise and identification of models Lumpsum1------1250------250B. Roll-out of effective graduation models 1. Training of staff Session---1015151050---203030201002. Qualitative targeting or gender study Study---1---1---50---503. Implementation of chosen graduation models /a a. Implementation of chosen graduation models: Step 1 /b Participant7,50015,00015,0007,500---45,000488975975488---2,925b. Implementation of chosen graduation models: Step 2-5 /c Participant-5,00010,00014,00012,0004,000-45,000-1,2002,4003,3602,880960-10,800Subtotal 4882,1753,3753,8482,880960-13,725Subtotal 4882,1753,3753,9182,9109902013,875C. Technical Assistance for Implementation of Graduation Models Unallocated TA Lumpsum0.20.20.20.20.10.1-11361361361366868-680Gender and targeting Lumpsum22222--1077777--35Subtotal 1431431431437568-715Total 8812,3183,5184,0612,9851,0582014,840 _________________________________\a targeting 15,000 households (cost is indicative / average and could vary between model(s) chosen)\b Cost of TA associated with the implementation of Step 1 (cash transfer) of the model will be covered by GIZ through parallel financing\c targeting 15,000 households (cost is indicative / average and could vary between model(s) chosen) 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 2. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households Component: Base and Total Cost    
148 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Table 1. Graduation of Ultra-Poor Households Detailed Costs (USD '000) Base CostTotals Including Contingencies18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total I. Investment Costs A. Stock-taking of graduation models to be rolled out Stock-taking exercise and identification of models 250------250255------255B. Roll-out of effective graduation models 1. Training of staff ---20303020100---213333231102. Qualitative targeting or gender study ---50---50---54---543. Implementation of chosen graduation models /a a. Implementation of chosen graduation models: Step 1 /b 488975975488---2,9254981,0121,027523---3,059b. Implementation of chosen graduation models: Step 2-5 /c -1,2002,4003,3602,880960-10,800-1,2452,5283,6033,1471,069-11,594Subtotal 4882,1753,3753,8482,880960-13,7254982,2573,5564,1263,1471,069-14,653Subtotal 4882,1753,3753,9182,9109902013,8754982,2573,5564,2013,1801,1022314,817C. Technical Assistance for Implementation of Graduation Models Unallocated TA 1361361361366868-6801391411431467476-719Gender and targeting 77777--3577788--37Subtotal 1431431431437568-7151461481511538276-756Total 8812,3183,5184,0612,9851,0582014,8408992,4063,7064,3553,2621,1782315,829 _________________________________\a targeting 15,000 households (cost is indicative / average and could vary between model(s) chosen)\b Cost of TA associated with the implementation of Step 1 (cash transfer) of the model will be covered by GIZ through parallel financing\c targeting 15,000 households (cost is indicative / average and could vary between model(s) chosen) 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 3. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach Component: Physical Quantities and Base Cost    
149 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Table 2. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach Detailed Costs (USD '000) QuantitiesBase CostUnit18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total I. Investment Costs A. Community Based Financial Organizations Support 1. Mapping of existing CBFOs Engagement of Service Providers for mapping exercise Lumpsum-0.50.5----1-125125----2502. Building and prospering CBFOs /a Engagement of Service Provider for CBFO building and prospering Group-2,0002,8502,8502,8502,8502,74316,143-1,5122,1552,1552,1552,1552,07412,2043. Formation of new groups /b Engagement of Service Provider for formation of new groups Group-6008808808808808805,000-3605285285285285283,000Subtotal -1,9972,8082,6832,6832,6832,60215,454B. Enhancing Innovation and Rural Outreach of Financial Service Providers 1. International Technical Assistance /c Person year0.5111110.5675150150150150150759002. Window 1: Market research, feasibility studies and exchange visits /d Lumpsum-73647330-4381883752504381881,8753. Window 2: Innovation and pilot testing /e Lumpsum-42334218-4002003003004002001,8004. Window 3: Outreach /f Lumpsum-31223112-3,0001,0002,0002,0003,0001,00012,000Total Investment Costs 755,9854,3455,5085,3836,6704,06432,029II. Recurrent Costs A. Recurrent cost of Component 2.1 1. In-country travel for supervision and implementation support /g Person day-5005005005005005003,000-303030303030180B. Recurrent cost of Component 2.2 1. Chief Technical Advisor Person year0.5110.5---37515015075---4502. In-country travel for supervision and implementation support /h Person day2550505025--20023332--12Total Recurrent Costs 77183183108323030642Total 1526,1684,5285,6165,4146,7004,09432,671 _________________________________\a May involve engagement of multiple service providers costs are expressed in terms of number of groups to be formed/stengthened\b May involve engagement of multiple service providers costs are expressed in terms of number of groups to be formed/stengthened\c Includes TA for management of the Innovation Facility, as well as start-up related TA\d Private sector contribution will be in cash and/or in-kind.\e Private sector contribution will be in cash and/or in-kind.\f Private sector contribution will be in cash and/or in-kind.\g Per diem costs inclusive of transport and lodging\h Per diem costs inclusive of transport and lodging 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 4. Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach Component: Base and Total Cost    
150 
Republic of MalawiFacility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and EnterpriseTable 2. Support to Financial Innovation and OutreachDetailed Costs(USD '000)Base CostTotals Including Contingencies18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total I. Investment CostsA. Community Based Financial Organizations Support1. Mapping of existing CBFOsEngagement of Service Providers for mapping exercise-125125----250-130132----2612. Building and prospering CBFOs /aEngagement of Service Provider for CBFO building and prospering-1,5122,1552,1552,1552,1552,07412,204-1,5692,2702,3112,3552,3992,35313,2573. Formation of new groups /bEngagement of Service Provider for formation of new groups-3605285285285285283,000-3745565665775885993,260Subtotal-1,9972,8082,6832,6832,6832,60215,454-2,0732,9582,8772,9322,9872,95216,779B. Enhancing Innovation and Rural Outreach of Financial Service Providers1. International Technical Assistance /c751501501501501507590075150150150150150759002. Window 1: Market research, feasibility studies and exchange visits /d-4381883752504381881,875-4381883752504381881,8753. Window 2: Innovation and pilot testing /e-4002003003004002001,800-4002003003004002001,8004. Window 3: Outreach /f-3,0001,0002,0002,0003,0001,00012,000-3,0001,0002,0002,0003,0001,00012,000Total Investment Costs755,9854,3455,5085,3836,6704,06432,029756,0604,4955,7025,6326,9754,41533,354II. Recurrent CostsA. Recurrent cost of Component 2.11. In-country travel for supervision and implementation support /g-303030303030180-313232333334195B. Recurrent cost of Component 2.21. Chief Technical Advisor7515015075---4507715615880---4712. In-country travel for supervision and implementation support /h23332--1223332--13Total Recurrent Costs7718318310832303064278190193116343334679Total1526,1684,5285,6165,4146,7004,09432,6711536,2504,6885,8185,6667,0084,44934,032 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 6. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy Component: Physical Quantities and Base Cost    
151 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Table 3. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy Detailed Costs (USD '000) QuantitiesBase CostUnit18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total I. Investment Costs A. Rural finance policy development, policy support and dissemination 1. Development and distribution of good rural finance policy Lumpsum-0.150.150.150.40.10.051-75757520050255002. Study on the effectiveness and impact of CMBFI models Lumpsum-----1-1-----349-3493. Support for CBFO sector data aggregation Lumpsum---0.50.5--1---100100--2004. Knowledge dissemination workshops Workshop-22222212-44444424Subtotal -7979179304403291,073B. Financial service providers and agro-industry sector development, policy and research support 1. Knowledge management on key innovations/lessons Lumpsum--0.250.250.250.25-1--19191919-752. Development of training modules related to rural and agricultural finance Lumpsum--0.50.5---1--7575---1503. Feasibility study for Microfinance APEX fund Study---1---1---200---2004. Training for MoFED staff /a Session111111172222222145. Knowledge dissemination workshops Workshop-22222212-44444424Subtotal 2610030025256463C. Support for poverty graduation policy and systems 1. Development of policy, guidance and supporting material (Graduation) Lumpsum---0.250.250.250.251---272727271092. Knowledge Dissemination Workshops Workshop-22222212-44444424Subtotal -4431313131133Total 289183510360459661,669 _________________________________\a rural and agricultural finance training 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 7. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy Component: Base and Total Cost    
152 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Table 3. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy Detailed Costs (USD '000) Base CostTotals Including ContingenciesUnit18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total I. Investment Costs A. Rural finance policy development, policy support and dissemination 1. Development and distribution of good rural finance policy Lumpsum-7575752005025500-78798021956285402. Study on the effectiveness and impact of CMBFI models Lumpsum-----349-349-----389-3893. Support for CBFO sector data aggregation Lumpsum---100100--200---107109--2174. Knowledge dissemination workshops Workshop-44444424-44444526Subtotal -7979179304403291,073-8283192332449331,171B. Financial service providers and agro-industry sector development, policy and research support 1. Knowledge management on key innovations/lessons Lumpsum--19191919-75--20202021-812. Development of training modules related to rural and agricultural finance Lumpsum--7575---150--7980---1593. Feasibility study for Microfinance APEX fund Study---200---200---214---2144. Training for MoFED staff /a Session2222222142222222155. Knowledge dissemination workshops Workshop-44444424-44444526Subtotal 26100300252564632610532127287496C. Support for poverty graduation policy and systems 1. Development of policy, guidance and supporting material (Graduation) Lumpsum---27272727109---293030311202. Knowledge Dissemination Workshops Workshop-44444424-44444526Subtotal -4431313131133-4434343535146Total 289183510360459661,669292193547393511751,814 _________________________________\a rural and agricultural finance training 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 8. Programme Management and Coordination: Base Cost   
153 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Table 4. Programme Management and Coordination Detailed Costs (USD '000) QuantitiesBase CostUnit18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles, Equipment and Materials 1. Vehicles a. 4 W vehicle Unit1------190------90b. Pick ups Unit3---1--4150---50--200Subtotal 240---50--2902. Equipment a. Computer set with software and printer Set10---2--1220---4--24b. Multifunctional printer/coopier/scanner Set1------15------5c. Financial & accounting software Set1------110------10d. Projector Set1------11------1e. Digital camera with GPS Coordinates Unit3------32------2Subtotal 37---4--413. Office furniture /a Set15------1523------23Subtotal 300---54--354B. Studies and Workshops 1. Programme M&E a. Baseline Survey Study1------120------20b. Mid-term review Unit--1----1--38----38c. M&E and supervision Unit11111117555555535d. Programme completion report preparation Unit------11------100100Subtotal 255435551051932. Workshops a. Start up workshop Workshop1------12------2b. Implementation Review Workshops Workshop244444426488888852Subtotal 688888854Subtotal 311351131313113247C. Audit /b Unit11111117555555535D. International Technical Assistance /c Person year0.522222212.5753003003003003003001,875Total Investment Costs 4113183563183723184182,511II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries of PMU staff /d 1. Professional staff a. Programme Coordinator Person year1111111748484848484848336b. Financial Controller Person year1111111742424242424242294c. Procurement Officer Person year1111111742424242424242294d. Rural Finance/Microfinance Specialist Person year1111111742424242424242294e. CBFO Specialist Person year1111111742424242424242294f. Knowledge & Communication Officer Person year1111111742424242424242294g. Gender & Targeting Specialist Person year----------------h. M&E Specialist Person year1111111742424242424242294i. Accountant Person year1111111724242424242424168Subtotal 3243243243243243243242,2682. Support team a. Administrative & Office Assistant  /e Person year111111171212121212121284b. Driver /f Person year2222222141212121212121284Subtotal 24242424242424168Subtotal 3483483483483483483482,436B. Operating Costs 1. Per diems for in-country travels /g Person day1005005005005005005003,10063030303030301862. Office rental Month121212121212128410101010101010673. PMU office maintenance Month1212121212121284363636363636362524. Vehicle O&M + insurance Per Year33333332121212121212121147Subtotal 73979797979797652Total Recurrent Costs 4214454454454454454453,088Total 8317638017638177638635,599 _________________________________\a This includes furniture for the PCO staff and the Board/Meeting Room\b Audit will be conducted by the Government, but PMU covers operational costs of it\c Includes TA for management of the Innovation Facility, as well as start-up related TA\d Salaries are based on computations made for the design of PRIDE\e Bombines functions of receptionist. Salary computed as the minimum of the National Professional Project Support Personnel Salary Scale (Annual Gross) at Level 3. It includes a gratuity of 10%.\f Salary computed as the minimum of the National Project Support Personnel Salary Scale (Annual Gross, November 2013) at Level 1. It includes a gratuity of 10%.\g DSA is set by the Government, and is inclusive of transport and lodging 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 9:  Programme Cost and Financing 
Table 8. Programme Management and Coordination: Total Cost 
154 
Republic of Malawi Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise Table 4. Programme Management and Coordination Detailed Costs (USD '000) Base CostTotals Including Contingencies18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total18/1919/2020/2121/2222/2323/2424/25Total I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles, Equipment and Materials 1. Vehicles a. 4 W vehicle 90------9092------92b. Pick ups 150---50--200153---55--208Subtotal 240---50--290245---55--3002. Equipment a. Computer set with software and printer 20---4--2420---4--25b. Multifunctional printer/coopier/scanner 5------55------5c. Financial & accounting software 10------1010------10d. Projector 1------11------1e. Digital camera with GPS Coordinates 2------22------2Subtotal 37---4--4138---4--423. Office furniture /a 23------2323------23Subtotal 300---54--354306---59--365B. Studies and Workshops 1. Programme M&E a. Baseline Survey 20------2020------20b. Mid-term review --38----38--40----40c. M&E and supervision 555555535555556638d. Programme completion report preparation ------100100------113113Subtotal 25543555105193265455561192122. Workshops a. Start up workshop 2------22------2b. Implementation Review Workshops 488888852488999956Subtotal 688888854688999958Subtotal 311351131313113247321354141414128270C. Audit /b 555555535555556638D. International Technical Assistance /c 753003003003003003001,875773113163223283343402,028Total Investment Costs 4113183563183723184182,5114193303753414073544742,700II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries of PMU staff /d 1. Professional staff a. Programme Coordinator 4848484848484833649505151525354361b. Financial Controller 4242424242424229443444445464748316c. Procurement Officer 4242424242424229443444445464748316d. Rural Finance/Microfinance Specialist 4242424242424229443444445464748316e. CBFO Specialist 4242424242424229443444445464748316f. Knowledge & Communication Officer 4242424242424229443444445464748316g. Gender & Targeting Specialist ----------------h. M&E Specialist 4242424242424229443444445464748316i. Accountant 2424242424242416824252526262727181Subtotal 3243243243243243243242,2683313363413473543613682,4382. Support team a. Administrative & Office Assistant  /e 12121212121212841212131313131490b. Driver /f 12121212121212841212131313131490Subtotal 2424242424242416824252526262727181Subtotal 3483483483483483483482,4363553613673733803883952,619B. Operating Costs 1. Per diems for in-country travels /g 630303030303018663333343435362112. Office rental 101010101010106710101111111111763. PMU office maintenance 36363636363636252393940414142432844. Vehicle O&M + insurance 2121212121212114723232324242525166Subtotal 7397979797979765278105107109111113115738Total Recurrent Costs 4214454454454454454453,0884334664734824915005103,357Total 8317638017638177638635,5998527978498238988559846,057 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
I. 
Introduction 
1. 
The Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise (FARMSE) aims at reducing 
poverty,  improve  livelihoods  and  enhance  resilience  of  rural  household  in  sustainable  basis.  It’s 
development  objective  is  to  increase  access  to  and  use  of  sustainable  financial  services  by  rural 
households and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). To achieve this, FARMSE will invest 
in  (i)  graduation  of  around  15,000  ultra-poor  households  from  poverty  and  food  insecurity  into 
sustainable  and  self-reliant  livelihoods;  (ii)  improved  outreach  of  financial  services  and  products  by 
informal  community  based  financial  organizations  and  formal  financial  service  providers  to  around 
417,800 households who are poor, vulnerable and resilient to poverty; and (iii) strengthened national 
policies and regulations to enhance financial inclusiveness. Additionally, the FARMSE will assist the 
programme households to  address key issues that  exist in each stage of value  chains starting from 
production  to  marketing.  The  programme  investments  will  be  implemented  under  three  technical 
components that are summarized below.  
2. 
Component  1.  Graduation  of  ultra-poor  households  will  scale  up  a  cost-efficient,  effective 
and replicable graduation  model that aims to assist ultra-poor households  to graduate from poverty. 
Graduation  model  approach  consists  of  five  non-sequential  steps  that  target  ultra-poor  households 
with different interventions based on availability of household labour for productive activities. Step 1 of 
the graduation model supports labour constrained ultra-poor households with social cash transfers to 
smoothen  their  consumptions  and  training.  The  step  1  activities  will  be  implemented  by  GOM  and 
costs  will  be  financed  jointly  by  GOM  and  any  new  identified  partner(s).  Steps  2-5  of  the model  will 
support  labour  unconstrained  ultra-poor  households  with  training,  mentoring  and  financial  services 
and one-time lump-sum cash grant (called asset transfer) to invest in productive assets and working 
capital. The latter steps of the model will be financed by IFAD and GOM.  
3. 
Component  2.  Support  to  Financial  Innovation  and  Outreach  will  invest  in  increased 
outreach  of  financial  services  and  products  to  rural  population  through  (i)  expansion  and 
strengthening  of  informal  community  based  financial  organizations  such  as  Village  Saving  and 
Lending  Associations  (VSLAs)  and  (ii)  support  to  formal  financial  service  providers  (FSP).  Target 
beneficiaries  for  this  component  are  poor  but  food  secure  households,  households  vulnerable  to 
poverty and resilient households.     
4. 
Component 3. Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy will increase the 
capacity and knowledge base of rural financial sector organizations through (a) strengthening macro 
level regulatory and financial sector policy guidance and institutional capacity; (b) strengthening meso 
level  financial  sector  infrastructure  of  organizations  and  enterprises;  and  (c)  production  and 
dissemination of rural finance knowledge products.    
II.  Methodology  
Using  the  cost  benefit  analysis  methodology,  the  financial  and  economic  analysis  examines 
5. 
financial  and  economic  viability  of  the  programme  investments  in  graduation  models  and  improved 
outreach  of  financial  services  and  products  to  rural  population  measured  through  gross  and  net 
margins,  returns  to  family  labour,  internal  rate  of  return  (IRR)  and  net  present  value  (NPV)  of 
incremental benefits.  
6. 
The financial analysis  assessed potential incremental  costs and  benefits projected to (i) ultra-
poor labour unconstrained households participating in graduation model who would receive capacity 
building support and asset transfer funds to be invested in productive assets and income generating 
activities;  and  (ii)  poor  but  food  insecure  households,  households  vulnerable  to  poverty  and 
households resilient to poverty whose improved access to formal and informal financial services and 
products would result in increased investments in productive and income generating activities.  
Incremental  benefits  to  the  programme  investments  are  estimated  by  comparing  the  future 
7. 
without  programme  (WoP)  and  future  with  programme  (WiP)  net  margins.  The  overall  programme 
impact  is  calculated  by  aggregating  benefits  to  the  investments  in  the  graduation  models  and  rural 
finance outreach. The benefits were assessed for a period of 16 years, a period that allows capturing 
potential  benefits  to  all  households  targeted  during  the  entire  programme  implementation  period,  at 
155 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
2017 financial prices, using economic discount rate of 5 per cent and financial discount rate of 12 per 
cent and assuming adoption rate in the rage of 30-50 per cent for all investments.  
8. 
Financial  prices  of  locally  traded  outputs  and  inputs  are  converted  into  economic  prices  by 
deducting direct agricultural subsidies and taxes and duties. Imported fertilizer are exempt from taxes 
which  had been reflected.  Financial cost of unskilled  labour is converted into economic one  using a 
shadow  wage  rate  conversion  factor  of  0.60.  The  official  exchange  rate  used  in  the  analysis  is 
Malawian  Kwacha  (MKW) 720  to  USD  1.0.  Value  Added  Tax  rate  is  16.5  per  cent,  import  duty  and 
excises for imported goods are in the range of 5.0 - 96.5 per cent.  
9. 
Sensitivity  analysis  is  conducted  to  test  robustness  of  economic  returns  of  the  programme 
investments  for  four  sensitivity  variables:  (1)  a  20  per  cent  declines  in  benefit  scopes;  (2)  a  20  per 
cent increase in the programme costs; (3) 1- and 2-year delays in programme implementation; and (4) 
a 20 per cent increases in incremental financial resources to be made available by VSLAs. 
III. Key assumptions 
10.  Beneficiaries. Total estimated number of targeted households is 432,800. This include around 
(i)  15,000  ultra-poor  households  who  would  benefit  from  the  graduation  model  interventions; 
(ii) 380,600  poor,  vulnerable  and  resilient  households  who  would  benefit  from  expansion  of  informal 
financial  services  and  products;  and  (iii)  37,200  households  from  formal  financial  services  and 
products.   
11.  Beneficiary  households are likely and/or expected to  participate in more than  one programme 
activity.  Ultra-poor  households,  for  instance,  may  graduate  from  ultra-poverty  and/or  become 
members of VSLAs. To minimise double counting, the analysis assumed that around 30 per cent of 
households  will  benefit  from  improved  access  to  informal  (component  2.2)  as  well  as  formal 
(component  2.1)  financial  services  and  products.  Please  refer  to  Table  1  for  assumptions  on  target 
beneficiaries.    
Table 1: Summary of Target Beneficiaries 
12.  Benefits. Main benefits expected from the programme investments include increased and more 
sustainable sources of household incomes, improved food security, reduced risks of distress sales of 
households’  assets  in  response  to  shocks  and  reduced  vulnerability  to  poverty.  Although  all 
households  except  ultra-poor  labour  constrained  households  are  likely  to  receive  these  benefits, 
scopes  as  well  as  benefit  accumulation  timelines  may  differ  from  one  group  to  another.  As  for  the 
labour constrained ultra-poor households,  lessons learned from the past graduation models suggest 
that these households, that are largely head by children or elderly or disabled adults, are less likely to 
graduate from poverty and require longer term social and economic assistance and labour availability 
to  achieve  it.  In  the  short  run,  potential  benefits  to  them  will  be  mainly  in  terms  of  household 
consumption  smoothening.  Because  of  this  reason  as  well  as  uncertainty  about  the  total  costs  of 
social  cash  transfer  support,  the  analysis  excluded  potential  benefits  to  the  ultra-poor  labour 
constrained households. Please refer to para 2 of Introduction section and relevant sections of Project 
Design Document (PDR).  
13.  Unquantified  benefits.  There  are  multiple  potential  programme  benefits  that  were  excluded 
from  the  analysis  because  either  they  are  unquantifiable  in  financial  terms  or  due  to  lack  of  data.  
156 
 Ultra-Poor Households  Poor Households  Vulnerable Households TOTAL:1. Graduation of ultra poor households15,000              -                        -                      15,000                 -                       -                       2.1: Community based financial organisation support-                    190,287                190,287               380,574               2.2: Financial innovation and outreach facility -                    18,600                  18,600                 37,200                 TOTAL:15,000              151,801                151,801               432,774               1. Graduation of ultra poor households15,000              -                        -                      15,000                 -                       -                       2.1: Community based financial organisation support-                    133,201                133,201               266,402               2.2: Financial innovation and outreach facility -                    9,300                    9,300                   18,600                 TOTAL:15,000              142,501                142,501               285,002               At various adoption rates and participation in multiple activitiesCOMPONENTTarget Number of Beneficiaries 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
These benefits are: (i) consumption smoothening to ultra-poor labour constrained households through 
social  cash  transfers  as  amounts  of  parallel  financing  by  any  other  potential  partner(s)  is  currently 
unknown;  (ii)  potential  interest  rate  earnings  by  VSLA member  households;  (iii)  potential  profits  and 
savings to participating FSPs resulting from a portfolio growth and reduced transaction costs; (iv) the 
potential  savings  to  borrowers/savers  through  improved  delivery  mechanisms;  and  (v)  prevented 
distress  sales  of  household  assets  by  poor  and  vulnerable  households  in  response  to  negative 
climatic or price shocks.  
14.  Potential investment priorities. Rural population of Malawi is predominantly engaged in crop 
production  (98%  of  rural  population)  and  farm  wage  employment  or  ganyu148  (48%)  followed  by  off-
farm  self-employment  (27%),  livestock  production  (23%)  and  non-farm  wage  employment  (14%)149. 
When consumption based wealth of households is considered, shares of per capita income from crop 
production  and  agricultural  wages  are  highest  for  poor  and  relative  poorer  households.  In  contrary, 
contributions  of  non-agricultural  wage  per  capita  and  non-farm  self-employment  per  capita  in  total 
household income is greater for richest households although crop and livestock incomes remains the 
determining source of income for them too.150 The analysis therefore assumed that future investment 
priorities  would  be  closely  aligned  with  the  types  of  economic  activities  that  poor  and  vulnerable 
households are currently engaged.  
15.  Labour.  In  general,  there  is  no  shortage  of  labour  for  agricultural  activities  in  rural  Malawi.  In 
terms  of  the  programme  households,  ultra-poor  labour  unconstrained  households  expected  to  have 
sufficient family labour for own farming activities and earn income through ganyu. Poor and vulnerable 
households hire labourers to supplement family labour or use animal labour during agricultural peak 
seasons.  
16.  Prices. Prices for inputs and outputs are 2017 prices collected from farmers, traders, markets 
and M&E database of RLEEP and PRIDE. The programme interventions in value chain development 
support may lead to increases in prices of outputs either through improved farm practices or improved 
access  to  markets  and  market  information.  This  is  however  expected  to  be  offset  by  increases  in 
prices  of  outputs  in  response  to  increased  demands  for  them.  Therefore,  prices  for  all  investment 
costs, agricultural inputs and outputs, except for maize, were kept constant for the entire programme 
period. 
17. 
 Maize prices that are highly sensitive to production levels. In past decade, prices went through 
dramatic fluctuations in response to climatic events such as droughts, dry spells and erratic rainfalls. 
Frequency and severity of such events continues to increase and the trend forecasted to continue in 
the future.151 The analysis attempted to capture future impacts of climatic events on maize prices by 
applying the frequency of negative climate events, scales and scope of production losses, and maize 
price volatility recorded during 2012-2015.  
18.  Loan interest rates and terms. In average, VSLAs provide loans at 10 per cent interest rate 
per month on flexible terms. An average monthly interest rate of micro-financing institutions for a six-
month loans is 14 per cent. These terms and rates were used in the analysis.    
19.  Discount  rate.  Discount  rate  in  the  financial  analysis  assumed  at  18  per  cent,  which 
corresponds  to  an  official  interest  rate  on  a  long  term  lending  set  by  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi. 
Economic discount rate  assumed at 5  per cent,  which corresponds to a  long-term growth projection 
for Malawi.152  
20.  Programme  costs.  The  financial  base  cost  of  the  programme  in  2017  prices,  inclusive  of 
physical  contingencies,  estimated  at  USD  54.8  million.  The  programme  cost  components  are 
distributed  in  the  following  proportion:  (1)  Graduation  of  ultra-poor  households  (27  per  cent); 
(2) Financial innovation and outreach (59 per cent); (3) Strategic partnerships, knowledge generation 
and  policy  (3  per  cent),  and  (4)  Project  management and  coordination  (10  per  cent).  The  economic 
base cost of the programme was estimated by removing all taxes and duties from the financial base 
cost. 
148 Ganyu is a short term employment in farms and plantations. 
149 World Bank. Jun. 2016. Malawi Poverty Assessment. World Bank Group. Washington DC.  
150 ibid 
151 World Bank. Dec. 2015. Malawi: Agricultural Sector Risk Assessment, World Bank Group, Washington DC. 
152 Economic Intelligence Unit, IMF. 
157 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
21.  Benefit scopes and accumulation phases. Adoption or success rate of 30 per cent assumed 
for households whose access to finance will be only through VSLAs based on average VSLA size and 
savings budgets. Adoption or success rate of 50 per cent applied for households who will access both 
informal  and  formal  financial  resources.  Benefit  accumulation  phases  correspond  to  the  programme 
implementation  phases  over  a  7  year  period.  Assumptions  on  the  benefit  accumulation  phases  and 
adoption rates are summarized in Table 2.  
Table 2: Beneficiary Phasing and Adoption
22.  Additional  incremental  financing.  As  discussed  above,  the  programme  will  to  invest  in 
enhanced  financial  services  and  products  to  rural  areas  through  supports  to  formal  and  informal 
financial service providers. Incremental financing that will need to be made available by these service 
providers over the programme period is estimated at USD 107 million, assuming an 80 per cent loan 
recovery rate, an average lending term of 6 month for agricultural loans, and multiple use of loans by 
some beneficiaries during the programme duration.    
Table 3. Incremental financing requirements 
23.  Data  sources.  The  indicative  investment  models  are  prepared  based  on  field  level  data  that 
represent existing and future farm management practices, crop and livestock productivity parameters, 
labour requirements, and types and costs of financial products and services provided by VSLAs and 
local  financing  institutions.  These  data  were  collected  under  the  current  IFADs  RLEEP,  PRIDE  and 
other development partners such as CARE and CRS. Additionally, statistical data of the local districts, 
monitoring  and  evaluation  data  of  ongoing  IFAD  programmes  and  projects,  and  findings  of  various 
studies conducted by research institutes and development agencies are used. 
158 
Y 1Y 2Y 3Y 4Y 5Y6Y7 TotalUltra Poor Household (Graduation) 15,000          coverage rate0%11%22%31%27%9%0%100%adoption rate50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%no. of HH-      833          1,667    2,333        2,000   667          -                      7,500 cumulative no. of HH          -              833       2,500          4,833      6,833         7,500           7,500 Poor Household (VSLA)133,201        adoption rate30%30%30%30%30%30%30%30%no. of HH-      4,914       7,050    7,050        7,050   7,050       6,847                39,960 cumulative no. of HH          -           4,914    11,964        19,013   26,063       33,113         39,960 Poor household (VSLA and FFS)18,600          coverage rate0%18%14%18%16%20%14%100%adoption rate50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%no. of HH-      1,657       1,285    1,673        1,518   1,905       1,262                  9,300 cumulative no. of HH          -           1,657       2,942          4,615      6,133         8,038           9,300 Vulnerable Household (VSLA and FFS)18,600          coverage rate0%18%14%18%16%20%14%100%adoption rate50%50%50%50%50%50%50%50%no. of HH-      1,657       1,285    1,673        1,518   1,905       1,262                  9,300 cumulative no. of HH          -           1,657       2,942          4,615      6,133         8,038           9,300 Vulnerable Household (VSLA)133,201        coverage rate0%12%18%18%18%18%17%100%adoption rate30%30%30%30%30%30%30%30%no. of HH-      4,914.00 7,050    7,050        7,050   7,050       6,847                39,960 cumulative no. of HH          -           4,914    11,964        19,013   26,063       33,113         39,960 Totals         318,602  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6  Y7 Total Number of HH          -         13,975    18,337        19,778   19,135       18,577         16,219      106,021 Total Cumulative HH          -         13,975    32,312        52,090   71,225       89,802       106,021 Project Year Target HH 12345678910111213141516TotalNumbers of householdsPoor (VSLA)hh4,914        7,050        7,050        7,050        7,050        6,847        -            -            -            39,960          Poor (VSLA &FSP)hh1,657        1,285        1,673        1,518        1,905        1,262        -            -            -            9,300            Vulnerable (VSLA)hh1,657        1,285        1,673        1,518        1,905        1,262        -            -            -            9,300            Vulnerable (VSLA&FSP)hh4,914        7,050        7,050        7,050        7,050        6,847        -            -            -            39,960          Loan requirementsPoor (VSLA)MKW/hh22,690      -            -            -            -            Poor (VSLA &FSP)MKW/hh-            -            312,233   -            -            -            -            -            -            Vulnerable (VSLA)MKW/hh137,084   445,255   611,674   82,194      -            26,105      34,364      43,685      9,507        Vulnerable (VSLA&FSP)MKW/hh618,377   396,094   -            -            -            -            -            -            -            Loan requirementTotal loan requirementMKW M3,377        7,380        10,602      8,970        8,370        10,447      8,464        9,860        7,034        672            309            503            558            366            65              76,977.64    Total loan requirementUSD M4.69          10.25        14.73        12.46        11.63        14.51        11.76        13.69        9.77          0.93          0.43          0.70          0.77          0.51          0.09          106.91           
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
IV. Financial Analysis 
a.  Production models 
24.  General.  The  analysis  developed  five  crop  and  two  livestock  production  models  to  represent 
predominant  production  activities.  Crop  models  demonstrate  intensified  production  of:  (i)  rainfed 
maize;  (ii)  rainfed  groundnuts;  (iii)  rainfed  soya  bean;  (iv)  rain-fed  potato;  and  (v)  irrigated  potato 
through investment in a low-cost treadle pump. Livestock production models demonstrate investments 
in purchase of: (i) two goats; and (ii) one dairy cow.  
25. 
In  the  WoP  situation,  the  crop  models  present  the  current  productivity  and  profitability  levels 
that  are  much  below  optimum  due  to  combination  of  factors  including  use  of  poor  quality  seeds, 
application of minimum levels of or no use of fertilizers and agrochemicals, inadequate farm practices 
and  technologies  that  do  not  respond  to  increasing  climate  shocks.  Similarly,  present  productivity 
levels  of  dairy  cow  and  goats  are  very  low  largely  because  of  poor  animal  health  and  nutrition  as 
households  have  limited  access  to  animal  feed,  animal  health  services  and  products  and  use 
inadequate  animal husbandry  practices. Limited or lack of access to financial services and products 
for  majority  of  rural  households  is  a  main  determining  factor  that  explain  afore-discussed  issues. 
Negative  climatic  events  such  as  droughts,  dry  spells  and  erratic  rainfalls  frequency  and  severity  of 
which are stubbornly increasing, is another contributing factor to steady declines in productivity levels 
leading  to  increases  in  food  insecurity  and  prices  of  major  food  crops  for  human  and  animal 
consumption.   
26. 
In  the  WiP  situation,  combination  of  improved  access  to  financial  services  and  products, 
improved  farm  practices  and  management,  climate  resilient  technologies,  and  improved  access  to 
markets  (value  chain  support)is  expected  to  enable  farm  households  to  substantially  increase  crop 
and  livestock  productivity  and  profitability  through  (i)  timely  application  of  optimum  levels  of  quality 
inputs  for  crop  and  livestock  production;  (ii)  adoption  of  new  climate  smart  technologies  and  farm 
practices; and (iii) improved animal health and nutrition. Although the value chain interventions would 
result  in  improved  access  to  markets,  potential  benefits  in  terms  of  favorable  prices  for  agricultural 
and livestock outputs are not measured.  
27.  Maize production model. This model would be an example for an improved maize production 
on 1.0 ha of agricultural land through investments in higher quality seeds, fertilizer and pest control, 
and improved farm management and climate smart agriculture practices. Maize is a main staple crop, 
which is produced for both home consumption and market. Despite availability of market demand for 
maize, the production remains low. Farmers are reluctant in investing in improved inputs, technology 
and farm practices for numbers of reasons including poor access to seeds, agrochemicals, negative 
climatic  events,  and  access  to  finance.  In  the  WoP  scenario,  (i)  a  smallholder  household  uses 
traditional  and  low  input  farming  practices;  (ii)  maize  yield  is  suboptimal  at  1,700  kg,  (iii)  access  to 
finance, quality seeds and extension services are limited; and (iv) harvest and post-harvest losses at 
10  per  cent  due  to  inadequate  farm  practices,  access  to  storage  and  market  facilities  and  climate 
related shocks. The WiP scenario assumes: (i) yield increases to 2,890 kg and (ii) production losses 
declines to 5 per cent due to (iii) timely and adequate application of improved seeds, agrochemicals; 
and (iii) use of improved farm practices.  
28.  The cost of initial investments will be USD 152. The investment expected to result in increases 
in  gross  margins  from  USD  173  to  USD  266  that  corresponds  to  an  incremental  return  at  USD  93. 
Returns to labour expected to increase from USD 2.2 to USD 3.2 per day. 
29.  Groundnut  production  model.  This  model  too  demonstrates  intensification  of  groundnut 
production on 1.0 ha of rainfed land through investments in quality seeds, fertilizer and pest control, 
and  improved  farm  management  and  climate  smart  agricultural  practices.  In  the  WoP  scenario, 
(i) traditional  and  low  input  farming  practices  are  used;  (ii)  groundnut  yield  is  below  optimum  at  930 
kg;  (iii)  access  to  finance,  quality  seeds  and  extension  services  are  limited;  (iv)  harvest  and  post-
harvest  losses  at  10  per  cent  due  to  inadequate  farm  practices,  access  to  storage,  processing  and 
market facilities, and climate related shocks. The WiP scenario assumes that: (i) yield will increase to 
1,320  kg;  and  (ii)  production  losses  will  drop  to  5  per  cent  due  to  combinations  of  improved  farm 
practices,  timely  and  adequate  application  of  improved  seeds  and  agrochemicals,  and  improved 
access to storage and markets.  
159 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
30.  The cost of initial investments will be USD 214. The investment expected to result in increases 
in gross margins from USD 474 to USD 579 generating an incremental return of USD 122. Returns to 
labour expected to increase from USD 3.7 to USD 4.6 per day. 
Soybean  production  model.  Similar  to  other  models,  this  model  illustrates  an  intensified 
31. 
soybean production on 1.0 ha of rainfed land through investments in quality inputs, farm practices and 
technologies.  The  investments  would  result  in  increases  in  yield  from  950  kg  to  1,615  kg  and 
reduction of losses from 10 percent to 5 percent.  
32.  The cost of initial investments will be USD 127. The investment expected to result in increases 
in gross margins from USD 104 to USD 161 generating an incremental return of USD 57. Returns to 
labour expected to increase from USD 1.0 to USD 1.8 per day. 
33.  Rainfed  potato  production  model.  The  model  demonstrates  an  improved  potato  production 
on  1.0  ha  of  rainfed  land  through  investments  in  fertilizer,  pest  control,  use  animal  labour  for  land 
preparation,  improved  farm  management  and  adoption  of  climate  smart  agricultural  practices.  The 
investments expected to  increase potato  yields from 8,000 kg to 12,000 kg and reduce  harvest and 
post-harvest losses from 10 percent to 5 percent.  
34.  The cost of initial investments will be USD 388. The investment expected to result in increases 
in gross margins from USD 303 to USD 454 generating an incremental return of USD 151. Returns to 
labour expected to increase from USD 14 to USD 19 per day. 
Irrigated  potato  production  model.  The  model  illustrates  investments  in  a  treadle  pump 
35. 
irrigation, improved agricultural inputs  and farm practices that would allow switching form production 
of  rainfed  potato  to  irrigated  potato  on  1.0  ha  land.  The  investments  expected  to  increase  potato 
yields from 8,000 kg to 19,000 kg and reduce harvest and post-harvest losses from 10 percent to  5 
percent.  
36.  The cost of initial investments will be USD 516. The investment expected to result in increases 
in gross margins from USD 648 to USD 1,906 generating an incremental return of USD 517. Returns 
to labour expected to increase from USD 14 to USD 28 per day. 
37.  Goat rearing model. This model describes investments in purchase of two goats of traditional 
breed  and  improved  animal  husbandry  practices.  Traditional  goat  breeds  are  less  prone  to  disease 
and  require  low  maintenance  costs.  The  goat  meat  is  also  the  preferred  choice  of  local  population, 
and  it  is  easily  marketed  through  different  outlets  including  direct  consumers  and  butcheries.  The 
model  assumes  purchase  of  two  does  and  maintenance  of  the  herd  size  at  two  does.  Birth  rates 
assumed at 1.5 per kidding with three kidding in two years and mortality rates 7 per cent for mature 
goats and 12 per cent per kids. One year-old kids assumed to weigh 15 kg and does 25 kg. Flock size 
expected to stabilize at six does. The 9-month-old kids will be sold live weight for MKW 14,000 each.  
38.  The  initial  investment  cost  is  estimated  at  USD  138.  The  investment  is  expected  to  generate 
positive returns starting from the  year 3 at USD 92. When a ten-year benefit accumulation period is 
assumed, the investment would yield FIRR of 29 per cent and FNPV of USD 100. The benefit to cost 
ratio would be 0.14. 
39.  Dairy  cow  model  illustrates  an  investment  in  purchase  of  one  dairy  cow  of  local  breed, 
improved  animal  husbandry  and  animal  health  and  nutrition.  The  model  assumes  that  with  the 
adequate  animal  nutrition,  health  and  management,  the  farmer  will  receive milk  yield  of  1,610  lt  per 
cow  over  a  6-month  lactation  period.  Although  the  barns  in  the  country  often  poorly  designed  with 
inadequate  ventilation  and  drainage,  cattle  health  generally  is  good.  Therefore,  mortality  rates  are 
assumed at 8 percent for cattle and 15 per cent for calves (from birth to  weaning and/or slaughter). 
Calving rate is assumed at 70 per cent. The herd size expected to be maintained at two dairy cows, 
and calves would be sold live weight before reaching one year old at MKW 200,000 each.  
40.  The total investment cost would be USD 505. The investment would generate a FNPV of USD 
291 and a FIRR of 38 per cent. The benefit to cost ratio would be 0.1. 
41.  Financial results to crop and livestock production models are summarized in Table 4. 
160 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 4: Summary of financial results for crop and livestock models 
b)  Household models 
42.  Potential FARMSE beneficiaries fall into five broad categories of poverty that represent various 
levels  of  endowment,  monetary  poverty,  food  security,  family  labour  availability,  vulnerability,  and 
resilience  to  poverty.  These  categories  are:  (i)  ultra-poor  labour  constrained;  (ii)  ultra-poor  labour 
unconstrained;  (iii)  poor  but  food-secure;  (iv)  vulnerable  to  poverty;  and  (v)  resilient  to  poverty.  To 
simplify, the analysis grouped them into (i) ultra-poor; (ii) poor; and (iii) vulnerable.  
43.  Potential  investment  choices  of  target  beneficiaries  are  illustrated  through  five  indicative 
smallholder household models with different types and scales of assets. The models are summarized 
below and presented in Table 5.  
a.  ultra-poor  labour  unconstrained  households  receiving  capacity  building  support  and  one 
time  lump  sum  asset  transfer  grants  of  around  USD  70  are  presented  through  indicative 
investments models for a smallholder farming household  operating 0.40 ha of rainfed land, of 
which  0.1  ha  is  currently  not  operated  due  to  lack  of  financial  resources,  and  investing  in 
(i) improved  production  of  maize  (0.20  ha)  and  groundnuts  (0.2  ha)  and  (ii)  purchase  of  two 
goats;  
b.  poor  households  gaining  access  to  informal  financial  services  and  products  through  its 
membership in the VSLA, are illustrated through a smallholder household model operating 0.70 
ha of rainfed land and investing in intensified production of maize, groundnuts, and soybean;  
c.  poor households gaining  access to both  informal and formal financial services  and  products 
delivered  by  FSPs  and  VSLAs,  are  illustrated  through  a  smallholder  farm  household  model 
operating 0.70 ha of rainfed land and investing in (i) intensification of rainfed maize, soybean, 
groundnut, and potato production; and (ii) purchase of one goat; 
d.  vulnerable  households  accessing  finance  through  its  membership  in  VSLAs  are  presented 
through a smallholder farm household model operating 0.80 ha of rainfed land and investing in 
(i)  intensification  of  maize,  groundnuts,  soybean  and  potato  production;  and  (ii)  increasing 
existing goat herd by one goat;   
e.  vulnerable  households  accessing  financial  resources  and  products  through  the  VSLAs  and 
FSPs are presented through a smallholder farm household model operating 0.80 ha of rainfed 
land and investing in (i) a treadle pump irrigation to produce irrigated potato on 0.50 ha of land; 
(ii) intensification of rainfed maize, groundnuts and soybean on 0.20 ha of rainfed land; (iii) one 
goat; and (iv) one dairy cow.  
161 
WoPWiPMWKUSDWOPWPUSDWoPWiPMaize (rainfed)257      447      136,867 190.09    1,700    2,890   81                3.2    5.3    Soybean (rainfed)132      278      105,051 146         950       1,615   70                1.2    3.2    Groundnuts (rainfed)546      785      171,579 238         800       1,320   139              4.4    6.3    Potato (rainfed)648      966      228,816 318         8,000    12,000 281              14.4  19.3  Potato (irrigated)648      1,906   905,857 1,258      8,000    19,000 517              14.4  28.2  Goat rearing (2 goats)-       247      177,762 247         146              -   1.9    Goat rearing (improved husbandry)-       -       -        -         -               -   -   Dairy cow-       94        67,771   94           1,610   578              -   1.0    Incremental gross marginYield kg/ha/animalIncremental costsReturn to labor (USD)Gross margin (USD)721 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 5: Summary of With and Without Project Situations per Household 
44.  Financing  requirements  for  investment  activities  will  vary  from  one  household  to  another 
depending  on  investment  choices.  As  presented  in  Table  5,  financial  needs  of  ultra-poor  labour 
unconstrained  households  will  be  around  USD  126  to  be  financed  from  the  asset  transfer  grants  of 
USD 70 and beneficiary contribution of USD 56. Investment choices of those households, who access 
only VSLA loans, are expected to require relatively modest amounts of investments. Poor households, 
for instance, are assumed to opt for less capital-intensive investment activities (crop production) that 
require investment at USD 63 to be funded from VSLA loans of USD 32 and household contribution of 
USD 31.  Similarly,  investment options of vulnerable  households assumed to require USD  439  to be 
funded from VSLA loans of USD 190 and beneficiary contribution of USD 249. Highest loan amounts 
are  expected  for  investments  choices  of  poor  and  vulnerable  households  gaining  access  to  both 
informal and formal financial services. Respective financial requirements of poor household expected 
at  USD  815  to  be  funded  from  loans  of  USD  434  and  beneficiary  contribution  of  USD  381  and  of 
vulnerable  households  at  USD  1,203  to  be  financed  from  loan  amount  of  USD  859  and  household 
contribution of USD 344. It should however be noted that these financial requirements of households 
represent  only  the  first  year  financial  needs  and  some  households  are  expected  to  receive  loans  in 
following years depending on their cash flows.   
45.  A summary of the financing requirement per household is presented in the Table 6. 
Table 6: Household Financing 
46.  Financial  returns  to  households.  As  presented  in  Table  7,  incremental  incomes  after 
financing are projected to  be in the ranges of USD  184 to USD 1,203  with a lowest incremental net 
returns  expected  for  poor  households  investing  in  rainfed  crop  production  and  highest  returns  to 
vulnerable households investing in intensification of crops and purchase of goats and dairy cow.  
47. 
In general, all households are expected to generate substantial incremental incomes and have 
positive  cash  flows  over  an  investment  maturity  period  of  10  year.  Cash  flow  analysis  also  suggest 
that  poor  households  will  need  loans  only  one  time,  whereas  other  households,  except  vulnerable 
household  accessing  VSLA  loans,  are  likely  to  need  loans  two  times.  In  contrary,  the  investment 
choice  assumed  for  vulnerable  households,  who  will  access  only  VSLAs  loans,  suggest  need  for 
loans almost every year.  
162 
WOPWIPWOPWIPWOPWIPWOPWIPWOPWIPCrop productionMaize (rainfed)ha0.200.200.400.400.400.300.200.200.200.15Maize (rainfed, rented land)ha0.100.200.000.00Groundnut (rainfed)ha0.200.150.150.200.250.300.150.10Soybean (rainfed)ha0.100.150.150.200.200.150.150.05Potato (rainfed)ha0.150.150.300.00Potato (irrigated)ha0.000.50Total  areaha0.300.400.700.700.700.700.800.800.800.80LivestockGoat (new investment)head1Goat (improved husbandry)head2111Dairy cowhead01Vulnerable (VSLA)Vulnerable (VSLA & FPS)UnitProduction activitiesUltra-poor (graduation)Poor (VSLA)Poor            (VSLA & FSP)MWKUSDMWKUSDMWKUSDUltra Poor Household (Graduation) 90,567         126             40,567     56             90,567         126        Poor Household (VSLA)45,381         63               22,690     32             22,690         32          Poor household (VSLA and FFS)586,528       815             274,295   381           312,233       434        Vulnerable Household (VSLA)316,335       439             179,250   249           137,084       190        Vulnerable Household (VSLA and FFS)866,325       1,203          247,948   344           618,377       859        Incremental production costsBeneficiary contributionHousehold loan requirement 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 7: Summary of Results for Household Models 
48.  Estimated  financial  rate  of  return  to  the  overall  programme  is  26.3  per  cent  with  financial  net 
present  value  of  USD  31.2  million  and  B:C  ratio  of  1.9.  The  programme  is  estimated  to  generate 
economic rate of return (ERR) at 19.3 per cent with economic net present value (ENPV) of USD 44.5 
million and B:C ratio at 2.2.  
V.  Economic Analysis 
49.  Economic rate of return (ERR) to the programme investments is estimated at 19.8 per cent with 
economic net present value (ENPV) of USD 46 million.  
50.  Sensitivity  analysis.  The  programme  is  moderately  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  programme 
benefits and costs. A 20 per cent declines in benefits drops the EIRR to 14.9 per cent and 20 per cent 
increases in programme cost reduces the base EIRR to 15.7 per cent. The programme is sensitive to 
delays in the benefit accumulation with a two-year delay in the programme implementation dropping 
the  EIRR  to  13.6  per  cent.  If  VSLAs  can  make  financial  resources  available  to  50  per  cent  of 
households instead of currently  assumed 30 per cent of households, EIRR  will reach 91.8 per cent. 
Please see Table 8 for results of sensitivity analysis.  
Table 8: Sensitivity Analysis 
163 
MWKUSDMWKUSDMWKUSDUltra Poor Household (Graduation) 149,505      208          282,297    392              132,792 184           90,567         126       Poor Household (VSLA)294,834      409          441,947    613              147,113 204           45,381         63         Poor household (VSLA and FFS) \2279,105      387          864,253    1,199           585,149 812           240,195       334       Vulnerable Household (VSLA)507,980      705          1,034,787 1,435           526,807 731           316,335       439       Vulnerable Household (VSLA and FFS)809,492      1,123       1,336,284 1,853           526,792 731           866,325       1,203    * FFS = Formal Financial ServicesIncremental production costs Incremental income after financing /2MWKUSDNet income after financing721WoPWiP \11\ At investments full maturity which is assumed at ten yearsChangeEIRRENPV0%20.3%15,638,679-10%18.2%11,120,390-20%15.8%6,602,101-50%7.2%-6,952,76710%22.3%20,156,96920%24.2%24,675,25810%18.4%12,684,25820%16.7%9,729,83750%12.4%866,5721 yr17.1%10,393,4702 yrs14.8%5,116,28220%20.3%48,369,882Sensitivity variablesBase scenarioProject costsProject benefitsDelay in benefit accumulationIncreases in VSLA loans 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
Appendix 11: Programme Implementation Manual 
I. 
Introduction 
1. Presentation of the FARMSE Project  
2. Objective of the Project  
3. Description of the Project Components  
4. Cost and financing  
5. Organization and management  
6. Institutional and Implementation arrangements  
7. Organizational charts 
II.  Administrative Procedures 
1. Human Resources management  
2. Correspondence and Communication Organization  
3. Logistics  
4. Asset and stock management  
III. Financial and Disbursements Procedures 
1. Financial Arrangements and Flow of funds  
2. IFAD Disbursements procedures  
3. FARMSE Disbursements procedures  
4. Accounting system and procedures  
5. Planning and budgeting  
IV. Procurement Procedures 
1. IFAD basic procurement principles  
2. National rules and regulations  
3. Main methods of procurement for goods and works  
4. Main methods of selection of consultants & services providers  
5. Specific procurement arrangements  
V.  Monitoring & Evaluation Procedures 
1. Planning of M&E  
2. AWPB Preparation, including annual targets (RIMS+MPAT)  
3. Follow-up of outputs  
4. Evaluation of results  
5. Evaluation of Impact  
6. Elaboration of progress reports  
Annexes 
Annex 1: Annual Work Plan and Budget for Year 1 in IFAD format 
Annex 2: Procurement Plan for first 18 months in IFAD format 
Annex 3: Organizational Chart of SIRP PCU  
Annex 4: TOR of key Project Staff  
Annex 5: Flow of Funds chart   
Annex 6: TOR for Auditors 
Annex 7: Baseline Survey 
Annex 8: Monitoring & Evaluation Matrix 
Annex 9: Reporting formats  
165 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
Government of Malawi 
Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, 
and Enterprise 
FARMSE 
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
Draft version: October 2017 
166 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
Contents 
I.  Overall introduction to this manual 
II.  1.0 INTRODUCTION 
III.  2.0 PROGRAMME COMPONENTS 
IV.  3.0 TARGET GROUPS AND TARGETING STRATEGIES 
V.  4.0 IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
VI.  5.0 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
2.1  Component 1: Ultra-poor graduation model development and scaling up 
2.2  Component 2: Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 
2.3  Component 3:  Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy. 
170 
170 
171 
171 
172 
174 
174 
177 
179 
181 
183 
191 
192 
193 
195 
199 
200 
VII.  6.0 MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
203 
VIII.  7.0 REPORTING 
205 
205 
IX.  8.0 PROCUMENT 
X.  9.0 DRAFT OPERATING MANUAL -FINANCIAL INNOVATION AND OUTREACH - COMPONENT2
A.  General Internal Control Principles 
B.  Cash and Bank Management 
C.  Follow-up of Advances 
D.  Commitment and Creditor Control Tips 
E.  Care and Custody of Fixed Assets 
F.  Bookkeeping Strategy 
G.  Annual Financial Reporting and Audits 
H.  Procurement 
  205 
XI.  10.0 GRANT APPRAISAL UNDER COMPONENT 2 
Implementation of Activities 
Appendix 14: 
I.  Major landscape characteristics and Issues 
SECAP review note 
A.  Socio-cultural context 
B.  Natural resources and climate 
C.  Key Issues 
II.  Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks 
A.  Key potential impacts 
B.  Climate change and adaptation 
III.  Environmental and social category 
IV.  Climate risk category 
V.  Recommended features of project design and implementation 
A.  Mitigation measures 
B. 
Incentives for good practices 
VI.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
212 
220 
229 
229 
229 
229 
230 
231 
231 
231 
232 
232 
232 
232 
232 
233 
167 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
List of Acronyms 
Agricultural Finance Working Group  
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Bankers Association of Malawi  
Community Based Financial Organization 
Chief Executive Officer 
Country Strategic Opportunities Paper 
Country and Policy Institutional Assessment  
Chief Technical Specialist 
Economic internal rate of return  
Economic net present value 
Facility to Assist Rural Markets, Smallholders, and Enterprise  
Farm Input Subsidy Programme 
Financial Management Assessment  
Financial Management Division  
Financial Service Providers 
Food Agricultural Practice  
Gross Domestic Product 
Government of Malawi 
Human Centered Design 
Human Development Index 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Internal Procurement Committee  
Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods, and Agricultural Development Programme 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II 
Management Information System 
Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development  
Malawi Micro-Finance Network  
Mobile Network Operators  
Ministry Agriculture 
AFWG  
AWP&B 
BAM  
CBFO  
CEO 
COSOP 
CPIA 
CTS 
DPFSPD   Department of Pensions and Financial Sector Policy Division 
EIRR 
ENPV 
FARMSE 
FISP 
FMA 
FMD 
FSP 
GAP 
GDP 
GOM 
HCD 
HDI 
IFAD  
IPC 
IRLADP 
M&E 
MGDS 
MIS 
MLGRD 
MMFN  
MNO 
MOA 
MoFEPD   Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning, and Development  
Multidimensional Poverty Assessment Tool  
MPAT  
MSMEs 
Micro, Small and Medium, sized Enterprise 
MUSCCO  Malawi Union of Savings and Credit Cooperatives  
Malawian Kwacha (unit of currency)  
MWK 
National Agriculture Policy 
NAP 
Non-governmental organization 
NGOs 
National Social Support Programme 
NSSP  
Opportunity International Bank of Malawi 
OIBM 
Project Concept Note 
PCN 
Pensions and Financial Sector Policy Division of the MOF  
PFSPD 
Programme Implementation Manual  
PIM 
Payday lending companies 
PLC 
Programme Management Unit 
PMU 
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development 
PRIDE  
Proposals Review Committee 
PRC 
PSC 
Programme Steering Committee 
RB-AWPB  Results Based Annual Workplan and Budget  
RBM 
RIMS 
RLEEP 
SACCO 
SAPP  
SECAP 
SME 
Reserve Bank of Malawi  
Results and Impact Management System  
Rural Livelihoods and Economic Enhancement Programme 
Savings and Credit Cooperative Organizations    
Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Small and medium sized Enterprise 
168 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
TA 
TOR 
TSPs 
USD 
VSLAs 
Technical Assistance 
Terms of Reference 
Technical Service Providers 
United States Dollar 
Village and Savings and Loan Associations 
169 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
I. 
Overall introduction to this manual 
The purpose of this manual is to provide a comprehensive set of guidelines, tools and formats, to 
1. 
facilitate programme management from inception through to closing. As a management tool, the manual 
contents  reflect  the  Programme  design,  and  the  overall  implementation  framework  with  respect  to  key 
principles  and  approaches  to  be  applied,  planned  intervention  strategies,  partnership  arrangements, 
fiduciary  controls,  and  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation,  and  reporting.  The  Manual  should  be 
considered  as  a  living  document;  when  it  comes  to  practical  application  and  usage,  if  aspects  prove 
challenging,  or  out  of  context,  there  should  be  appropriate  mechanisms  in  place  for  rectification  and 
improvement as this will lead ultimately to improved programme delivery. 
The  Manual  is  made  of  components  or  sub-manuals,  which  can  be  referenced  as  a  whole  or 
2. 
independently. For example, sub-manuals for components 1, and 2 - whilst they are anticipated to lead to 
common outcomes, and drive progress to achieving the Programme Development Objective (PDO), they 
require  different  management  approaches  with  respect  to  eligibility  criteria,  funding  disbursement 
mechanisms, partner management, etc.; this is reflected in the respective manuals for each component. 
3. 
This  Manual  is  an  internal  management  document.  Whilst  parts  of  it  can  be  shared  with 
implementing  partners  (e.g.  selection  criteria,  Logical  Framework  and  indicators,  Planning,  Monitoring 
and  Evaluation  (PM&E)  requirements,  templates  for  data  collection,  reporting  formats,  etc.),  the 
documents should not be distributed as a whole.  
4. 
The  Manual  provides  instruction  for  contractual  arrangements,  fund  management,  reporting,  etc. 
Therefore, it requires compliance on the part of programme management and staff. Failure to work within 
the framework of the Manual will be considered as breach of responsibility. 
II. 
1.0 
INTRODUCTION 
5. 
Programme  Objectives.  The  overall  goal  of  FARMSE  is  to  reduce  poverty,  improve  livelihoods 
and enhance the resilience of rural households on a sustainable basis. The Programme’s Development 
Objective (PDO) is to increase access to, and  use of, a range  of sustainable financial services by rural 
households and micro, small, and medium enterprises.  
6. 
Outcomes. Five major programme outcomes are expected that would lead to achieving the PDO: 
(i).  the  capacity  of  ultra-poor  households  to  graduate  from  poverty,  improve  food  security  and  secure 
livelihood  opportunities  improved  (ii).  The  capacity  of  ultra-poor  women  headed  households  and  youth 
graduate  from  poverty  iii).  Improved  access  to  structured  and  sustainable  CBFO  financial  services  (iv). 
Enhanced  capacity  of  FSPs  to  deliver  demand-driven  services  in  rural  areas  v).  improved  access  to 
sustainable  financial  services  to  women  and  youth  vi).  Rural  finance  sector  support  organisations 
capacity  and  knowledge  increased. These  outcomes  will  be  measured  through  the  following  indicators, 
which will apply to all three components:   
a. 
a national model for graduating ultra-poor from poverty developed, tested at scale, and 
approved by GOM 
a. 
b. 
outreach  of  rural  financial  services  serving  432,774  individuals  with  sustainable 
financial services; and  
sustainable  financial  services  innovation  introducing  five  new/improved  sustainable 
financial  products,  services  or  delivery  mechanisms  targeting  rural  beneficiaries.This 
is  expected  to  contribute  to  improved  resilience  and  improved  food  security  and 
nutrition. 
Programme Implementation approach. The proposed principles of engagement for  programme 
7. 
design are as follows: 
170 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
a.  While not exclusive to any target socio-economic household, some financial tools are more 
appropriate for one than others. Graduation will target the ultra-poor, while informal financial 
organizations such as CBFOs are better suited to the ultra-poor but non-labour constrained 
and poor but food-secure. Financial services offered by formal FSPs are most effective for 
households  vulnerable  to  poverty  and  resilient  households.  The  FARMSE  design  will 
provide  the  most  appropriate  intervention  for  each  group,  including  youth,  with  gender 
sensitive approaches; 
b.  The  programme  will  be  national  in  scope  with  some  interventions  targeting  strategically 
identified  districts  to  test  concentrate  resources  and  test/identify  effective,  efficient,  and 
replicable  interventions  for  scaling  up. Where  possible,  components/  activities  will  overlap 
geographically  and  with  IFAD  programme  areas,  to  maximize  impact  and  potential  for 
scaling up; 
c.  The  programme  will  support  private  and  not-for-profit  organizations  individually  or  in 
consortia,  often  in  long-term,  multi-phased  and  performance-based  partnerships.    Private 
sector participation will be on a cost sharing basis; 
d.  To  ensure 
the  GOM’s  ability 
to  successfully  manage  and  oversight  programme 
implementation,  a  competitively  selected  Programme  Management  Unit  (PMU)  team, 
technically  qualified  to  manage  a  financial  inclusion  programme  will  be  supported  with 
training and long term technical capacity support; and 
e.  Programme  partners  will  be  required  to  employ  high-calibre  international,  regional,  and 
national financial sector experts as required to ensure effective project implementation. 
III. 
2.0 PROGRAMME COMPONENTS 
8. 
The  PDO  will  be  achieved  through  three  components:  (a) Ultra-poor  Graduation  Model; 
b).Community  Based  Financial  Organisations  (CBFO)  and  (c)  Strategic  Partnerships,  Knowledge 
Generation and Policy.  Under Component 1 implementing agencies will lead the implementation working 
through the  PMU  while under Component 2 potential partners seeking support  will have to apply under 
pre-defined  windows  and  under  well-defined  procedures.  Several  approaches  for  the  approval  of 
proposals  have  been  envisaged,  with  a  mix  of  internal  and  external  assessments,  through  which  all 
initiatives  to  be  supported  will  be  approved.  For  Component  3  a  support  framework  will  be  jointly 
elaborated that requires approval under the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), initiatives undertaken 
under Component 3 will be conducted in accordance with the AWPB, with the choice of interventions and 
activities being more at the discretion of the Programme Management Unit (PMU) than those proposed 
under the partnership and grant agreements concluded under components 1 and 2. 
2.1  Component 1: Ultra-poor graduation model development and scaling up 
This  component  will  support  on-going  government  efforts  in  developing  and  delivering  effective 
9. 
graduation  programmes  in  rural  areas  to  reduce  extreme  poverty  levels  among  both  ultra-poor  labour 
constrained and  non-labour constrained  households. The component  will  be  overseen by  the PMU and 
led  by  selected  implementing  agencies  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoFEPD,  NSSP) 
who together are piloting a modest graduation programme in Mwanza District southern Malawi. FARMSE 
will  follow  the  graduation  concept  adopted  by  the  GOM  and  where  applicable  borrow  aspects  from  the 
universally  tested  Consultative  Group  to  Assist  the  Poor  (CGAP)/Ford  Foundation  model.  This  model 
essentially  has  5  steps  targeting:  consumption  support;  savings;  technical  skills  transfer  and  asset 
transfer. IFAD support will only be applied from stage 2 to stage 5 of the graduation stages. GOM and its 
other partners, , will support the stage 1 which involves targeting and provision of grants for consumption 
support  or  smoothing  out  life  shocks.  The  details  of  cooperation  will  be  worked  out  between  GOM  and 
IFAD.  In  addition  piloting  activities  will  be  excluded  given  that  it  will  shorten  the  overall  programme 
171 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
implementation  time  and  curtail  achievement  of  its  objectives  and  as  the  country  has  already  piloted 
many graduation models, no additional pilots will be necessary. 
10.  The  expected  Outcomes  of  this  Component  are  that  the  capacity  of  ultra-poor  households  to 
graduate from poverty, improve food security and secure livelihood opportunities is improved; and ii) the 
capacity  of  ultra-poor  women  headed  households  and  youth  graduate  from  poverty  is  improved.  The 
objective  of  the  component  is  to  develop  and  test  at  scale  a  cost-effective,  replicable  model(s)  to 
graduate  households  from  ultra-poverty  and  food  insecurity  into  sustainable,  self-reliant  livelihoods.  A 
secondary  goal  of  the  design  and  testing  is  to  reduce  the  cost  of  graduation  from  the  international 
benchmark of USD 1,500 to between USD 800 to 1,000. 
2.2  Component 2: Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach 
11.  The  outcome  of  this  subcomponent  is  improved  access  to  existing  and  innovate  informal 
community  based  financial  organizations  savings  and  loans  products.153  The  objective  is  to  support 
CFBOs expanded outreach to poor but food secure  households, households vulnerable to  poverty,  and 
resilient households in rural Malawi. This component will seek to overcome numerous barriers to financial 
services  to  the  rural  poor.  It  will  support  the  development  of  informal  and  formal  financial  services  best 
suited to ultra-poor non-labour constrained, poor but food-secure, vulnerable to poverty, and low income 
but resilient to  poverty households, emphasizing savings and credit for on and  off farm enterprise. This 
component  will  also  employ  financial  interventions  within  select  value  chains  to  enhance  economic 
returns to smallholder participation and value chain efficiency. The component has two subcomponents: 
12.  Subcomponent  2.1  -  Community  Based  Financial  Organization  support  (CBFO).This  sub-
component has three activities; i). Mapping of existing CBFOs and assessing maturity status; ii).Building 
capacity of CBFOs: provide opportunities to additional skills and linking CBFOs and/or their members to 
formal  financial  institutions  and  high  value  markets.  This  will  enhance  smallholder  income,  asset  and 
some livelihood / enterprise development opportunities; iii).Formation of new Groups. This will contribute 
to household income smoothing and/or to enhancing household income, asset, and livelihood/enterprise 
development opportunities.   
13.  For  all  the  three  activities,  Matching  Grants  will  be  provided  to  experienced  CBFO  support 
groups/consortia  for  the  preparation  of  a  detailed  proposal  with  multi-year  project  implementation  plan. 
Selected proposals will be awarded service contracts on a competitive basis for multi-year, multi-phased, 
performance based contracts. Funding will be given to organizations with a proven track record in CBFO 
promotion or to a consortia capable of rapidly and sustainably expanding their network of member groups 
in  targeted  rural  areas  with  the  Promoter  contributing  40%  of  the  cost  and  the  Programme contributing 
60%. Actors will comprise i). Operators desirous to expand sustainable savings and credit intermediation 
models ii). Value chain developers and ii) secondary or apex organisations.   
14.  Subcomponent  2.2  –  Innovation  and  Outreach  Facility  (IOF).  The  outcome  for  this 
subcomponent is to enhance the capacity of FSPs to deliver demand-driven services in rural areas. The 
objectives  are  two:  i)  increase  access  to  new  and  innovative  financial  services  and  low-cost  delivery 
mechanisms for poor rural households and MSMEs; and ii) to support the scaling up of proven financial 
services and delivery mechanisms. Activities under this subcomponent will support FSPs wishing to enter 
and expand outreach in rural areas. Support will be provided on a demand-driven and cost-sharing basis 
through the Rural Finance Innovation and Outreach Facility (IOF). The IOF would address FSP’s lack of 
experience in rural financial markets and limited expertise in designing and delivering products/ services 
targeting low-income rural clients and MSMEs. Critically, a lack of exposure to rural markets leads to an 
exaggerated  perception  of  risks  which  further  discourages  FSP  from  entering  these  markets.  The  IOF 
would  address  these constraints  by facilitating FSP  exposure to successful international best practices/ 
153 Informal CBFOs are commonly referred to as Village Savings and Loan Associations. CBFOs have two defining 
characters. First, they are informal, or unregulated by a government agency. Second, they are formed and managed by 
individuals who come together voluntarily. There many different CBFO models, many like VSLAs, and can include informal 
cooperative associations, village bank models, or variations of the VSLA model. See: IFAD, How to do Support community-
based financial organizations, IFAD, 2014. 
172 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
innovations which have worked in other African countries, and access to high-quality technical assistance 
(TA)  to  identify  promising  approaches  and  adjust  models  to  institutional  settings  and  market 
environments.  Products  and  services  could  be  within  the  financial  sector  value  chain  or  could  be 
opportunities related to the development of an agricultural value chain. 
15.  The IOF will have three funding windows: i) market research and feasibility studies to support FSP 
market  opportunities  identification,  risks,  market  entry  costs  and  revenues;  ii)  pilot  testing  of  product 
innovations and/or delivery mechanisms; and iii) expanding outreach of piloted products/ services and/or 
delivery mechanisms. Prospective partners can choose to apply to the window that best suits the nature 
of  development  needs. All  projects  will  be  cost  shared  with  FSP  partners  and  chosen  on  a  competitive 
basis. 
16.  Non-Financial  Sector  Service  Providers  will  also  be  eligible  for  support  if  they  are  engaged  in 
financial  service  provision  (or  have  the  intention  to  do  so),  either  directly  or  in  partnership  with  FSPs. 
Partnerships will be encouraged as they can often manage risk better and reduce transaction costs than 
a  single  institution  alone.  Examples  projects  for  non-financial  service  providers  would  include  inter  alia: 
value  chain  finance  arrangements  between  FSPs,  input  suppliers,  agribusiness  companies,  warehouse 
operators  and  commodity  exchanges  or  partnerships  with  mobile  money  operators  for  digital  payment 
solutions.  Some  non-financial  services  activities  will  also  be  supported  if  deemed  critical  to  enhance 
beneficiaries’  capacity  to  access  and  use  financial  services  supported  under  the  IOF,  such  as,  for 
example,  strengthening  farmer  organizations  or  basic  financial  literacy  support,  market  linkages 
establishment, or targeted extension services.  
17.  The  component  provides  for  matching  grants  in  varying  degrees  depending  on  the  capacity  and 
the  needs  of  the  participating  institution  under  the  CBFO  support  organisations  and  the  three  IOF 
windows. The  operations  of  this  component  will  be  governed  by  the  details  elaborated  in  the  PIM. The 
PIM  provides  a  detailed  description  of  the  respective  partnership  arrangements,  windows  (notably 
edibility  and  selection  criteria,  grant  ceilings,  and  co-financing  requirements,  etc.),  procedures  and 
mechanisms  for  application  processing,  administration  of  grants,  various  formats  (such  as  evaluation 
form,  grant  agreements.  Rigorous  internal  and  external  technical  review  will  be  built  in  by  subjecting 
applications that pass initial screening for a detailed review by external technical specialists. A Proposals 
Review Committee (PRC) will be established with the authority to review and approve or disapprove the 
applications,  while  ensuring  professional  confidentiality  so  that  innovations,  approaches  and  products 
tested and developed are not revealed to competitors or the general public. 
Financial Innovation and Outreach Support 
Community Based 
Financial 
Organisations Support 
CBFO support 
organisations, ii) 
Value chain 
developers and iii) 
secondary or apex 
farmer organisations, 
FSPs 
Mapping exercises for 
old groups, Farmer 
Groups support, 
CBFO –FSP 
dialogue, CBFO –
High value market 
players dialogue and 
mobilisation of 
groups. 
Matching Grant for 
60% of total costs for 
Eligible 
Applicants 
Main 
Activities 
Supported 
Matching 
Ratios 
IOF: 
Window 1: Market 
research and feasibility 
studies 
Technical Service 
Providers (TSPs), 
Research agencies and 
institutions, Input 
suppliers, agribusiness 
companies, warehouse 
operators, and 
commodity exchange.  
TA and logistic costs for 
undertaking fieldwork. 
Study tours and 
exchange visits 
IOF: 
Window 2: Pilot Testing 
and Innovation 
IOF: 
Window 3: Expanding 
Outreach 
Technical Service 
Providers (TSPs), FSPs 
Input suppliers, 
agribusiness 
companies, warehouse 
operators, and 
commodity exchange 
Developing and piloting 
product prototypes, 
conducting pilot tests 
and adjusting and 
refining product 
features 
FSPs, MNOs, 
electronic & money 
transfer operators 
&Fintechs Input 
suppliers, agribusiness 
companies, warehouse 
operators, and 
commodity exchange 
National and 
international TA for staff 
training, draft manuals, 
and institutional change 
ICT equipment, low-
cost branches and 
agencies, vehicles 
Matching Grant for 80% 
of total costs for 12 
Matching Grant for 70% 
of total costs for 36 
Matching Grant for 70% 
of total costs for 36 
173 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
Community Based 
Financial 
Organisations Support 
36 months 
US$ 100,000154 – 
US$ 450,000 
IOF: 
Window 1: Market 
research and feasibility 
studies 
months and 50% for 
study tour and 
exchange visit 
US$ 50,000. US$ 
10,000 for study tour 
and exchange visit 
IOF: 
Window 2: Pilot Testing 
and Innovation 
IOF: 
Window 3: Expanding 
Outreach 
months 
US$ 70,000 
months. 20% 
contribution by 
promoter should be in 
cash 
US$ 1,000,000 
US$82 and $ 390,000  US$ 25,000 
US$ 50,000 
US$ 750,000 
Maximum 
Grant 
Amount 
Average 
Grant Size 
2.3  Component 3:  Strategic Partnerships, Knowledge Generation, and Policy. 
18.  The outcome of this component is to increase the capacity and knowledge bases of rural financial 
sector support organizations, and has three objectives: i) strengthen macro level regulatory and financial 
sector  policy  and  institutional  capacity;  ii)  strengthen  financial  sector  organizations/infrastructure;  and 
iii) produce  and  distribute  rural  finance  sector  knowledge  products  which  enhance  the  outreach  and 
innovation potential of sector stakeholders. The component has two subcomponents. 
19.  Subcomponent 3.1 – Support to Poverty Graduation Policy and Systems activities will support 
efforts at the Division of Poverty Reduction and Social Protection in Ministry of Finance to develop policy, 
capacity  related  to  the  identification  of  effective  graduation  models,  and  to  disseminate  good  practice 
graduation information within the GOM and to other stakeholders.  
20.  Subcomponent  3.2  –  Support  to  Development/Review  of  broader  and  inclusive  Rural 
Finance Policies/strategies has two activities one for each subcomponent of Component 2.0. The first 
will support CBFO sector development, policy,  and research with  the  goal of improving  FARMSE target 
group  access  to  and  benefits  derived  from  structured  CBFOs,  including  greater  links  to  the  formal 
financial  sector.  It  will  also  facilitate  formal  GOM  recognition  of  good  practice  CBFOs  (but  not  their 
regulation  or  supervision).155  The  second  activity  relates  to  subcomponent  2.2  and  would  support 
financial service providers and agro-Industry sector development, policy, and research. This will be done 
in partnership the MOFEPD, the Reserve Bank of Malawi (central banks), and industry stakeholders such 
as  The  Malawi  Micro-Finance  Network,  the  Bankers  Association  of  Malawi  and  the  Malawi  Union  of 
Savings  and  Credit  Organizations.  Both  activities  would  include  support  for  key  innovations/lessons 
knowledge management, financial training modules, feasibility study for a micro-finance apex fund, rural 
finance  policy  capacity  building  at  MOFEPD,  or  the  establishment  of  a  high-level  Agricultural  Finance 
Working Group.  
IV. 
3.0 TARGET GROUPS AND TARGETING STRATEGIES 
21.  Target groups. FARMSE categorizes rural households as: i) labour constrained ultra-poor; ii) non-
labour constrained ultra-poor; iii) food secure but poor; iv) vulnerable; and v) resilient.156 
22.  The  groups  represent  a  continuum,  characterized  by  diverging  levels  of  poverty/wealth, 
vulnerability  and  resilience.  The  first  two  categories  (ultra-poor,  labour  constrained  and  non-labour 
constrained households) represent those living under extreme/severe food poverty as they are unable to 
meet  basic  food  needs.  The  third  category,  food  secure  but  poor  households,  represents  households 
living  under  the  poverty  line  that  are  food  secure  but  unable  to  meet  all  other  basic  needs.  Together, 
these three categories represent 50.7% of the Malawian population living under the national poverty line. 
Vulnerable households are the economically active, whose performance in agricultural activity allows for 
154US$ 100, 000 for new groups and US$450,000 for restructured groups. 
156 While similar, these five categories cannot be strictly equated to the five socio-economic quintiles used in national level 
household surveys. 
174 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
the  regular  sale  of  produce  in  markets  and  the  use  of  cheap  labour  from  poorer  households.  These 
economically  active households tend to have additional small complementary sources of income. While 
over the poverty line, these households are vulnerable to shocks which can result in loss of assets and 
falling back into poverty. 
23.  Recognizing the role played by financial inclusion in poverty alleviation, FARMSE was designed to 
meet  the  financial  inclusion  needs  of  the  first  four  categories  of  poor  and  vulnerable  households,  and 
within  these,  the  condition  of  women  and  youth  who  are  more  likely  to  be  excluded  without  specific 
targeting efforts.   
24. 
In addition to needing to meet food consumption needs, very poor households require productive 
assets  to  develop  livelihood  activities.  Savings  and  access  to  small  credit  supports  such  a  transition. 
CBFOs play a crucial role in supporting households living under the poverty line who are food secure and 
vulnerable  to  poverty  for  consumption  needs,  livelihoods  enhancement,  and  meeting  foreseen  and 
unforeseen education or health related expenses. Credit and savings also enables these households, as 
well as households vulnerable to poverty, to strengthen their livelihood strategies. Formal FSPs, such as 
SACCOs and MFIs, offer more economically active and resilient households the possibility of accessing 
funds to build strengthened and or diversified livelihood activities, including those in agricultural or micro/ 
small enterprise.   
25.  Component  1.0  will  target  15,000  ultra-poor  households  in  a  graduation  model  roll  out,  of  these 
30%  will  be  women  headed  households  and  20%  youth.  Component  2.1  focuses  on  CBFO  group 
expansion  and  innovation  and  will  reach  380,  574  target  beneficiaries,  of  which  20%  will  be  youth  and 
30%  women.  Component  2.2  will  directly  reach  an  estimated  417,350  target  beneficiaries  and  1.68 
million  indirect  beneficiaries  (household  members),  of  which  an  estimated  30%  will  be  women,  and  at 
least 20% will be youth. 
26.  Targeting  Strategy. Although FARMSE  will  be a  nation-wide programme, its geographic coverage 
will be clustered based on two distinct targeting mechanisms: i) selection of participants for Component 1 
will  be  based  on  pre-identified  criteria  ensuring  that  targets  for  women  and  youth  are  met;  and  ii)  self-
selection through use of low income appropriate financial services for Component 2. 
27.  The FARMSE targeting strategy is socio-economic based as different programme components will 
target  households  with  different  socio-economic  characteristics  to  meet  their  specific  needs.  Specific 
geographic  areas  (e.g.,  districts  with  clusters  of  villages)  will  be  selected  based  on  concentrations  of 
ultra-poor households. Preference will be given to areas which overlap with other FARMSE components, 
and/or  other  complementary  government/donor  activities,  and  in  areas  where  with  some  livelihood 
175 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
opportunities for the poor exist (e.g., growing agricultural product value chain). Sites in North and Central 
Malawi  are  of  interest  given  that  most  similar  graduation  programming  efforts  have  concentrated  in  the 
South. 
28.  Component 1.0 will be GOM graduation concept, and will be rolled out by  selected implementing 
agencies  and/or  development  partners,  with  oversight  of  the  PMU.  The  graduation  programme  will  be 
rolled  out  in  a  coordinated  fashion  in  several  areas  with  representative  socio-economic  population 
distributions. The tested GOM model will be sensitive to the needs and capacities of youth and women; 
women-headed households are common among the ultra-poor. Participating households will be selected 
based on pre-identified criteria. 
29.  Component  2.0  will  focus  on  financial  service  provision  targeting  poor  but  food  secures 
households,  households  vulnerable  to  poverty,  and  resilient  households.  The  programme  will  facilitate 
access  to  financial  services  based  on  self-selection.  This  approach  relies  on  the  expansion  of  existing 
and new financial services and/or related interventions that meet target households needs/demands, but 
are largely unattractive to higher income households. This targeting strategy is not exclusive to reaching 
households  in  other  socio-economic  strata  with  lower  or  higher  income.  Many  financial  sector 
interventions  also  have  geographic  limitations  based  on  implementing  FSP’s  area  of  operations  (e.g., 
location  of  branch/agent  network),  which  can  introduce  some  bias  towards  urban  areas.  Measures  to 
ensure  programme  benefits  are  as  widely  distributed  nationally  as  possible.  Partner  financial  service 
sector operating  areas  will be selected based on: i) commercial activity potential (agriculture and trade/ 
services);  ii)  agricultural  product  value  chains  with  development  potential;  iii)  poverty  reduction  and 
employment  creation  potential;  iv)  financial  services  demand,  particularly  among  target  socio-economic 
households; and v) existence of complementary government/donor programmes. The programme could 
support  value  chain  financing  interventions  located  in  urban  areas  if  benefits  of  interventions  flow 
substantially to target rural households. Proposed financial sector projects will be encouraged to consider 
linkages  with  existing  IFAD  programmes  (Sustainable  Agricultural  Production  Programme-  SAPP,  and 
Programme  for  Rural  Irrigation  Development-PRIDE)  or  operate  in  past  programme  areas  of  the  Rural 
Livelihoods and Economic Enhancement Programme (RLEEP). 
30.  Gender  and  youth  mainstreaming  strategy.  A  key  element  in  FARMSE’s  targeting  strategy  is 
inclusion. Success in gender mainstreaming and social inclusion at the programme level will be possible 
through  appropriate  FARMSE  management/staff  capacitation  and  operational  policies.  Women  will  be 
proactively  offered  equal  opportunities  to  participate  in  programme management  and  gaining  access  to 
training and promotions. The programme will adopt a non-harassment policy. PMU staff members will be 
trained on gender issues, socio-economic analysis, household methodologies and HIV/AIDS. Compliance 
with  the  programme´s  gender  and  youth  strategy  will  be  required  among  organizations/individuals 
contracted  to  undertake  programme  activities.  Likewise,  the  PMU  will  be  mandated  to  proactively  raise 
the awareness of partners and contractors to use pro-poor development methods sensitive to gender and 
youth needs/interests.   
31.  The programme will proactively reach out to individuals or households to ensure women and youth 
have access to opportunities offered by FARMSE, including mechanisms integrated in programme design 
facilitating  their  access  to  information,  engagement,  representation  and  participation  in  programme 
activities and interventions .At programme level, FARMSE will identify measurable indicators for women 
and youth for each programme component and sub-component. The programme will actively engage and 
enable women and youth to participate in programme planning and monitoring activities. The programme 
will  also  ensure  intervention  opportunities  are  sensitive  to  the  needs  and  preferences  of  women  and 
youth.  A  gender  analysis  of  all  financial  products  and  services  will  be  made  to  ensure  to  the  extent 
possible,  the  financial,  economic,  and  social  impacts  of  services  are  gender  positive.  Partner  financial 
and  non-financial  organizations  will  also  be  assessed  for  their  gender  sensitivity.  FARMSE  will  monitor 
targeting  effectiveness  (planned  vs.  actual  men  and  women  reached  –  including  young  males  and 
females)  using  gender  and  youth-disaggregated,  participatory  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E). 
FARMSE  will  monitor  the  impact  of  products  and  services  on  target  groups,  together  with  key  gender 
equality  outcomes  which  will  include  inter  alia:  improved  intra-household  relations;  improved  sharing  of 
176 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
tasks between household members; and participation of women in decision-making related to use of land 
for productive purposes. Use of data will fine tune operational/intervention strategies. 
32.  Gender  and  youth  strategy.  A  key  element  of  inclusion  and  targeting  is  the  application  of 
mechanisms to facilitate the involvement of youth and women in programme interventions. A Household 
Methodology adapted for the Malawian context will be employed for Components 1.0. This approach will 
equip targeted households to elaborate, execute, and monitor a realistic household development plan to 
become  more  resilient.157  The  use  of  household  methodologies  aims  to  unlock  households´  economic 
potential  and  promote  gender  equality  from  within. As  such,  the  approach  addresses  structural  factors 
hindering the long term sustainability of interventions, including: i) participation of men, women and youth 
in  household  and  community  decisions  related  to  access,  control  and  use  of  productive  assets;  ii) 
promote  more  equal  access,  control  and  use  of  assets  and  benefits  derived  from  household  livelihood 
activities;  and  iii)  promote  equal  enjoyment  of  benefits  associated  to  programme  interventions. 
Component  2.1  will  also  encourage  active  inclusion  through  household  methodologies  and/or  similar 
approaches  via  CBFO  group  formation  methods  employed  by  CBFO  support  organizations.  As  this 
subcomponent, will be demand driven, there is no guarantee as to the nature of such targeting, though 
inclusion strategies will be strongly encouraged. 
V. 
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
33.  Programme  oversight.  The  implementation  of  FARMSE  would  be  jointly  undertaken  by  several 
agencies  and  organizations  working  within  their  specialised  fields  of  competence.  This  calls  for  sound 
coordination  of  the  different  agencies  and  stakeholders  which  would  be  achieved  through  the 
establishment of the Programme Steering Committee (PSC) and the PMU.  
34.  Programme  Steering  Committee  (PSC).  A  multi-sector  stakeholder  PSC,  chaired  by  the 
Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  will  be  established  to  provide  overall  programme  oversight,  direction,  and 
guidance.  The  PSC  will  have  representatives  of  key  stakeholders  including,  inter-alia,  government 
ministries,  farmer  organisations, APEX  bodies,  the  private  sector,  and  development  partners.  The  PSC 
would meet on every six months basis to review work plans and budgets, financial and progress reports, 
receive draft annual reports and approve all major programme decisions. The multi-sectoral composition 
of the PSC will ensure FARMSE’s implementation complements rather than duplicates other government 
interventions and encourages private sector participation, harmonizing the programme’s contribution with 
the GOM’s strategic priorities and development objectives for the sector. 
35.  The Programme Management Unit. The PMU would be hosted by MoFEPD as lead agency. The 
Department of Pensions and Financial Sector Policy will house the PMU. It would be responsible for day 
to day management, consolidation of AWPBs, Procurement Plans, Progress, and Financial Reports, and 
will  co-ordinate  the  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services.  The  PMU  will  manage  monitoring  and 
evaluation, and provide support to implementation and supervision missions.  
36.  The PMU will be staffed with: i) Programme Director; ii) Financial Controller; iii) Procurement and 
Contracts  Specialist; 
iv)  Monitoring,  Evaluation  Specialist;  v)  Knowledge  Management  and 
Communication Specialist; vi) Chief Technical Advisor to be assisted by specialists (one each for CBFOs, 
and  another  for  Rural  and  Micro  Finance;  and  vii)  relevant  support  staff.  The  CTA,  with  regional  and 
international knowledge,  will be engaged for a period  three  years to build capacity of the  MoFEPD and 
the  Technical  Team,  and  MoF  staff.  The  CTA  will  be  the  head  of  the  technical  team  who  will  be 
responsible for implementation of component   2 and support for component 3. He/she will report to the to 
the Programme Coordinator.  
157IFAD, October 2014. Household Methodologies: Harnessing the Family´s Potential for Change. Gender, Targeting and Social 
Inclusion. 
177 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
37.  Programme  implementation  and  Technical Assistance.  Component  1  will  be  overseen  by  the 
PMU  with  the  participation  of  the  National  Social  Support  Programme,  under  the  Ministry  of  Finance. 
Component 2 will be overseen by the PMU and led by the CTA with CBFO support organizations, value 
chain stakeholder organizations and FSPs as implementing agents. 
38.  Technical  Assistance  (TA).  All  TA  will  be  procured  on  a  needs  basis  following  GOM/IFAD 
procurement guidelines.  Performance of TA will be  assessed against contract-specific deliverables. The 
Programme  will  require  a  variety  of  technical  assistance,  some  of  which  may  not  be  available  locally. 
Where TA is not available locally, they will be procured regionally/internationally, and in order to build local 
capacity, all international TAs  will be paired  with local TAs to the extent  possible. It  is, proposed that in 
order  to  ensure  that  procurement  of TA  does  not  slow  down  implementation;  a  pre-qualification  system 
will be employed. This would entail identification of key capacity areas and advertisement for expressions 
of interest  in local, regional and  international media.  Expressions  of interest  will be  assessed based  on 
the  provided  criteria  and  a  database  of  pre-qualified  TA  produced.  This  would  be  used  in  inviting 
proposals  by  the  Programme  when  needed.  The  Programme  will  be  able  to  create  the  data  base  of 
experts  once  they  have  tested  the  market  and  established  what  type  of  capacity  areas  the  programme 
will  need  after  assessing  of  EOIs  being  received  in  the  first  one  year.  Rigorous  internal  and  external 
technical review will be built in by subjecting applications that pass initial screening for a detailed review 
by  external  technical  specialists.  A  Proposals  Review  Committee  (PRC)  will  be  established  with  the 
authority to review and approve or disapprove the applications, while ensuring professional confidentiality 
so that innovations, approached and products test and developed are not revealed to competitor or the 
general public. 
178 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
39.  Supervision.  The  FARMSE  would  be  directly  supervised  by  IFAD.  Direct  supervision  would 
encompass four processes: i). loan and grant administration; ii) procurement review; iii) audit review; and 
iv) supervision and implementation support. Direct supervision would be applied as a continuous process 
which  requires  on-going  communication  and  engagement  with  the  GOM  and  PMU.  Key  supervision 
processes include: i) ensuring fiduciary compliance with the loan and grant administration; ii)  assessing 
programme performance; iii) guidance towards the achievement of the programme’s strategic objectives; 
and iv) conducting supervisory missions. 
VI. 
5.0 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
40.  A Financial Management Assessment (FMA) was undertaken as part of the programme design in 
accordance  with  IFAD  requirements  and  Financial  Management  Division  (FMD)  guidelines  on  financial 
management  assessment  at  design.  The  assessment  was  based  on  review  of  operation  of  the 
Programme  Support  Unit  (PSU)  of  the  IFAD  financed  RLEEP,  Ministry  of  Local  Government  and  Rural 
Development  (MLGRD),  the  IFAD  financed  SAPP  mainstreamed  in  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  the 
National Audit Office headed by the Auditor General and the Internal Audit of the Ministry of Finance. A 
review of previous supervision mission reports on financial management was also undertaken during the 
design mission.  
41.  The  results  find  a  low  fiduciary  risk  if  the  PMU  composition,  management  responsibilities,  and 
implementation  activities  proposed  by  the  design  are  followed.  While  FARMSE  will  be  the  first  IFAD 
programme led by the MoFEPD, the ministry has substantial experience with other donors and the FMA 
found that GOM systems provide adequate controls to ensure proper management of programme funds. 
That the Pension and Financial Policy Division of MoFEPD, the designated FARMSE manager, ensures 
the  importance  of  a  strong,  supportive  PMU  and  of  the  proposed  management  training  activities.  (See 
Appendix 7 for details)  
42.  FARMSE  Financial  Management  Organization  Structure.  Given  the  above  assessment  which 
represents  a  moderate  fiduciary  risk,  the  following  arrangements  will  apply.  A  separate  Programme 
Management Unit will be set up for FARMSE with a fully-fledged finance section staffed by one Financial 
Controller  and  one  Assistant  Accountant  competitively  recruited  and  paid  for  from  Programme  funds. 
These will be recruited on an initial  three-year contract basis. This includes the review and approval by 
IFAD  of  the:  (i)  recruitment  process;  (ii)  terms  of  reference  of  the  officers;  and  (iii)  post  review  of  the 
selected officers prior to the issuing of the contracts. The recruited officers will have to be trained in the 
IFAD-specific financial management requirements. 
43.  Proposed funds flow arrangements. The Programme will open a Designated Account in USD at 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  and  a  Programme  account  in  Malawian  Kwacha  (MWK)  in  a  commercial 
bank acceptable to the Fund. The proposed FARMSE envisions a number of partnerships and this comes 
with  financial  management  implications.  Programme  implementation  under  components  1  and  2  will 
largely rest with selected partner institutions and grant recipients. 
44.  To provide assurance of strong internal controls, MoFEPD will ensure regular internal audit activity 
provided by the internal audit unit of the Ministry. Supervision missions would report on the activity of the 
internal  audit  by  reviewing  Programme  reports  and  assessing  management’s  responsiveness  to 
recommendations. Internal controls will also be verified during an annual audit undertaken by the Auditor 
General  or  by  an  acceptable  designated  third  party.  In  compliance  with  IFAD’s  General  Conditions, 
FARMSE’s  financial  statements  shall  be  audited  on  an  annual  basis  in  accordance  with  IFAD  audit 
guidelines. The audit reports together with the related management letters shall be submitted to IFAD no 
later  than  six  months  after  the  end  of  each  fiscal  year.  Financial  management  arrangements  including, 
staffing,  budgeting,  accounting,  funds  flow,  disbursements,  financial  reporting,  internal  controls,  and 
auditing are detailed in Appendix 7. 
45.  Financial  Management  for  partnerships  under  Component  1.  Implementing  agencies  will  be   
expected  to  participate  in  a  cost  share  and  development  partners  will  be  expected  to  provide  parallel 
financing  to  compliment  IFAD  and  GOM  funding.  Given  the  size  of  the  funding,  the  following  financial 
management arrangement will be detailed in the PIM and included in the partnership agreements: 
179 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
Potential New Funding Partners will open a specific bank account for the FARMSE funds:  
 
 
To  access  FARMSE  funds,  evidence  by  way  of  bank  statements  will  be  provided  by 
implementing  agency  that  it  has  put  its  pro  rata  contribution  on  the  bank  account  in 
advance. 
The implementing agency    will provide counterpart staff, in addition to the Graduation 
Specialist, to participate in the FARMSE AWPB events to ensure their respective parts 
of the budgets have been well captured. That is, the AWPB preparation process will be 
participatory. 
 
  Budget overruns will not be allowed beyond 5% without prior written concurrence from 
the  PMU.  Thus,  the  implementing  agency  will  be  required  to  make  use  of  agreed 
budget control tools. 
The  implementing  agency  will  receive  an  initial  float  that  will  be  managed  on  a 
replenishment  basis  on  submission  of  certified  Statement  of  Expenditures  (SOEs) 
subject to the SOE in the letter to the borrower as amended from time to time by the 
Fund  depending  on  the  assessment  of  the  fiduciary  risk.  Initially  this  is  proposed  as 
USD  50,000.  The  same  replenishment  system  that  FARMSE  will  use  to  access  IFAD 
loan funding will cascade to the implementing agency. 
The PMU will, in addition to the SOEs, require financial reports to be able to capture the 
transactions of the implementing agency in the FARMSE consolidated financials. 
The  implementing  agency  will  be  required  to  grant  FARMSE’s  internal  and  external 
auditors full audit cooperation. This will include collaboration with the IFAD supervision 
missions. 
 
 
46.  Both IFAD, and GoMGOM require that the Programme be well managed and supervised to ensure 
that loan/ grant proceeds are used only for the purposes for which they were granted, with due regard to 
economy, efficiency, and sustainable achievement of the Programme’s development objectives. In order 
for the implementing agencies and all those involved in the Programme’s financial management such as 
external  auditors  to  have  a  common  understanding  and  approach  to  the  various  aspects  of  project 
financial  management,  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  describe  the  financial  management  and 
accounting  arrangement  as  part  of  the  Programme  Implementation  Manual  (PIM).  The  layout  of  the 
section is as follows: 
Part 
A 
C 
Description 
General Internal Control 
Principles 
Managing  the FARMSE 
Cash and Bank 
transactions 
D 
Monitoring and Following-
up FARMSE advances 
E 
F 
Controlling Commitments 
and Creditors 
Care and Custody of Fixed 
Assets 
Coverage Summary 
Systems would mean nothing without internal controls. This part describes 
the generic internal controls that can be adapted in any scenario including 
those that may have not been covered in this manual. 
FARMSE  will apply the International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
(IPSAS)- cash basis of accounting- as adopted by GOM and therefore the 
management of cash and bank transactions is key to clean audit opinions. 
This  manual  lays  out  the  salient  internal  controls  needed  in  the 
management of cash and bank transactions. 
The  pace  at  which  the  special  accounts  are  replenished  has  a  direct 
bearing  on  the  success  of  Programme  Implementation.  The  manual 
includes cash flow management tips. 
A  series  of  imprest  advances  to  facilitate  trainings/  capacity  building 
activities  at  various 
local  governments, 
focal  areas,  ministries, 
departments,  Agencies,  NGOs,  etc.  This  manual  is  responding  to  the 
challenge that there are many implementing agencies but then there is a 
need  to  ensure  that  financial  control  is  achieved  without  impairing  the 
pace at which the Programme is implemented. 
Commitment  and  creditors  control.  The  risk  of  over-committing  the 
Programme beyond available resources has to be dealt with right from the 
start.  The  manual  describes  specific  management  tools  to  achieve 
effective commitment accounting. 
Fixed  Assets  accounting/  controls.  Even  though  under  the  IPSAS  cash 
basis of accounting, fixed assets may be expensed, the disclosures of the 
Programme  financed  fixed  assets  is  required.  The  manual  illustrates  the 
controls  needed  to  ensure  that  the  Programme’s  fixed  assets  are 
180 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
Part 
Description 
Coverage Summary 
protected from misuse. 
G 
Summary of the 
bookkeeping Strategy 
H 
Financial Reporting and 
application of Public Sector 
Accounting Standards in 
the Malawian Context 
Management accounting through progress reporting. Progress reporting is 
a formal requirement and senior management have to availed with timely 
analytical information about the state of financial affairs, budget execution, 
analytical  value  for  money  reviews  etc.  The  manual  explains  the 
bookkeeping  strategy  and  the  specific  formats  for  the  progress  financial 
reports. 
Annual  Financial  Reporting  in  accordance  with  the  International  Public 
Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS)  as  adopted  by  GOM.  The 
Programme  has  to  be  able  to  prepare  a  complete  set  of  financial 
statements  in  accordance  with  the  IPSAS  for  timely  presentation  to  the 
external  auditors.  The  manual  offers  guidelines  to  enable  Programme 
management to fulfill its  statutory responsibility regarding the preparation 
of a complete set of financial statements and thus the external auditors will 
not  be  provided  with  only  a  trial  balance  but  a  complete  of  financial 
statements comprising: 
o  Executive commentary 
o  Statement of financial position 
o  Budget Execution statement 
o  Notes and policies used in the preparation of the 
financial statements 
o  Disclosure  schedules  such  as 
fixed  assets 
registers, off-balance sheet items etc. 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A.  General Internal Control 
Principles 
Topic 
Definition: 
Segregation of duties: 
Authorization: 
Approvals: 
Section:  IV A 
Responsibility: All implementing Staff. 
Coverage 
Internal  control  system  is  a  whole  system  of  controls,  financial  and 
otherwise, instituted by management in order to carry out the business of 
FARMSE  in  an  efficient  and  orderly  fashion,  ensure  adherence  to 
Programme’s  policies,  safeguard  the  assets  and  secure  as  far  as 
possible  the  completeness  and  accuracy  of  the  records.  The  individual 
components of an internal control system are known as ‘internal controls’. 
In designing and developing the various systems and procedures set out 
in this manual, care is taken to ensure that the pertinent internal controls 
are  integrated  in  these  systems  as  a  means  of  strengthening  them. 
Hereunder is a list of some of the most common and important controls, 
which are generic to most operations of the Programme. 
These  are  designed  to  reduce  the  opportunities  for  someone  to 
perpetuate and/or conceal errors or irregularities in the normal course of 
their  duties.  A  single  individual  should  not  be  able  to  originate  a 
transaction, authorize it, process/ implement it, check it and close it off. 
Designed to provide reasonable assurance that transactions, events from 
which  they  arise  and  procedures  under  which  they  are  processed  are 
authorized  in accordance  with  the  laws,  FARMSE’s  regulations,  AWPBs 
and management policies.  
Designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  authorized  individuals 
approve recorded transactions in accordance with management’s general 
or  specific  criteria.  Examples:  Specific  transactions  are  approved  by 
persons having authority to do so in accordance with established policies 
and procedures; 
  Key records are matched before a transaction is approved (e.g. 
181 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A.  General Internal Control 
Principles 
Section:  IV A 
Responsibility: All implementing Staff. 
Topic 
Coverage 
matching invoices with LPOs and GRNs, etc.) 
  Prior  to  acceptance,  changes  to  data  in  existing  files  are 
independently approved, evidenced by documentary approval of 
input before processing. 
Documentation and records: 
These  are  designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  transactions 
and events are properly recorded. Examples: 
  Pre-numbered forms are used to record all of the  Programme’s 
transactions, and accountability is maintained for sequence of all 
numbers used. 
Transaction documents, e.g. invoices, delivery documents, etc., 
are date stamped and tracked to ensure that they are recorded 
on a timely basis. 
 
  Source  documents  are  canceled  after  processing  to  provide 
assurance  that  the  same  documents  shall  not  be  reused  and 
shall  not  result  in  recording  transactions  more  than  once.  Also, 
only original documents are used to process transactions. 
Safeguard access to and use of 
assets and records: 
These  controls  are  designed  to  protect  assets  and  records  against 
physical harm, misuse or unauthorized access. Examples: 
  Secured  facilities  are  used  when  appropriate,  and  access  to 
critical  forms  and  equipment  is  limited  to  authorized  personnel 
only. 
  Assets and records are protected against physical harm. 
  Access  to  programs  and  data  files  is  restricted  to  authorized 
personnel. 
Acknowledgement of task 
performance: 
Controls  providing  for  tasks  performed  to  be  acknowledged  through 
signature, initials, rubber stamps, etc.  
Management and Accounting 
controls: 
Controls in this category are designed to provide independent checks on 
the validity, accuracy and completeness of processed data. Examples: 
  Calculations, 
extensions, 
classifications being independently reviewed. 
additions 
and 
accounting 
  Subsidiary  ledgers  and  records  are  reconciled  to  the  general 
ledger. 
  Management reviews performance reports. 
 
The  Programme  promptly  follows  up  on  complaints  from 
Grantees, suppliers, customers, employees and others. 
  Actual operating results are compared with approved budgets, 
and variances are explained.  
Presence  of  an  organization  plan/chart,  which  defines  and  allocates 
responsibilities, and identifies clear lines of reporting. 
Organizational Controls: 
Systems Controls and Security: 
These  controls  are  applied and  inbuilt  within  the  Accounting  Package  to 
protect  data  from  accidental  or  deliberate  threats  which  might  cause 
unauthorized modification, disclosure or destruction. 
  Accessibility levels need to be provided to prevent unauthorized 
amendment,  adding  to,  deleting  or  re-arranging  the  data,  or 
extracting 
the  data.  These 
that 
accessibility limits should be in form of log on and passwords. A 
basic  password  structure  shall  be  applied  based  on  access 
limits. 
information 
forms 
the 
  Reports  should  not  be  produced  or  disclosed  in  any  manner 
incompatible with their purposes. 
182 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A.  General Internal Control 
Principles 
Section:  IV A 
Responsibility: All implementing Staff. 
Topic 
Coverage 
  Regular backup of data requires to be maintained. The backup 
requires to be done on a daily basis and copies need to be kept 
off premises. 
  Proper  shut  down  procedures  need  to  be  put  in  place  only  by 
authorized officers. Network should not be left on unattended. 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Guidelines 
Topic 
Core Values/ 
Principles: 
Management tools 
that have to be put 
in place: 
 
 
 
The finance unit of FARMSE will protect and enhance the financial resources 
of  the  Programme  through  effective  cash  management,  timely  replenishment 
of  special  account.  These  responsibilities  will  be  conducted  in an ethical  and 
efficient manner, guided by the financing agreement, letter to borrower, GOM 
financial  management  requirements,  and  this  implementation  manual  and  in 
the best interests of achieving agricultural commercialization in Malawi. 
The  purpose  of  cash  management  is  to  fulfill  the  fiduciary  responsibilities  of 
the  FARMSE  in  handling,  securing,  and  disbursing  the  funds  of  the 
Programme.  Cash  management  policies  and  controls  assure  the  safety  of 
Programme liquid assets, provide required liquidity for operations, and obtain 
the best banking relationships. 
The finance unit will strive to ensure that cash flow constraints due to delayed 
replenishments  of  imprest  accounts  are  not  mentioned  by  implementers  as 
reasons for delayed Programme Implementation. 
 
  All  cash  books  whether  in  respect  of  the  special  account  or  the  operational 
accounts  will  be  embedded  in  the  double-entry  accounting  package.  No 
manual cash books will be entertained. 
The accounting package should be able to do interactive bank reconciliation- 
no off the-system bank reconciliations will be entertained. 
The accounting package should be able to export cash book entries into excel 
to  allow  for  ease  preparation  of  withdrawal  applications  in  the  formats 
prescribed in the letter to the borrower. 
 
 
  Payment  vouchers  should  be  generated  by  the  accounting  package  to  allow 
for instant posting of the transactions in the accounting package- this way no 
back log of un-posted transactions will be entertained. 
The PSU will acquire a PAID rubber-stamp to cancel documents at the point of 
payment  to  avoid  presenting  the  same  documents  for  settlement  more  than 
once. 
There will be a fire proof safe to store cash- even though this will be limited to 
only petty cash. Other things to be kept in the safe will include blank cheques 
and receipt books. 
 
Cash and Bank 
Internal Controls: 
  Strictly, the payment vouchers will be  electronically printed by the accounting 
 
package to ensure timely data capture. 
The  pre-numbered  cheques  should  be  used  with  strict  observance  of  serial 
continuity, which should be regularly independently checked. 
  Access to blank cheques should be restricted to the Financial Controller. 
  Petty  cash  disbursements  should  be  operated  under  an  imprest  system  with 
restriction on IOU use 
  Periodic independent counts should be carried out. 
  Replenishments should be approved by the Financial Controller and National 
183 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Programme Director 
  Adequate procedures for initiation, processing and authorisation of payments  
  Adequate cut-off procedures should be in place. 
  All  recorded  disbursements  should  be  in  exchange  for  value  received  by 
RLEEP for the period. In particular, there should be controls to ensure that: 
There  are  adequate  procedures  for  approving  payments  with  back-up  or 
supporting documentation. 
There are procedures for cancellation of documents to prevent re-use, e.g. all 
payment documents are stamped PAID after payment. 
 
 
Cheque Payments 
  Evidence of payments to suppliers and 3rd parties. 
  Rules for issuing open cheques are adequate. 
  Expenditure is eligible for disbursement under the AWPBs 
  Adequate cut-off procedures are in place. 
 
There should be controls to ensure that payments are accurately and correctly 
calculated. In particular: 
  Cheque amounts should be agreed to supporting documents. 
  Regular  comparisons  of  actual  payments  with  budgets  should  be  made  and 
investigations of any anomalies or variances carried out. 
  Management  should 
take 
interest 
to 
follow-up  creditor  queries, 
long-
outstanding reconciling items on bank reconciliation statements. 
 
In general no payment shall be made without an approved payments voucher. 
  Payments  shall  only  be  made  on  the  basis  of  original  supplier’s  invoices  and/or 
other  properly  raised  requests  for  payment  only.  No  payments  shall  be  made  on 
the basis of duplicates or photocopies of such documents.  
  Payments  shall  be  made only  to  the  persons named in  the  vouchers or  their 
accredited  agent  and  wherever  possible  shall  be  made  by  means  of  direct 
bank transfer or crossed cheques. Where payments are made in cash signed 
receipts  (duly  stamped  where  necessary)  shall  be  taken  at  the  time  of 
payment. Except where an amount is receivable for official purposes (e.g. by 
way  of  temporary  imprest)  or  for  his  or  her  own  account  (e.g.  in  payment  of 
subsistence allowance) payments shall not be made to officers of FARMSE. 
If the recipient of a payment in cash is unable to write, he or she shall make 
his  or  her  thumb  print  mark  in  acknowledgement  of  receipt,  the  act  being 
witnessed by an officer of FARMSE other than the paying officer.  The witness 
shall  certify  on  the  payment  voucher  that  the  payments  were  made  to  the 
persons entitled to receive them. 
 
  Where the paying  officer  is  in  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  any  person  drawing 
payment  in  cash,  he  or  she  shall  require  that  person  to  produce  proof  of 
identity (e.g. a driving license) or to have his or her identity attested by a third 
person who can be identified, who shall sign the voucher as a witness to the 
payment. 
The  date  of  recording  of  a  payment  transaction  is  the  date  when  a  cheque 
payment voucher (PCV) is generated. 
 
  Cheques  shall  always  be  crossed  unless  there  are  compelling  reasons  for 
opening them. Should it be necessary to open a crossed cheque, this shall be 
done  by  a  “Crossing  Cancelled”  rubber  stamp  and  counter-signed  by  the 
authorized signatories. 
  All payment vouchers shall be properly supported with appropriate documents 
or sub-vouchers including requisitions, purchase orders, a suppliers’ invoices, 
delivery notes and an inspection/goods received notes. 
  All payments shall be made when, or as soon as possible after, they are due 
and  the  preparation  of  payment  vouchers  and  their  submission  to  the 
appropriate  paying  officer  shall  not  be  delayed.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt, 
payments  shall  be  made,  as  far  as  possible,  within  30  days  after  receipt  of 
invoices or demand notes presented upon satisfactory performance or delivery 
184 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
 
of goods and or services. 
In circumstances where it is not possible to issue a cheque e.g. where an error 
has been  made  in  writing  out  the cheque,  the  cheque shall  be cancelled.  To 
avoid  any  possibility  of  subsequent  misuse,  the  cheque  shall  be  clearly 
marked “Cancelled” and the top right-hand corner of the cheque torn off. They 
shall  then  be  filed  in  chronological  order  among  the  paid  cheques  received 
from the Bank.  
  All payments shall be entered in the cashbook immediately they are made and 
the cheque number shall be inserted on the payment voucher as soon as the 
entry in the cashbook has been made. 
The dates on cheques shall be the dates when they are written/printed. 
 
  Every  officer  signing  a  cheque  shall  satisfy  him  or  herself  that  the  cheque  is 
correctly drawn and that the payee and the amount correspond with the details 
of  the  relevant  invoices  and/or  receipts.  Under  no  circumstances  shall  an 
officer  sign  a  cheque,  which  has  not  been  fully  completed  in  all  respects  or 
one  for  which  if  any  other  information  known  to  him/her  would  bar  the 
payment. 
In  the  event  of  cheques  issued  by  the  Programme  being  reported  as  lost  or 
mislaid before they are cashed, the bank shall immediately be advised to stop 
payment  of  the  cheque,  acknowledgement  of  this  instruction  being  obtained. 
The payee shall be requested to provide a written indemnity against any loss 
being sustained by Programme because of the missing cheque and he or she 
may then be issued with a replacement cheque. If the original cheque is found 
before a replacement cheque is issued, the bank shall be requested to lift the 
stop  order.    If  the  original  cheque  is  found  after  a  replacement  cheque  is 
issued, it shall immediately be cancelled. 
 
Payment Vouchers 
  Unless expressly authorized, under no circumstances shall payments be made 
before they are due, or stores be purchased before they are required, merely 
because  funds  which  would  not  otherwise  be  utilized  are  available  under  an 
item. Nor shall the unexpected portion of an item be drawn for the purpose of 
setting it in reserve to meet impending payments or be carried to a deposit or 
similar account for that purpose. 
All  payments  shall  be  supported  by  payment  vouchers,  which  shall  be  electronically 
generated  by  the  system  in  triplicates  and  shall  contain  or  have  attached  thereto  full 
particulars  of  the  service  for  which  payment  is  made,  such  as  dates,  numbers, 
distances, rates etc. so as to enable them to be checked without reference to any other 
document.   
An authorizing officer shall, therefore, be held personally responsible for ensuring: - 
(a) 
that the services specified have been duly and competently performed; 
(b) 
that the prices charged are either according to contracts or approved scales or 
are fair and reasonable according to appropriate rates; 
that authority has been obtained as quoted; 
that the calculations and castings have been verified and are arithmetically 
that the classification of the expenditure is correct; 
that there are sufficient funds uncommitted in the relevant budget line to meet 
(c)  
(d) 
correct; 
(e)  
(f)  
the expenditure; 
(g)  
and 
(h)  
The  signature  of  officers  on  payment  vouchers  and  certificates  shall  be  in  ink  or 
ballpoint  pen.    Stamped  facsimile  signatures  shall  not  be  used.  Only  the  original 
payment  voucher  or  certificate  shall  be  signed,  copies,  if  any,  of  the  voucher  being 
that the persons named in the voucher are those entitled to receive payment; 
that any supplies purchased have been recorded.  
185 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
initialed only.  The name and designation of the officer signing a voucher shall be typed 
or written legibly below the signature 
To avoid the possibility of a duplicate payment being made on a voucher, as soon as a 
voucher has been paid, the officer making the payment shall stamp "PAID" across the 
face  of  the  voucher  and  accompanying  documents.    In  the  event  of  a  duplicate  or 
irregular  payment  being  made  because  of  a  failure  to  comply  with  this  provision,  the 
paying  officer  responsible  for  the  omission  may  be  liable  to  be  surcharged  with  the 
amount of any loss.  
Except  as  may  be  specifically  authorized  by  the  Programme  Director,  no  officer  shall 
certify  a  voucher  for  payment  to  himself  or  herself  nor  can  the  National  Programme 
Director approve a payment to him/herself.  
In  the  event  of  an  authorized  payment  being  made  in  consequence  of  an  incorrect 
certificate on a voucher, the officer giving the certificate shall be held responsible and 
the amount may be surcharged against him or her, and he or she may also be subject 
to disciplinary action. 
Payment vouchers shall be prepared in such a way as to prevent fraudulent alteration 
of,  or  addition  to,  the  figures  or  details  given  on  them.    Any  alterations  on  payment 
vouchers  shall  be  initialed  by  the  officer  signing  the  voucher,  or  by  the  receiver  or 
paying officer, according to the part of the voucher in which the alteration is made. 
Separate  payment  vouchers  shall,  as  far  as  possible,  be  used  for  separate  items  of 
expenditure or for the payment of different services, especially in cases in which each 
service has been separately authorized.  One voucher, however, may be used for any 
number  of  separate  items  if  it  is  deemed  necessary  e.g.  where  the  separate  items  or 
services have been delivered by one supplier or payee. 
In  cases  where  officers  present  claims  for  small  payments  made  by  them,  supporting 
documents,  shall  be  produced  whenever  practicable.    When  supporting  documents 
cannot be obtained, the officer shall certify that the charges have been incurred solely 
upon the Programme service and actually paid by him or her. 
Unpresented 
Cheques: 
The following procedures will be adopted by the paying officer if cheques issued by 
them remain unpresented for longer than six months from the date on which they were 
drawn: 
  Raise a journal voucher debiting the amount of the cheque to the bank 
account and crediting “Creditors Account”, and quoting on the journal voucher 
the number and date of the original payment voucher and cross-referencing 
the cashbook entries. 
  Should the original payee request for payment, enquiries will be made to 
establish that payment has not been made and if no reason is found to the 
contrary payment may be made as a debit to the “Creditors A/C”. 
Bank 
reconciliation 
Statements: 
The  main  object  of  bank  reconciliation  is  to  ensure  that  the  bank  transactions  in  the 
General  Ledger  bank  account  tally  with  the  bank  statement,  during  a  defined  period, 
normally a month. 
All bank accounts shall be reconciled monthly with bank statements by an officer, who, 
if  possible,  shall  take  no  part  in  the  receipt  or  disbursement  of  funds.  Bank 
reconciliations shall be prepared and submitted to the Financial Controller by the 15th 
day of the subsequent month.   
Bank reconciliation steps: 
 
If  the  bank statements and advices are  not  received  by  10th  of  the  following 
month, follow up shall be made with the bank. 
  Check  the  deposits  made  in  the  systems  generated  cashbook  against  the 
186 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
bank  statements  to  see  if  there  are  any  deposits  not  credited  on  the  bank 
statements. 
  Check the credit advices against the bank statements to see if any unidentified 
 
 
credits are shown. 
List items from the previous reconciliation statement, if any, and from the cash 
books such as: 
a.  Unpaid cheques and /or vouchers 
b.  Deposits in transit 
c.  Corrections for miss-codings and key data input errors 
d.  Unidentifiable items 
Items  in  the  bank  statements  but  not  recorded  in  the  cashbook  (e.g.  Bank 
Charges, direct credits, interest earned, etc.) shall be posted using a Journal 
Voucher  (JV).  Ensure  that  such  transactions  are  supported  by  bank  advice 
slips. 
  After  reconciliation,  the  person  preparing  it  shall  sign  and  handover  it  to  the 
Financial Controller (FC) for review. 
FC shall review and approve the bank reconciliation. 
 
  Cheques that remain unpresented for more than two months shall be followed 
up and the evidence of such action documented.  Those over six months shall 
be written back and the corresponding expenditure reversed. 
The  Financial  Controller  shall  file  for  audit  purposes  and  references, 
reconciliation statements and any  other working papers that may be required 
to verify the accuracy of the entries in the accounts. 
 
Review and Follow-up Action 
Bank Accounts 
signatories: 
Expenditure 
Commitment: 
 
 
 
The  bank  reconciliation  statements  shall  be  reviewed  and  approved  by 
Financial Controller, who shall: 
a. 
Ascertain that the reconciliation is supported with a list of outstanding 
cheques. 
Review  the  reconciliation  and seek  explanations  for  any  significant  or 
long outstanding items. 
Ensure that proper adjusting entries have been made. 
Check that follow-up letters in respect of unidentifiable items have been 
written to the banks. 
Check that the banks have attended to the follow-up letters. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
The  Special  Account  will  require  joint  signatures  of  PMU  and  MoFEPD.  The 
Signatories  will  be  agreed  between  IFAD  and  GOM  at  the  start  of  the 
Programme  and  the  respective  Specimen  Signatures  will  be  forwarded  to 
IFAD. The specimen signatures for the officers required to sign on withdrawal 
applications will also be availed to IFAD. 
The active signatories to the Operational Account will also be agreed between 
IFAD and GOM at the start of the Programme. The most active signatories will 
be  the  Programme  Director  and  the  Financial  Controller,  and  a  Cheque  will 
require a minimum of two signatories. 
Requisition form for goods or terms of reference for services shall be established by the 
FARMSE implementing unit, which lodges the requisition, signed by the head of the unit 
and  approved  by  the  Programme  Director  through  the  Financial  Controller.  The 
requisition form shall include clear information on goods and/or services requested and 
terms of reference.     
The  requisition  form  will  be  transmitted  to  the  Financial  Controller  who  will  verify  to 
ensure  the  eligibility  of  the  expenditure  as  far  as  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  is 
concerned,  and  makes  sure  of  fund  availability  on  the  budget  line  on  the  concerned 
187 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
bank account. The Financial Controller will ensure that the Vote book is completed 
before  the  payment  is  passed  up-wards  for  further  processing.  The  National 
Programme Director will not approve payments or sign contracts unless the vote 
book  is  updated.  In  case  of  insufficiency,  he/she  will  examine  the  possibility  of  fund 
transfer  from  item  with  surplus  amount  to  finance  the  budget  line  in  deficit  and 
recommend  for  a  formal  request  from  GOM  and  IFAD.  He/she  will  then  submit  the 
proposal  to  National  Programme  Director  for  submission  to  GOM  and  IFAD  for 
appropriate budget revisions.  
 
 
The  requisition  duly  approved  by  the  National  Programme  Director  is 
transmitted to Internal Tender Committee. 
The  head  of  the  FARMSE  implementation  unit  which  submits  the 
requisition  form  shall  provide  further  information  on  specificities  of 
goods and services he/she requests.    
Flow of Funds 
Explanation for 
each of the lines 
on the flow of 
funds fig: 
 
 
Line 1. Direct payments from IFAD to suppliers, etc for disbursements valued 
with  a  minimum  value  of  USD  20 000  There  is  also  an  option  to  pay  for 
contracts above USD 20 000 from the Special Account or operational account 
at PSU and then seek replenishment from IFAD. 
Line  2.  Initial  allocation  into  the  Special  Account  (advance)  and  subsequent 
replenishments. The Special account will be initiated with an advance of USD 
1,000,000  as  stipulated  in  the  financing  agreement.  This  advance  will  be 
replenished  until  towards  programme  closure  when  recovery  of  the  advance 
starts  to  take  place.  With  the  replenishment  system,  the  full  initial  advance 
should always be reconcilable within the replenishment cycle as any ineligible 
expenses incurred will be replenished back. Towards programme closure the 
advance  to  the  Special  Account  will  be  recovered  by  IFAD;  by  way  of 
justification  of  expenditure  accounted  for  by  the  programme.  When  recovery 
commences,  the  programme  will  submit  SOE  justifications  and  will  not  be 
replenished in  full,  with  a  portion  going to  the  credit  of  the advance account. 
188 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Should  the  full  advance  not  be  fully  recovered  by  presentation  of  SOEs  to 
justify the use thereof, the amount outstanding not justified is to be refunded to 
IFAD. 
Line 3. Payments in foreign currency for goods supplied, works executed and 
services rendered from the Special Account. 
Line  4.  Transfer  of  IFAD  funds  from  the  special  account  to  PSU  operational  
accounts for covering eligible local costs in Malawi Kwacha;  
Line 5. Payments of IFAD portion of local costs in Malawi Kwacha. Common 
items will be bulked and centrally procured at the PSU. 
Line  6.  GOM  cash  transfers  to  the  Programme  to  meet  taxes  and  duties 
components  of  transactions.  Unlike  line  8,  this  line  is  transaction  specific, 
where  there  is  need  to  write-out  a  single  cheque  to  a  supplier/  contractor 
covering the taxes as well; in that case GOM will be required to first make the 
transfer. In accordance with the financing agreements, taxes should never be 
pre-financed using the IFAD grant/loan resources. 
Line  7.  GOM  currently  prefers  to  pay  directly  to  the  suppliers,  thus  the 
counterpart  contribution  will  either  be  through  tax  waivers  by  exempting  the 
Programme or direct payments to the suppliers. 
Line 8. For small procurements such as stationery and office suppliers that tax 
waiver/ programme tax exemption is not practicable and thus GOM may have 
to  avail  a  small  General  imprest  to  the  PSU  for  such  items  to  avoid  the 
programme pre-financing some of the taxes on the small procurements. 
Line  9.  PSU  pays  the  GOM  counterpart  contribution  to  the  suppliers/ 
implementers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As is common with many projects, a number of programme transactions will be settled 
without the cash flows passing through the PSU and this creates a risk of not recording 
the  transactions  in  the  accounting  system  since  the  bank  reconciliations  (that  would 
have  flagged  a  reminder  of  the  non-recording  of  a  transaction)  would  still  agree. 
Examples  of  the  transactions  that  are  at  a  risk  of  not  being  recorded  include  (a)  the 
direct payments from IFAD – line one on the flow of funds; (b) GOM payments directly 
to the suppliers by way of tax exempting the Programme – line 7 on the flow of funds; 
(c) private sector making a contribution directly without the cash flow passing through 
the PSU – line 12  
Suggested Remedy 
The  following  remedies  have  been  suggested  (a)  the  Financial  Controller  at  the  PSU 
will  be  expected  to  post  those  transactions  in  the  accounting  system  using  Journal 
Vouchers  as  they  do  not  have  to  go  through  the  cash  books;  (b)  just  like  bank 
reconciliations  will  be  done  monthly,  on  a  quarterly  basis  there  should  be  a 
reconciliation  between  the  PSU  records  and  the  IFAD’s  historic  transaction  detailed 
statements regarding the IFAD transactions; (c) additional analytical reviews should be 
done by the PSU on the data coming out of the accounting system such as by applying 
the VAT rates on the transactions expected to have got tax waivers and comparing the 
results with the recorded GOM contributions. 
Risk of failing to 
record a non-cash 
transaction 
189 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
The  bulking-up  of 
procurements 
through  the  PSU 
creates  a  risk  of 
either charging the 
for 
loan  account 
transactions 
that 
characteristically 
are  chargeable  on 
the  grant  and  vice 
versa. 
Ineligible expenses 
on  taxes  paid  on 
small 
procurements 
Guidelines 
The  risk  associated  with  bulked  transactions;  especially  those,  paid  for  by  the  Direct 
Payments method, is that the application may earmark one source of funding; say the 
IFAD loan, when in fact some of the transactions being paid for are chargeable on the 
IFAD grant. The result would be one funding source getting overdrawn while the other 
remaining  with  significant  available  balances  and  yet  reallocations  across  different 
sources can be difficult. 
Suggested Remedy 
The PSU in completing replenishment applications will exercise due care and earmark 
the  items  being  procured  to  their  respective  components  with  a  view  of  properly 
completing the replenishment/ direct payment applications. For a bulked up transaction 
lot it may be necessary to complete two replenishment applications depending on the 
components  to  which  the transactions  relate  to,  and  therefore  the  appropriate  funding 
source. 
A review of the operations of the two IFAD supported projects in Malawi has revealed 
that the Government contribution in form of foregoing taxes is by giving tax exemption 
to the Programmes that are 100% IFAD supported, a case in point being the RLEEP. 
The  arrangements  works  very  well  for  the  larger  procurements  but  gets  impracticable 
for  the  smaller  procurements  such  Stationery,  office  sundries;  where  the  tax 
components  of  the  transactions  get  pre-financed  using  the  IFAD  resources.  The 
amounts  individually  may  appear  immaterial  but  with  time  they  can  accumulate  to 
substantial  amounts.  This  could  result  in  audit  qualifications,  cash  flow  challenges  as 
the  imprest  would  have  been  reduced;  and  generally  a  breach  of  the  financing 
agreements. 
Suggested Options 
(c) 
(b) 
(a)  One way of dealing with the risk is to have well planned procurements even 
for  the  small  items.  For  example  stationery  and  office  sundries  for  six 
months  could  be  procured.  This  way  it  would  be  possible  to  find  supplier 
who  would  understand  the  operation  of  the  Malawi  tax  systems  and  not 
charge  VAT  for  supplies  to  a  tax  exempt  programme.  With  organized 
procurements  even  of  such  items  as  stationery  that  appear  small,  the 
amounts involved become attractive to formal market suppliers. 
 Another way is to issue framework contracts to properly procured suppliers 
of  such  items  that  appear  to  be  small  such  as  office  stationery. With  such 
frame  contracts,  the  contract  sum  would  be  sufficiently  significant  to  apply 
the government approach of clearing taxes.  
 Another way is for government to avail the programme a reasonable imprest 
such that the refunds of the pre-financed taxes can be made instantly, and 
with  such  an  arrangement,  the  principle  would  be  no  taxes  should  be  pre-
financed unless the cash to refund back is instantly held by the PSU. 
 Given that the replenishment system that IFAD uses does not systematically 
replenish  the  tax  components  of  transactions,  any  such  taxes  that  have 
been pre-financed would reduce the cash flow available in the replenishment 
cycle and this would be revealed by the Special Account reconciliation that 
will usually be attached to replenishment applications. A discrepancy on the 
Special Account reconciliation will always be investigated by the PSU at the 
chief  executive  level.  Therefore  the  inception  trainings  in  the  IFAD 
disbursement  procedures  for  the  PSU  staff  will  not  be  restricted  to  the 
accounting personnel but should be extended to the non-finance managers 
such as the Programme Director, the Procurement Specialist, the Monitoring 
and Evaluation Officer to enable these also appreciate the idea of such tools 
as  Special  Account  reconciliations  in  trailing  the  whereabouts  of  the  initial 
advance  to  the  Special  Account.  If  the  Special  Account  reconciliation  that 
(d) 
190 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
will  usually  attached  to  replenishment  applications  is  consistently  in 
agreement  from  the  first  replenishments  to  Programme  Closure,  then  the 
Special Account recovery would be guaranteed to be smooth. 
The FARMSE- 
Cash-Flow 
Management Tips 
Cash-flow planning will be the one of the core-functions of the Financial Controller. The 
Finance  Unit  will  strive  to  ensure  that  cash-flow  is  not  mentioned  as  one  of  the 
constraints  hindering  the  pace  of  Programme  Implementation.  The  following  tips  are 
available: 
  ACF grants will be replenished for on a cash-basis at PSU level- as opposed 
to waiting for the grantee to report having fully utilised the grant. 
  Bigger payments of over USD 20,000 will be paid for by the direct payments 
method.  This  method  will  however,  be  subjected  to  tighter  internal  controls, 
and will be recorded in the accounting package just like the in-country cheque 
payments. 
 
  Advances  to  implementing  agencies  will  be  activity  specific  to  be  retired 
immediately after the activity is accomplished as opposed to sending general 
imprest advances to a wide range of implementing agencies. 
The Financial Controller will formally present in management meeting, monthly 
and  quarterly  cash  flow  forecasts  to  identify  potential  cash  deficits  early 
enough  and  take  necessary  actions.  By  inference,  this  means  that  the 
Financial  Controller  together  with  the  Procurement  Officer  will  keep  in 
appropriate  software  the  status  of  all  commitments  including  the signed  ACF 
grant agreements. 
 
  Withdrawal Applications to replenish the special account will be submitted as 
soon as the minimum amount of 20% of the initial advance is attained without 
any delay. 
The Loan/ grant proceeds will not be used to finance any of the counter-part 
contributions, such as taxes because such a practice will immediately eat into 
the working capital because the system will declare it ineligible. 
To ensure speedy processing of Withdrawal Applications, they should be proof 
checked for any errors, carefully ticked against a check list that accompanies 
it,  and  the  usually  attached  special  account  reconciliation  should  never  be 
allowed to get out of balance. 
 
  A  register  of  WA  in  the  pipeline  should  be  maintained  and  these  should  be 
appropriately aged. As soon as the standard agreed lead time to process the 
WA is exceeded, an inquiry should be sent to IFAD. 
FARMSE  should establish  good  banking  relationship  with  bankers, so  that  in 
periods of peak, cheques can be honoured against pending transfer from the 
Special to the Operational Account. 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Section:  IV D 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
C.  Follow-up of 
Advances 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Advances: 
 
In performing the day-to-day activities of the Programme, it will sometimes be 
found necessary to advance funds to staff or implementing units on the basis 
of the estimated cost of the activity to be carried out. When a lot of funding is 
tied-up in advances to implementing agencies, cash flow constraints will recur. 
Therefore  advances  will  strictly  activity  tagged  to  be  retired  immediately  the 
activity is complete. Even though advances are to be kept to a minimum there 
monitoring/  follow-up  will  be  very  important  and  therefore  the  following  tools 
are being suggested: 
191 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
 
The recording of accounting information in respect of advances and generally 
accounts  receivable  shall  be  done  through  the  debtors’  module  or  debtors 
control account and not through the general ledger. 
  Any  funds  advance  made  to  the  staff  or  implementing  agency  shall  be 
 
 
authorized by the National Programme Director.  
The funds advanced shall be debited to the personal account of the respective 
individual or implementing agency to be embedded in a debtors’ module or the 
debtors control account depending on the accounting package to be installed. 
Funds  in  respect  of  advances  shall  be  accounted  for  immediately  after  the 
purpose  for  which  they  were  made  has  been  accomplished,  but  in  any  case 
not  later  than  48  hours.  After  the  lapse  of  48  hours,  such  funds  shall  be 
recovered  from  the  individual’s  monthly  salary  at  the  end  of  the  month,  if  by 
the time of preparing the payroll no accountability has been submitted or in the 
case of implementing agencies, other sanctions will be sought. 
  No additional advances shall be given to a person/ implementing agency with 
an outstanding advance (i.e. funds remaining unaccounted for). 
  Where  an  advance  is  required,  a  requisition  shall  be  initiated  by  way  of  an 
Advance  Requisition  and  Claim  Form  to  the  National  Programme  Director 
through the Financial Controller. 
  After  the  National  Programme  Director has authorised  the  requisition, it  shall 
be forwarded to the accounts department for processing in the same manner 
as for cheque payments. 
 
to 
the 
forward, 
  When 
the  purpose 
individual  concerned  shall 
for  which  an  advance  was  requested  has  been 
accomplished, 
finance 
department, receipts and other relevant supporting documents under the cover 
of a memorandum through his/her head of implementing unit. 
In the finance department, a Journal Voucher (JV) shall be prepared to which 
the supporting documents shall be attached. The JV shall reverse the original 
entry by crediting the personal account of the individual concerned. 
The JVs shall be approved by the Financial Controller 
JVs shall be allocated numerical numbers and filed in sequential order.  
 
 
  Any funds that remain unutilised after the completion of the activity for which 
the advance was given will be passed on the Finance Unit for which a receipt 
will be issued. Such funds will be banked intact. 
the 
RLEEP 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
D.  Commitment and 
Creditor Control Tips 
Section:  IV E 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
                            Procurement Officer 
Commitments and 
creditor control 
tips 
  Cash-flow  management  and  commitment  control  are  interrelated.  However, 
commitment  control  is  even  more  relevant  in  eliminating  ineligible  expenses. 
Under commitment accounting, accounting officers are not supposed to enter 
any  contracts  or  issue  local  purchase  orders  unless  they  are  certain  of  the 
source  of  finance  to  settle  the  obligation.  Under  this  procedure,  there  is  no 
reason why creditor account should remain unsettled for over a month. 
Therefore, the Financial Controller will ensure that no Commitment is entered 
into unless it has sufficient provision in the AWPB and this cannot be achieved 
unless the standard GOM vote book is put to use as a management tool. No 
contract  will  be  signed  unless  the  commitment  column  of  the  vote  book  is 
updated. 
 
  Having  provision  in  the  AWPB  is  one  thing  and  having  the  immediate  cash 
flow  is  another,  and  therefore  the  tools  discussed  in  the  preceding  section 
192 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
regarding the monthly and quarterly cash flow forecasts should be able to fix 
this. 
  Other tips regarding commitment and creditor control include the following: 
  Maintenance of a contracts register as per format to be contained in the Letter 
to the Borrower. 
  Establishment  of  a  confidential  system  to  receive  complaints  from  creditors- 
this can also detect some frauds. 
  Presentation  of  creditor  age  reports  with  explanations  as  to  why  some 
accounts may have remained unsettled for long. 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
E.  Care and Custody of 
Fixed Assets 
Section:  IV F 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
                            Procurement Officer                           
Vehicles: 
 
The  management  of  Programme’s  vehicles  shall  be  vested 
the 
Procurement/ Contracts Officer. Vehicle management shall include insurance, 
repairs  and  maintenance,  fueling,  control  of  movement,  boarding  and 
disposals, etc.  
in 
  Vehicles  shall  be  kept  in  good  state  of  repair  at  all  times.  Repairs  shall  be 
carried  out  by  designated Workshops  or  Garages.  Prior  to  any  repairs  being 
undertaken,  quotations  shall  be  solicited  for.  The  decision  as  to  which 
Workshop/Garage to execute the repairs shall be arrived at in accordance with 
procurement guidelines regarding tendered procurements. 
  Where vehicles are damaged as a result of accidents and the insurance firms 
assumed responsibility, the Procurement Officer shall satisfy himself or herself 
that garages chosen by the insurance firms are of good repute and capable of 
executing the repairs in a proper manner. 
  Drivers  and  other  officers  using  official  vehicles  shall  be  responsible  for 
ensuring that such vehicles are taken for regular service as recommended by 
the  manufacturers;  ensuring  that  vehicles  are  parked  overnight  in  safe  and 
secure  places  free  of  pilferage  of  accessories  like  spare  wheels,  jacks, 
windscreens,  etc.;  ensuring  that  the  vehicle  devices  are  in  good  operational 
order;  ensuring  that  the  tools,  first  aid kits  and  fire  extinguishers  are  in  good 
working  order;  checking  oil  and  water  adequacy  and;  cleanliness  of  the 
vehicle. 
 
  Programme  vehicles  shall  be  insured.  The  type  of  vehicle  insurance  (third 
party or comprehensive) shall depend on the state of a particular vehicle. 
  All fuel shall be drawn using fuel cards.  Fuel cash advances to DAs or other 
implementing  agencies  shall  not  be  allowed  without  exceptional  documented 
justification. In the worst case scenario, fuel coupons may be used where the 
fleet cannot be accommodated by the fuel cards. 
Fuel  card  usages  are  to  be  reconciled  and  efficiency  rates  computed  by  the 
accounts staff  every  month on  a sample  basis.  The statements  from  the  fuel 
stations  should  be  corroborated  to  the  vehicle  log  movement  sheets  that  will 
be maintained. 
The format to use in the computation of the fuel efficiency rates is given here 
below. Efficiency rates that are out of the average will be formally investigated 
and such exceptions will be included in the monthly management accounts. 
 
Fuel Efficiency Computation Format: 
193 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
General 
Assets: 
Fixed 
 
In addition to the Vehicle asset register each vehicle shall have a Log Sheets 
recording  its  history,  performance,  servicing,  overheads,  repairs,  etc.  in 
sufficient  detail  for  periodic  assessments  to  be  made  of  its  performance 
compared with its cost of upkeep.  
the 
  All vehicles shall have Log Movement Sheets (LMSs) recording among other 
things 
following  particulars:  Driver's  name,  Department,  Vehicle 
registration  number,  Journey  being  undertaken,  reason  for  the  journey, 
signature of driver undertaking the journey, signature of authorising officer for 
the  journey  being  undertaken,  record  of  mileage  at  the  start  and  end  of  the 
journey, record of fuels and lubricants being procured for the journey, etc. 
  Periodically  the  Procurement  Officer  shall  conduct  spot-checks  of  LMSs  to 
ensure that they are being used properly. 
  Private  use  of  Programme  vehicles shall  be  restricted  to  the  basic minimum. 
Where,  however,  this  is  absolutely  necessary,  the  application  shall  be 
authorised  by  the  National  Programme  Director.  The  vehicles shall be driven 
by an authorised driver 
 
  All  documents  proving  ownership  of  fixed  assets  like  Title  Deeds,  Logbooks, 
Licenses,  etc.,  shall  be  kept  under  the  custody  of  the  Financial  Controller.  A 
safe  shall  be  maintained  for  these  documents  and  the  keys  shall  be  kept  by 
said officer. 
Fixed  assets  will  be  expensed  under 
the  respective  component  and 
expenditure categories in accordance with GOM requirements. All fixed assets 
shall  be  recorded  in  Fixed  assets  registers,  the  entries  being  supported  by 
procurement  documents  and  store 
issue  vouchers,  which  shall  bear 
references  to  the  folios  of  the  Fixed  assets  Register.    Fixed  assets  shall 
remain  recorded  in  the  ledgers  until  they  are  sold  or  destroyed  after 
condemnation, or written off with due authority. 
  A  fixed  Assets  register  shall be  maintained  to  record  pertinent  information  of 
each asset including date of purchase, cost (and subsequent valuation), serial 
numbers  where  appropriate,  depreciation  policy  and 
location, 
movement,  etc.  This  register  shall  show  the  articles  in  the  custody  of  each 
officer.  
rates, 
  When the occupant of an office, or other person having charge or use of the 
equipment or furniture changes, the goods or equipment in their custody shall 
be  physically  checked  a  designated    officer  and  the  check  acknowledged  by 
the incoming officer as evidence of his or her having taken over the goods or 
equipment. 
  Once in a while, at least once a year, arrangements shall be made for all fixed 
assets  in  the  inventory  ledgers  to  be  physically  checked  against  ledger 
records.  As far as possible, the check shall be carried out by officers having 
no  responsibility  for  the  maintenance  of  the  fixed  assets  records.  Any 
deficiencies or damage not caused by fair wear and tear shall be treated as a 
loss and shall be brought to the attention of the National Programme Director. 
  Movement  of  fixed  assets  shall  be  recorded  by  completion  of  an  Asset 
Movement  Form  duly  authorized  and  approved  by  the  National  Programme 
Director  or  his  delegated  officer.  This  form  shall  be  used  to  update  the  fixed 
assets Register. 
  All  Fixed  Assets  of  the  Programme  shall  be  distinctly  marked,  labeled  or 
engraved  with  inscriptions  to  expressly  identify  them  as  the  property  of  the 
194 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
B.  Cash and Bank 
Management 
Section:  IV C 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Programme. When Assets are ordered to be sold FARMSE’s inscriptions shall 
be obliterated. 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
F.  Bookkeeping Strategy 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Section:  IV G 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Accounting  Software 
to be installed: 
  At the PSU, a simple off-the shelf accounting package will be used to facilitate 
Programme specific financial reporting, in accordance with the chart of accounts 
shown in annex 1. The following books of account shall be integrated within the 
accounting package either as modules or as control accounts. 
o  General Ledger 
o  Cash books 
o  Advances/ debtors ledger 
o  ACF Grants/ creditors module 
 
FARMSE will maintain a centralized accounting system using simple accounting 
software  that  should  be  set-up  to  able  to  produce  FARMSE-wide  accounts.   
The  accounting  system  should  be  set-up  to  be  able  to  generate  financial 
information in the following dimensions: 
o  Expenditure trends by components 
o  Expenditure trends by categories 
o  Expenditure 
trends  by  Financiers 
Contributions 
IFAD,  GOM,  and  Beneficiary 
o  Sources and uses of Funds 
o  Statement  of  financial  position  showing  financial  assets  and  financial 
liabilities 
o  Commitments 
o  Budgetary  control  information  to  ensure  expenditures  do  not  exceed  
set limits 
o  Receivables  in  form  of  replenishment  applications  in  transit  and  any 
refunds  that  may  be  due  from  Government.  Pre-financing  of  counter-
part contribution using the IFAD financing is discouraged and this will 
be  promptly  detected  through  the  Special  Account  reconciliation  that 
will be attached to all replenishment applications and will be an integral 
part of the annual audited financial statements. 
 
To the extent possible IFAD projects are implemented within existing borrower’s 
structures and therefore the off-the shelf accounting package to be installed will 
be  a  very  basic  one  to  compliment  the  already  existing  procedures  and  to 
enhance compilation of information needed to effectively and properly manage 
FARMSE. Given such simplicity, the package should be able to export data into 
Microsoft excel, and thus a lot of data manipulation will be done after data has 
been exported into excel.  
With the off-the shelf accounting package, the project accounts will be posted using 
the  double-entry  accounting  principle.  The  examples  of  the  double-entries  to  be 
passed at each stage in the funds-flow are illustrated above: 
195 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
F.  Bookkeeping Strategy 
Topic 
Double-entry 
mechanics 
Guidelines 
Section:  IV G 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
With the chart of accounts attached as annex 1 and the double entries suggested above 
the  following  guidelines  will  be  followed  to  obtain  financial  information  in  the  required 
information dimensions: 
 
 
 
To  generate  information  category-wise  and  by  financier-  retrieve  the  trial 
balance or income and expenditure statements without sub-accounts. When this 
data  is  exported  into  Microsoft  excel,  with  the  budget  as  a  comparative, 
expenditure trends category-wise will be easily be processed. 
To  generate  information  component-wise  and  by  financier,  similarly  export  the 
trial  balance  into  Microsoft  excel  and  sort  by  the  description  column  and  align 
data as appropriate. 
The  expenditure  trends  by  cost  centre  can  be  analyzed  through  the  same 
component-wise  data  above  since  each  cost  centre  relate  to  a  specific  sub-
component. 
  Sources and uses of funds statements will be a typical income and expenditure 
statement coming out of the accounting package. 
  Statement  of  financial  position  will  be  the  balance  sheet  that  the  system  can 
generate 
  Commitments will be recorded off the accounting package in the vote books and 
contracts  register.  However  the  data  on  commitments  will  be  analyzed  and 
summarized component-wise and category-wise such that the expenditure trend 
tables exported into excel from the accounting package can be enriched with a 
commitments column. 
  Once the budget is approved, it shall be entered in the accounting package and 
thus all reports can be processed with budget comparative information. 
  Any receivables will have been recorded and will appear on the balance sheet 
coming  out  of  the  accounting  package.  Specifically  the  accounting  package 
should  be  able  to  generate  information  about  pre-financed  taxes  and  other 
ineligible expenses refundable by GOM. That means there should a systematic 
method  of  debiting  the  GOM  receivable  account  for  any  such  ineligible 
expenses  at  the  point  they  get  incurred.  For  example  if  MK  100,000  was 
incurred on acquisition of a piece of equipment inclusive of taxes of MK 20,000 
and it is established that the full  MK 100,000 was paid from the IFAD funds, the 
following  entry  would  be  passed:  Debit  expense  a/c-  80,000;  Debit  GOM 
Receivable account- Balance sheet 20,000; Credit Bank- 100,000 
  When the GOM actually effects the refund into the Programme bank accounts 
the following two entries will be passed in the accounting system: 
196 
 FLOW LINE as per the chart above . FLOW DESCRIPTION SPECIFIC DOUBLE ENTRY 1.  From IFAD to suppliers/ grantees for a cost of goods, works, grants and services at not less than U.S. $ 20,000 (Direct Payments) Dr:  expense Account per chart of accounts in annex 1  Cr: IFAD ledger a/c   2.  Initial deposit into the special account and subsequent replenishments Dr: Special Account  Cr: IFAD Ledger a/c   3.  payments in foreign currency for goods supplied, grants, works executed and services rendered DR: expense Account per chart of accounts in annex 1  Cr: Special A/c  4.  Transfer of IFAD funds from the special account to operational account for covering eligible local costs in MK   Dr: Operational Bank A/c  Cr: Special Account  May need to be done through an inter-bank transfer account. 5.  Payments of IFAD portion of local costs Dr: expense Account per chart of accounts in annex 1  Cr: Operational Bank A/c   
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
F.  Bookkeeping Strategy 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Section:  IV G 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Financial Progress 
Reports 
(a) To recognize the cash in flow: Debit Bank- 20,000 Credit- GOM 
Receivable A/c Balance Sheet- 20,000 
(b) To recognize the expense and GOM contribution- Expense a/c 20,000; 
credit GOM contribution- 20,000 
  By viewing the balance sheet one should be able to tell how much is tied up in 
the  pre-financed  counter-part  contributions  and  any  other  ineligible  expenses 
such  as  withheld  funds.  If  information  is  received  from  IFAD  that  funds  have 
been  withheld  due  to  ineligibility  and  it  is  established  that  the  GOM  will  be 
required to make the refunds back into the Special Account the following entries 
shall be passed. Debit: GOM receivable a/c- balance sheet; Credit appropriate 
expense  a/c  that  had  been  charged  initially.  The  GOM  receivable  account  will 
be  appropriately  retired  on  receipt  of  the  actual  refunds  into  the  Programme 
Special or operational bank accounts. 
  Up-to-date financial information should be included as part of progress reports. 
Sufficient  information  must  be  made  available  about  what  money  is  spent  on, 
how  much  is  spent  on  what  and  what  the  results  are.  Half  yearly  and  annual 
reports are to be submitted to IFAD. Within the Government of Malawi, financial 
reports will be submitted to the Treasury- the Accountant General’s office. The 
Accountant General’s office will guide the PSU regarding the format to use and 
the applicable budget codes against which to report, as it understood that these 
will be much more compressed than the chart of accounts attached in annex 1. 
As  GOM  is  moving  to  implement  Integrated  Financial  Management  System 
(IFMS); the PSU at an appropriate time will compile a matrix that compares the 
FARMSE chart of accounts and the  GOM IFMS chart of accounts, for ease of 
manipulation of FARMSE accounting data for within  GOM reporting should the 
need arise from time to time. 
  Monthly  management  accounts  will  be  prepared  to  aid  management  decision 
and  control.  The  format  of  each  of  the  components  of  the  monthly  financial 
report is given in annex 2. The monthly management accounts will include the 
following basic information and will be prepared by the PSU and shared with the 
implementing agencies. 
  Budget  Execution  Report.  A  budget  actual  comparison  of  the  expenditures 
incurred component-wise and category-wise. The actual expenditure should be 
prepared  according  to  the  bookkeeping  strategy  described  earlier.  It  also 
includes  a  list  of  commitments  entered  into  and  still  to  be  paid;  analyzed 
component-wise  and  category-wise.  A  commitment  is  a  signed  contract  or 
issued Local Purchase Order. 
  Statement of financial position (financial assets and liabilities) 
  Statement of commitments (off-balance sheet)- the contracts register 
  Bank Reconciliation Statement.  
o  With reference to the outline of annual reports, the finance section and 
accounting personnel need certainly make contributions regarding the 
following parts of the annual report: 
Financial Progress Summary 
 
  Detailed AWBP- Based progress review 
 
Financial Progress Summary of the Annual Report 
o  The data for this section comes from the financial controller who 
should use the accounting package to enter, analyze and report on all 
financial transactions. Based on the detailed information in the 
accounting system, summary tables should be prepared on the overall 
financial performance and status of the project. This would include as a 
minimum: 
197 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
F.  Bookkeeping Strategy 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Section:  IV G 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
  Expenditure trends by component; 
  Expenditure by trends by category; 
  Disbursement  by  financier(sources  of  funds);  including  Government  and 
beneficiary contributions (local contributions); and  
The status of project accounts. 
 
o  Each  of  the  main  project  components  has  an  approximate  budget  in 
the  project  design.  Each  component  pursues  its  objective,  and  jointly 
the components should contribute to achieving the overall project goal. 
In  this  regard,  the  balance  between  the  components,  in  terms  of 
implementing activities, achieving outputs and using up the associated 
budget,  is  important.  When  expenditure  under  a  certain  component 
falls  far  behind  the  planned  expenditure,  this  should  be  cause  for 
concern,  the  reasons  should  be  investigated  and  action  taken. 
Financial  progress  by  component  (fig.  below)  should  provide  the 
information  that  is  necessary  to  detect  such  an  imbalance  in 
expenditure. The information should also be useful to assess whether 
budgeting is realistic and to track expenditure over time. As an option, 
expenditure by component compared to the project budget can also be 
presented using graphs. 
  Similar  to  components,  the  total  budget  of  the  project  can  be  broken  down 
according  to  types  or  categories  of  expenditure  as  per  the  loan  agreement. 
These categories are not supposed to be overspent. The reason is the same as 
described  under  components:  there  is  certain  balance  in  the  project  design, 
between  different  items  and  activities on  which money  should  be  spent.  If  this 
balance is lost, for example because far  more money than expected is spent on 
allowances and very little is spent on studies and training, certain  aspects  of 
the project should fail to work as expected. When expenditure under a certain 
category approaches the limit while other categories have a much lower level of 
expenditure, the reasons should be investigated. Financial progress by category 
should provide the information that is necessary to detect such situations, which 
may lead to reallocation.  
 
It is important to track the cumulative disbursement for each financier, in relation 
to  the  total  amount  committed,  in  order  to  know  how  much  money  the  project 
has  left.  The  information  on  cumulative  disbursement  should  be  recorded  by 
financier  and  by  category  and  periodically  compared  to  the disbursement  data 
at IFAD. 
  Beneficiary contribution, e.g. by the private sector and community contributions 
in form of  labour and material contributions, should have to be captured at field 
level  and  converted  into  monetary  value,  using  a  system  of  standard  record 
forms  and  rates.  In  practice  though,  as  it  could  be  difficult  to  convert  in  kind 
contributions  to  monetary  value,  an  attempt  should  still  be  made  to  capture 
community contribution. 
  Project management should be fully aware of the status and performance of all 
project  related  bank  accounts,  and  relevant  information  should  be  included  in 
the annual reports.  
  What  to  include  in  Detailed  AWPB-Based  Progress  Review  as  part  of  the 
Annual Report  
o  This  annex  of 
to  presenting 
implementation  progress  over  the  past  year  at  the  detailed  level  of 
the  annual 
is  devoted 
report 
198 
 Component AWPB Actual (MK) Actual  (USD) Exp/Bud (%) Total Project Budget Total Cumulative Expenditure Cumulative Exp/Bud (%)           
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
F.  Bookkeeping Strategy 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Section:  IV G 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
individual  planned  activities.  This  annex  would  therefore  present  the 
findings of the most fundamental monitoring activity: 
o  What is actual implantation progress of planned activities? 
o  What is the actual cost compared to what was budgeted? This is a rather 
detailed  review  and  the  simple  accounting  package  may  not  offer 
much. The vote books will provide the required level of detail. 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
G.  Annual Financial Reporting and 
Audits 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Section:  IV H 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Financial Reporting: 
For the annual financial statements to be presented for audit, the modified cash basis of 
Accounting  should  be  used.  Thus  the  financial  reporting  in  accordance  with  the  public 
sector requirements in Malawi will be very simplified not requiring the application of very 
complex commercial environment International Financial Reporting Standards. However, 
the  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  as  adopted  by  GOM  will  be 
adhered  to  the  extent  of  the  agreed  to  modification  to  include  on  the  statement  of 
financial position, the financial assets and financial liabilities. 
  Generally,  transactions  are  recognized  only  at  the  time  the  cash  flows 
take place; 
 
The  expenditure  on  acquisition  of  fixed  assets  is  not  capitalized  –  thus 
fixed  assets  are  written-off  on  acquisition  and 
the  wear  and 
(depreciation) of those assets is not recorded in the books of accounts; 
  Prepaid  expenditure/advances 
is  written-off  during 
the  period  of 
disbursement; 
 
The recognized “Modification” is as follows: 
o 
o 
Invoices  for  goods  and  services  which  are  outstanding  on  the 
date of the closure of the fiscal year are recognized as liabilities 
for that specific fiscal year. 
Loans  and  advances  are  recognized  as  assets/liabilities  at  the 
time  of  disbursement  and  related  interest  is  recognized  only 
when disbursed.  
Regarding  the  annual  financial  statements  IPSAS  cash  basis  as  the  modified,  the 
following will be the integral components: 
  Responsibility statement  
  Executive commentary 
  Statement of revenue and expenditure with two comparatives, the 
approved budget and previous year’s actual. This should recognise the 
following amounts for the reporting period: 
o 
o 
total cash receipts of the entity showing separately a sub-
classification of total cash receipts from IFAD, GOM, and other 
internally generated resources. Monetary receivables arising in the 
period are recognized. 
total cash payments including prepayments of the entity showing 
separately a sub classification of total cash payments using a 
classification according to the programme components and 
expenditure categories. 
  Statement  of  financial  position  (financial  assets  &  liabilities):  The  balance 
sheet  should  include  only  financial  assets  and  financial  liabilities.  Non-
financial  assets  are  not  admissible  on  the  statement  of  financial  position 
prepared  under  the  IPSAS  basis  of  cash  accounting.  In  accordance  with 
199 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
G.  Annual Financial Reporting and 
Audits 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Section:  IV H 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
Audit Reports: 
IPSAS cash basis, FARMSE is encouraged to disclose in the notes to the 
financial statements information about the assets and liabilities of the entity; 
  Cash flow statement with two comparatives, the approved budget and last 
year’s actual 
  Special  Account  Reconciliations  in  the  formats  to  be  prescribed  in  the 
Letter to the Borrower. 
  Notes to the financial statements.  
  Section 5.02(a) of the Financing Agreement stipulates that the Auditor General 
shall  be  responsible  for  the  audit  of  the  financial  statements  relating  to  the 
Programme. In the event that the Auditor General chooses to appoint external 
auditors  to  audit  the  financial  statements  relating  to  the  Programme,  such 
appointment shall be carried out in accordance with the procedures and criteria 
set  forth  in  the  Fund’s  “Guidelines  on  Project  Audits  (for  Borrowers’  Use)”  as 
may be amended from time to time, and shall be subject to the prior approval of 
IFAD.  
 
 
  Section 5.02(b)  of  the  Financing  Agreement  provides  that  the  Borrower  shall 
have the financial statements relating to the programme audited each fiscal year 
by such auditors in accordance with International Standards of Auditing and the 
IFAD “Guidelines on Project Audit (Borrower’s Use)” as they may be amended 
from time to time. 
In  accordance  with  Section 9.03  of the  General  Conditions,  the  Borrower  shall 
ensure  that  in  addition  to  the  audit  reports  on  the  financial  statements,  the 
auditors shall provide:  
an  opinion  on  the  certified  statements  of  expenditure  and  the  operation  of  the 
Special Account; and 
a  separate  management  letter  addressing  the  adequacy  of  accounting  and 
internal control systems. 
The Lead Programme Agency shall deliver to IFAD a certified copy of the audit 
report  within  6  months  after  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  i.e.  not  later  than  30 
September of the following year, and submit its reply to the Management Letter 
to  the  auditors  and  to  IFAD  within  one  (1)  month  after  the  receipt  of  the  audit 
report. 
 
 
  All expenditures disbursed on the basis of SOE should be audited annually by 
the Auditor General, or external auditors appointed by them and acceptable to 
IFAD  in  accordance  with  provisions  of  Section 9.03  of  the  General  Conditions 
and  a  separate  opinion  of  the  auditors  in  respect  of  the  statements  of 
expenditures  must  be  included  in  the  certified  audit  report  which  must  be 
submitted to IFAD.  
The suggested formats of the financial statements to be presented for external 
audits are attached as annex 3. 
 
RLEEP 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
H.  Procurement 
Section:  IV I 
Responsibility: Procurement Officer 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Procurements: 
  No  procurement  thresholds  to  guide  the  determination  of  which  Procurement 
method to apply have been put in the financing agreement. The Programme is 
supposed  to  formally  move  to  national  systems  in  the  spirit  of  the  Paris 
Declaration on Aids effectiveness.  
The  Public  Procurement  Act  (No.  8  of  2003),  which  came  into  force  on  21 
August 2003, provides legal basis of the GOM’s public procurement system. It 
sets out the organizational structure of the procurement system and establishes 
the  basic  principles  which  all procurement  rules  In  accordance  with  the  Public 
Procurement Act, The Public Procurement Regulations were issued in 2004 to 
 
200 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
G.  Annual Financial Reporting and 
Audits 
Topic 
Guidelines 
Section:  IV H 
Responsibility: Financial Controller 
provide  a  more  detailed  framework  of  rules  to  implement  the  objectives  of  the 
Act and govern all public procurement.  In addition the Office of the Director of 
Public  Procurement  has  issued  Desk  Instructions  to  implement  the  principles 
and  rules  in  the  Act and  Regulations by  providing step-by-step  procedures  for 
all aspects of the procurement cycle. 
The  Director  of  Public  Procurement  has  also  issued  standard  bidding 
documents  and  forms,  to  provide  working  documents  for  implementation  of 
public procurement activities. The use of standard documents is mandatory for 
all procuring entities. 
The  PSU  will  be  a  procurement  entity  in  its  own  right  and  will  follow  GOM 
regulations  to  the  extent  that  they  are  consistent  with  the  IFAD  procurement 
guidelines  and  the  loan  agreement.  Given  the  uniqueness  of  the  Programme, 
and  the  fact  that  GOM  thresholds  are  restrictive  of  International  Competitive 
Bidding the following thresholds have been suggested: 
 
 
ICB: USD 100,000 equivalent or more 
LCB: USD 10,000 equivalent or more but less than USD 100,000  
Local Shopping: USD 5,000 t0 USD 10,000 
 
 
 
  Direct Contracting: less than   
 
It  is  a  requirement  under  the  IFAD  Procurement  guidelines  that  each  AWPB 
should have an 18 month procurement plan, even though the AWPB covers 12 
months. The procurement plans will contain details of the procurement methods 
applicable.  In  preparing  the  procurement  plans,  the  procurement  specialist  at 
the PSU will track common items that can be bulked and centrally procured at 
the  PSU.  In  addition,  all  items  whose  value  is  over  USD  20 000  and  thus 
requiring competitive bidding and in some cases prior review and non-objection 
from  IFAD  will  be  centrally  procured  at  the  PSU.  The  risk  of  breaking 
procurement  lots  in  order  to  avoid  the  USD  20 000  threshold  should  be 
mitigated at the planning stage; by identifying common items to be included in a 
single procurement lots and thus tagged to one procurement method.  
  Mis-procurements  could  cause  a  transaction  to  be  declared  ineligible  and 
therefore  it  is  important  that  as  part  of  start-up  training,  all  the  PSU  and 
identified  implementing  agencies  be  oriented  in  the  IFAD/GOM  procurement 
guidelines,  and  as  indicated  before  all  MOUs  with  implementing  agencies  will 
specify the procurement methods and procedures and whether the PSU will be 
involved or not.  
  Procurement of goods and works would be in accordance with IFAD guidelines. 
In  addition,  due  diligence  will  be  exercised  to  ensure  that  the  procurement  of 
consultancy  services  would  be  in  accordance  with  Government  procedures 
acceptable to IFAD.  
47.  Financial Management under Component 2: Support to Financial Innovation and Outreach Facility. 
Matching grants by their nature create unique financial management challenges. Under FARMSE, these 
matching  grants  will  be  for  CBFO  support  organizations  and  the  Innovation  and  Outreach  Facility 
windows. All the grants will have varying levels of grantee contributions. 
  Matching grants pose unique accounting issues 
  How to deal with the counterpart contribution; 
  Under cash basis, how to account for matching grants in the accounting system; 
  The need for specialized data base for matching grants; 
  The tax elements in grants; 
  The nature of accountability on the side of the grantees. 
  While the specialized Financial Innovation and Outreach (FIO) manual will be developed as 
part of the PIM, it is important to explain in the appendix the accounting approach: 
201 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
  A Beneficiary contribution: Grantees will not have to deposit their respective contribution into 
their  own      bank  account  in  the  same  tranches  as  they  expect  to  receive  from  FARMSE. 
Instead, they will keep analytical records regarding their own contributions and justify these 
where  needed.  Transfers  of  grants  will  be  in  tranches,  based  on  achievements  of  certain 
milestones by the grantees as defined in the grant agreements. For bigger grants, it will also 
be  allowed  for  FARMSE  to  pay  the  suppliers  directly  after  the  grantee  has  confirmed  that 
they  have  paid  the  supplier  their  share  of  the  matching  grant.  This  is  likely  to  be  the  case 
where external international TA is recruited under the grant agreement. 
  Matching  grants  will  be  expensed  at  the  point  of  disbursements  and  will  be  included  in  the 
withdrawal  application  at  that  point.  If  the  FARMSE  was  to  wait  for  the  grantees  to  submit 
their  returns,  it  would  quickly  deplete  its  initial  deposit.  A  grant,  once  given,  is  a  grant 
expensed;  the  rest  will  be  left  for  monitoring  and  evaluation/follow  up  by  the  Technical 
Specialists and the Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. 
  Since grants will be expensed at the point of disbursement, a simple off the shelf accounting 
package  system  will  not  be  able  to  provide  ledgers  for  each  grant  thus  necessitating  a 
separate grant data base. The objective is to ensure that grantees are not paid beyond the 
grant ceiling and the agreed milestone bases payment is adhered to. 
  Taxes  and  Grants:  It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  tax  element  in  grants  does  not  cause 
ineligibility for IFAD financing purposes as in other transactions. It will be taken that the tax 
element is paid from the portion contributed by the beneficiary. 
  Nature  of  Accountability  from  Grantee:  The  matching  grant  represents  an  arrangement  of 
equal  partnership  between  FARMSE  and  the  grantee  and  the  accountability  will  be  output-
based as opposed to a series of paper work. 
Figure 2: The FARMSE flow of funds chart 
SOURCES 
Designated Account 
USD 
Operational A/Cs 
IFAD 
2 
GOM 
7 
Reserve Bank of Malawi 
3 
1 
Operational A/c in a  
Commercial Bank 
4 
6 
Partner  
Institutions and  
Grantees Bank  
Accounts 
5 
LPOs to FARMSE for tax  
waivers. IFMS based  
Operational Counterpart  
Funding 
8 
Service providers, suppliers, consultants, other payees, etc 
48.  The funds flow chart above depicts the use of the standard International Financing Institution (IFI) 
disbursement  methods  including:  (i)  direct  payment  method  for  bigger  payments  over  USD  50,000; 
(ii) use  of  designated  account;  and  (iii)  reimbursement  if  GOM  has  pre-financed  any  transactions.  As 
202 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
FARMSE  has  very  few  physical  goods  to  procure,  the  use  of  the  special  commitment  procedure  is 
unlikely. 
VII.  6.0  MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
49.  FARMSE’s  approach  to  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  will  be  compatible  with 
corresponding GOM and IFAD policies and tools (e.g., IFAD Results and Impact Management System  - 
RIMS). Guided by the Programme’s  logical framework, the M&E function will  systematically record data 
and  performance  information  of  programme  partner  performance  implementation,  as  well  as  household 
surveys. 
Planning 
50.  The  main  planning  tools  for  FARMSE  will  comprise  the  Logical  Framework,  M&E  framework 
including  its  indicators  and  targets,  and  the  Results  Based Annual  Work  plan  and  Budget  (RB-AWPB). 
The log frame provides indicators and targets for programme implementation from output over outcome, 
development objective to impact levels. The RB-AWPB will break physical targets up by year and attach 
financial resources to them. The RB-AWPB shall present financial and physical outputs and outcomes of 
the  programme for  the  given  year,  and  report  on  the  accumulative  achievements. The  execution  of  the 
RB- AWPB will be monitored along the M&E framework of the programme and reported back in regular 
intervals  from  quarterly  to  semi-annuals  reports.  The  cycle  of  planning,  monitoring  and  reporting  is 
essential for efficient management of the programme and for achieving the results as agreed.  
Results based monitoring and evaluation 
51.  FARMSE’s approach to planning, M&E and knowledge management system will be developed to 
generate comprehensive and reliable information, to improve planning and decision-making for effective 
programme  management  towards  results  and  impact.  The  system  will  inform  FARMSE  overall  and 
programme  performance.  Both,  programme  and  Results  and  Impact  Management  System  (RIMS) 
indicators,  at  each  level  will  be  used  to  guide  programme  management  and  performance.  The  IFAD- 
RIMS manual and templates will be placed in the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) for guidance. 
The PMU will have the responsibility for M&E system management. 
52.  Preliminary  baseline  and  target  values  are  to  be  established  for  the  key  indicators  based  on  the 
data used for the economic and financial  analysis. The PMU  will conduct  a baseline survey  of targeted 
areas to benchmark key indicators at the beginning of programme implementation and set targets against 
which progress of the programme will be monitored and impact assessed. A detailed M&E plan to guide 
the  implementation  of  the  programme  at  all  levels  will  be  developed  by  the  PMU  within  the  first  few 
months of implementation.  
53.  The  integrated  M&E  system  will:  i)  measure  the  achievement  of  the  logical  framework  indicators 
(including  the  RIMS);  ii)  assess  the  relevance  of  the  programme  strategy,  methodologies  and 
implementation  processes;  iii)  assess  the  performance  of  implementing  agencies  and  external  service 
providers; iii) assess programme outcomes and impacts partner service providers/stakeholders including 
clients, specifically women and youth; iv) identify successes and good practices; and v) share knowledge 
as  appropriate  with  programme  stakeholders  to  support  dialogue  and  decision  making. The  system  will 
provide performance transparency, respecting as necessary sensitive/proprietary partner information.  
54.  Beyond  RIMS  and  Logical  Frame  work measures,  other  programme  and  programme metrics  will 
be  developed  by  the  PMU  with  the  input  of  programme  stakeholders.  Component  1.0  will  have  two 
streams of complementary data. First it will undertake a baseline study structured to provide the basis for 
a  random  control  trial  research  assessment  of  graduation  impact.  This  will  be  used  as  a  part  of  a 
longitudinal  impact study  of the targeted test  graduation  households.  Second,  two  qualitative studies  of 
graduation  model  households  will  be  undertaken  to  better  understand  the  effect  of  graduation  on 
household time use, productive decision making, gender relations impacts, etc.  
55.  Component 2.0 will require the development of a set of programme partner performance metrics. 
Data  required  for  CFBO  groups  will  be  provided  by  programme  partners  and  will  include  basic 
203 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
programme  performance  indicators  including  number  of  groups,  number  of  members,  location,  some 
basic  form  of  performance/sustainability.  A  set  of  cores  metrics  will  apply  to  all  2.2  programmes  (i.e., 
around  profitability,  efficiency,  etc.).  Another  set  of  metrics  will  apply  only  to  each  specific  programme 
(e.g., non-financial sector  partners versus financial sector partners). All metrics beyond those related to 
FARMSE  logframe,  will  be  developed  with  the  concomitant  aim  of  providing  programme  partner, 
programme  partner  stakeholders  and  the  programme  performance  data  in  support  of  performance 
management. This will  include development of a monitoring process with  provision of timely, actionable 
problem  and  opportunity  identification  outputs  (e.g.,  identification  of  TSPs  and  FSPs  conflicts,  client 
need/demand for financial  services, market bottlenecks, etc.).Data  will also be  used to support relevant 
policy dialogue. Performance data will be collected by partners and aggregated by the PMU monthly, and 
reported on a quarterly.  
56.  Programme  Baseline  Study.  The  FARMSE  baseline  study  will  be  designed  and  carried  out  at 
programme  start-up  in  areas  likely  to  be  selected  for  at  least  one  component  activities,  preferably  two. 
The baseline study will form the basis for assessing programme effectiveness and results achievement. 
The  household  survey  shall  be  repeated  at  mid-  term  (or  programme  year  3-4)  and  at  programme 
completion. Repeated measurements allow for obtaining data and information required for assessing the 
performance and achievements of the programme over time. Baseline studies will include a target group 
and a control group, and will incorporate the Multidimensional Poverty Assessment Tool (MPAT). This will 
be essential to determine attribution of results to programme activities.  
57.  Reporting.  The  M&E  staff  will  produce  three  core  reports:  i)  a  quarterly  progress  report  by  each 
service  provider;  ii)  a  semi-annual  progress  report;  and  iii)  an  annual  progress  report.  The  programme 
Logical  Framework  includes  the  draft  indicators  against  which  programme  performance  would  be 
monitored  and  the  sources  of  data  to  be  used.  These  indicators  would  be  discussed  and  agreed  at 
programme  start-up.  Draft  reports  will  be  shared  with  programme  partners  and  other  relevant 
stakeholders.  Comments  and  input  would  be  consolidated  by  the  PMU  M&E  staff,  reviewed,  and 
approved  by  the  PSC  prior  to  submission  to  IFAD,  and  the  GOM.  The  M&E  team  will  also  consolidate 
programme  performance  input  for  Sub  components  2.1  and  2.2  monthly,  providing  trend  analysis  as 
projects are implemented. Aggregate core metrics and limited, non-proprietary (to be negotiated) project 
partner  performance  data  will  be  published  on-line  quarterly  to  update  stakeholders  on  project 
performance and to foster friendly competition. 
58.  Start-up  workshop.  MoFEPD  will  organize  a  FARMSE  start-up  workshop,  with  the  aim  of 
presenting programme objectives and scope, roles and responsibilities to potential stakeholders, service 
providers and samples of beneficiaries. The workshop’s timing and agenda will be agreed upon between 
GOM, IFAD and key programme stakeholders. The objective will be to have full buy-in and ownership of 
FARMSE  by  all  stakeholders.  The  programme  design  report  needs  to  be  disseminated  prior  to  a  wide 
audience within the GOM, among potential programme implementation partners, and other stakeholders. 
Invitations to the workshop should be equally inclusive.  
Learning and Knowledge Management (L&KM) 
59.  Learning  system.  Capturing  and  documenting  lessons  and  innovations  through  ongoing  data 
collection,  monthly/semi-annual  reports,  and  thematic  studies  will  be  an  integral  part  of  the  FARMSE 
L&KM.  Disseminating  reports  and  studies  (in  full  or  synthesized)  will  enable  sharing  of  information  and 
dialog 
review 
facilitation  with  stakeholders.  FARMSE  will  also  have  bi-annual  and  annual 
meetings/workshops.  Workshops  will  report  on  programme  progress,  lessons  learned,  challenges  and 
solutions  to  implementation  constraints.  Workshops  will  be  learning  events  as  well,  presenting  the 
opportunity  to  influence  the  programming  performance  reviews.  A  short  report  capturing  workshop 
discussions  and  results  will  provide  feedback  to  the  programme’s  planning  and  AWPBs  as  a  part  of 
FARMSE’s commitment to participatory, demand-driven planning and implementation commitment.  
60.  Knowledge  development  and  diffusion.  FARMSE  will  support  the  creation  of  replicable  and 
scalable  approaches  to  graduation.  It  will  also  support  the  development  of  several  innovative  rural 
financial  products,  services,  and  delivery  mechanisms.  The  PMU  will  work  closely  with  programme 
partners and the M&E function to capture the process, technical, management, and impact learnings  of 
204 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
these  programme/project experiences. The knowledge management function  of the  M&E  will document 
and  share  knowledge  through  internal  (e.g.,  learning  events,  stakeholder  workshop  meetings,  etc.)  and 
external mechanisms (e.g., website, blogs, podcasts featuring programme stakeholders, etc.). In addition, 
the  programme  would  publish  a  semi-annual  programme  update  (online/print)  and  on  various  good 
practices  and  human  interest  stories.  Knowledge  activities  will  proactively  pursue  gender  and  youth 
issues,  and  present  success  stories  related  to  vulnerability  reduction  and  livelihood  diversification  as  a 
means of household risk management. 
VIII.  7.0  REPORTING 
61.  The  provision  of  informative  progress  reports  is  a  formal  requirement;  the  Loan  and  Financing 
Agreements  stipulate  these  requirements. The  six-monthly  and  annual  reports  should  be  prepared  and 
submitted to IFAD, the other co-financing institutions and all collaborating institutions. The main functions 
of progress reports are: 
  Review current progress compared to planned activities, and expenditures compared to 
budgets; 
  Provide  overall  status  information  on  the  Programme  since  it  started  –  in  terms  of 
 
physical progress and total expenditure; 
Identify  problems  encountered  during  the  reporting  period  and  any  remedial  actions 
taken to resolve the problems; 
  Analyse strength and weaknesses, opportunities and threats; 
  Discuss  quantitative  and  qualitative  progress  made  in  achieving  the  overall  objectives; 
and, 
  Provide strategic direction for the next planning cycle. 
62.  The primary importance of preparing progress reports is that it forces implementing agencies and 
Programme management to record data and review progress. Reflect on outputs, evaluate performance, 
and discover weaknesses that can be improved and successes that can be up-scaled. It is this process of 
reflection  and  analysis  that  matters;  if  done  properly,  the  process  would  lead  to  better  plans  and 
implementation in the future. 
63.  Progress  reports  are  the  most  tangible  result  of  monitoring  and,  usually,  a  distinction  is  made 
between  quarterly,  six-monthly  and  annual  reports.    Monthly  reports  are  not  recommended  although 
some  implementing  agencies  may  use  monthly  reports  as  part  of  their  internal  management  systems.  
For IFAD Programmes/Projects, however, a month is generally too short to record significant change and 
prepare a consolidated report. Thus, six-monthly and annual reports will be produced. It is recommended 
that FARMSE liaises with the other IFAD-supported Programmes/Projects in the country to agree on a set 
of guidelines and a format for progress report writing. 
IX. 
8.0  PROCUMENT  
64.  Procurement of good and  services  will follow  be  guided by  procurement procedures of IFAD and 
the Government of Malawi. Where there is a conflict of the guidelines, IFAD procurement guidelines will 
prevail.  
X. 
9.0  DRAFT  OPERATING  MANUAL 
COMPONENT2 
-FINANCIAL 
INNOVATION  AND  OUTREACH 
- 
1.1  Introduction  
65.  This component will seek to overcome numerous barriers to financial services to the rural poor. It 
will support the development of informal and formal financial services best suited to ultra-poor non-labour 
constrained,  poor  but  food-secure,  vulnerable  to  poverty,  and  low  income  but  resilient  to  poverty 
households,  emphasizing  savings  and  credit  for  on  and  off  farm  enterprise.  This  component  will  also 
employ  financial  interventions  within  select  value  chains  to  enhance  economic  returns  to  smallholder 
participation and value chain efficiency. The component has two subcomponents.  
1.2  Justification  
205 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
66.  The  journey  from  poverty  to  prosperity  is  not  a  singular  accomplishment,  but  continual  evolution 
towards  greater  household  food  security,  income  and  asset  accumulation,  and  livelihood  opportunities. 
FARMSE intends to help graduate poor Malawians along the poverty spectrum from ultra-poor to poor but 
food  insecure.  FARMSE  will  work  to  support  household  economic  development  through  access  to 
financial  services  appropriate  to  each  socio-economic  level  of  poverty,  including  social  payment 
graduation  programmes,  community-based  financial  organizations,  financial  cooperatives,  MFIs,  and 
commercial  banks.  Meeting  the  needs  of  rural  households  will  require  new  and  innovative  products, 
services,  and  delivery  mechanisms  beyond  what  the  financial  sector  currently  offers.  Supporting 
emerging and encouraging new institutional efforts and partnerships is required to overcome the multiple 
costs, volume, and product/service design constraints facing sector development, as well as overcoming 
the sector’s relative lack of experience and unclear risk perception of rural markets. FARMSE will support 
FSPs  to  develop  demand-driven,  simple  to  use,  low  monetary  value,  low  transaction  cost  savings  and 
loans products highly suitable for low income rural households. With a focus on formal financial services, 
FARMSE  supported  value  chains  will  fuel  economic  opportunity  for  smallholder  rural  enterprise/ 
households on and/ or off-farm enterprises, creating employment and rural economic multipliers effects. 
Support to improved rural financial infrastructure (e.g., sector associations), policy, and regulation is also 
required. 
Objectives and structure of this manual  
67.  The  manual  for  component  2  is  intended  to  provide  the  FARMSE  management,  and  relevant 
monitoring and supervisory bodies with comprehensive explanations, guidelines and tools and formats to 
support FARMSE planning and implementation. The Manual begins by presenting the overall structure of 
the FIO component and goes on to present approaches for the implementation of the component. 
68.  The  support  provided  under  this  component  consists  of  matching  grants.  A  matching  grant  is  a 
one-off, non-reimbursable transfer to eligible grant recipients. Beneficiaries can only be legal entities, not 
individuals,  and  may  comprise  different  types  of  institutions,  including  financial  institutions,  value  chain 
operators, farmer associations and cooperatives and their apex bodies, and technical service providers. 
As regards the CBFO support organisations sub-component and the windows outlined below, other types 
of  institutions,  non-registered  associations  or  governmental  bodies  are  not  eligible.  Where  licensed 
financial institutions are referred to, this applies to financial institutions licensed by and operating under 
RBM supervision and meeting capital adequacy norms, which are willing and capable to render additional 
services to the rural population or finance agricultural ventures (in a broader sense).  
69.  Approaches  adopted  for  the  FIO.  In  addressing  these  objectives  the  approach  adopted  by  the 
FIO Facility will build on the following principles158: 
  Responsiveness  to  the:  (i) needs  of  the  ultimate  target  groups  of  the  FARMSE;  (ii) needs  of 
financial institutions desirous to improve and expand their services for the benefit of the ultimate 
target groups; and (iii) rapidly changing environment in which the financial sector operates, and 
to the need to become and remain competitive; 
  Accessibility for a range of operators in the financial sector, ranging from banks to microfinance 
institutions,  credit  unions  and  other  financial  institutions,  and  value  chain  operators,  such  as 
agribusinesses, producer groups and cooperatives, and other value chain actors; 
  Transparency  of  organization  and  management  with  predefined  rules  and  procedures  for 
operations and the changes of such rules; 
  Accountability at all levels, including a “check and balance” management and decision making 
approach, with high quality technical assessments and sound approval mechanisms; 
  Efficiency of all appraisal steps by means of constantly monitoring the duration of all steps;  
  Effectiveness  through  the  focus  on  sound,  sustainable  and  innovative  solutions  to  enhance 
access of the rural poor to financial services of all kinds, which have the potential to be replicated 
elsewhere;  
158 Adapted from the SAPP - Zambia Operating Manual for the Matching Grant Facility, 2nd Draft, July 2012 
206 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
  Respect  for  the  autonomy  and  ownership  of  partner  institutions  and  the  need  to  protect 
intellectual efforts and innovative investments by preserving a professional secret. 
70.  CBFO Support and IOF Windows. The FIO is comprised of two sub components. CBFO support 
sub-component and the IOF sub-component. The IOF sub-component is divided into three windows. 
CBFO Support Organisations Facility 
71.  VSLAs  have  had  the  greatest  success  in  Malawi  in  encouraging  savings  amongst  rural 
populations. According to the NSFI (MoFEPD, 2017) the number of members have grown from 86,000 in 
2008  to  1.1  million  in  2014.  This  facility  will  support  three  activities:  i)  Mapping  of  existing  CBFOs  and 
assessing maturity status in order to establish the location and status of the groups; ii) Building capacity 
of CBFOs in order to provide opportunities for additional skills and linkages of CBFO members to formal 
financial  institutions  and  high  value  markets.  This  will  enhance  smallholder  income,  asset  and  some 
livelihood/enterprise  development  opportunities;  iii)  Formation  of  new  Groups  in  order  to  include 
beneficiaries that are currently excluded. 
72.  The targeted institutions under this facility are therefore; CBFO support organisations, Value chain 
developers,  secondary  or  apex  body  organisations  and  FSPs.  Support  under  this  sub  component  will 
enable CBFOs either collectively or individually present themselves to FSPs as a bankable proposition, 
support those FSPs interested in linking with CBFOs to make the necessary changes in institutional set 
up, business strategies and processes to provide  products and services that  are suited to the needs of 
CBFOs  and  support  CBFO members  to  acquire  high  level  skills  in  their  respective  trades  and  increase 
production. 
73.  The activities in this sub component will include identifying interested partners, training of CBFOs 
and FSPs, mapping exercises to take stock of existing Savings Groups and their status, farmer Groups 
support,  CBFO-  FSP  dialogue,  CBFO-  High  value  market  players,  dialogue  and  mobilisation  of  groups 
and improving or developing products and services. 
Innovation and Outreach Facility 
74.  This  subcomponent  will  support  FSPs  wishing  to  enter  and  expand  outreach  in  rural  areas. 
Support  will  be  provided  on  a  demand-driven  and  cost-sharing  basis  through  the  Rural  Finance 
Innovation and Outreach Facility (IOF).The IOF would address FSP’s lack of experience in rural financial 
markets  and  limited  expertise  in  designing  and  delivering  products/services  targeting  low-income  rural 
clients and MSMEs. Critically, a lack of exposure to rural markets leads to an exaggerated perception of 
risks  which  further  discourages  FSP  from  entering  these  markets.  The  IOF  will  have  three  funding 
windows: 
i.  Market  Research  and  Feasibility  Studies:  Research  could  provide  insights  into  the  reasons 
why  current  service  provider  products  and  services  are  not  being  used  and  how  they  could  be 
improved. Research will provide evidence to support a decision to move to a product/service to 
pilot stage, upgrade existing products, or expand successful existing products.  
The  targeted  institutions  under  this  window  are  therefore;  Technical  Service  Providers  (TSPs), 
Research  agencies  and  TSPs.  Support  under  this  window  will  enable  FSPs  identify  market 
opportunities,  client  needs,  key  product  features  and  possible  delivery  mechanisms.  It  will  also 
identify  risks  and  risk  mitigation  measures,  costs  and  revenues  estimates,  and  possible 
partnerships for product introduction and roll-out.  
Activities will include hiring specialized Technical Service Providers (TSPs) well versed in market 
research  and  client  demand/  needs  assessment,  support  for  logistics  for  fieldwork,  study  tours 
and exchange visits. 
Pilot testing  and Innovation:  This window  will support pilot-testing of product innovations  and 
new low-cost delivery mechanisms.  
The  targeted  institutions  are  Technical  Service  Providers  TSPs  and  FSPs.  Support  under  this 
window will be based on prior market research (via the Window 1 or credible internal research) 
and  will  enable  piloting  of  research  products.  Activities  will  include  developing  and  piloting 
product  prototypes,  conducting  pilot  tests,  adjusting  and  refining  product  features.  Subject  to 
ii. 
207 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
commercial viability, a roll-out plan and budget could be prepared. Eligible costs to be covered by 
this  window  would  include  TA,  some  fieldwork  costs,  staff  training,  management  information 
systems/information  (MIS)  and  information  and  communications  technology  (ICT)  updates  and 
equipment. Support could cover costs of developing training material for prospective clients. 
iii. 
Expanding  Outreach:  This  window  will  support  scaling  up  of  proven  products/  services  and 
delivery mechanisms. It can finance rollout of products and services piloted under Window 2, but 
also existing products/services developed by the FSP. Proposals would be based on: i) a proven 
product/delivery  mechanism  to  be  scaled  up  for  FARMSE  target  group;  and  ii)  a  well-defined 
outreach strategy with clearly defined performance targets and milestones.  
The targeted institutions are FSPs, MNOs, electronic & money transfer operators and Fintechs. 
Activities  will  include  hiring  national  and  international  TA  for  staff  training,  draft  manuals,  and 
institutional  change.  The  IOF  could  co-finance  physical  investment  costs  related  to  the  roll-out, 
such  as  ICT  equipment,  low-cost  branches  and  agencies,  vehicles,  as  well  as  incremental 
operating costs on a declining basis. 
75.  Terms and conditions for CBFO support and the three IOF Windows 
76.  The following are the terms and conditions for CBFO support and the three IOF windows: 
Terms and conditions for CBFO Support Organisations Facility 
Item 
Objectives 
Direct Target Groups 
Eligibility Criteria 
Selection criteria 
Terms and conditions 
To  improve  access  to  structured  and  sustainable  CBFO 
financial services and expand outreach to poor but food secure 
households,  households  vulnerable  to  poverty,  and  resilient 
households  
Entities interested in mobilising, restructuring and linking 
with  CBFOs 
financial  services  and  high  value 
markets. These include:  
to 
  CBFO support organisations 
  Value chain developers, 
 
 
secondary apex body organisations 
and FSPs 
 
 
 
Legal registration  
Familiarity with the promotion of CBFOs, and 
working in collaboration with FSPs and high value 
chain promoters 
2-years Audited Annual financial statements 
submitted to relevant supervisory body 
  Sufficient field and supervisory staff available  
  Clear implementation plan and schedule showing 
profitability of innovative activities and how they can 
be sustained after the funding  period 
  Proven capacity to form new and restructured good practice groups 
  Outreach  to  reach  poor  households  (directly  or  indirectly  through  SMEs)  and 
simplicity of processes and methods 
  Special features to reach women and youth, commercial viability 
  Provision of additional extension services, training or education or value 
chain development support  
 
“Fit” of the project with the strategic plan and market positioning of proposing 
organization, 
Technical capacity or credibly to implement proposed project 
 
  Potential replicability of proposed project/approach 
  Use of Village Agents/PSPs to lower unit cost of delivery and formation of new 
or restructured CBFOs 
  Uniqueness  and  innovativeness  of  new  products  to  be  enjoyed  by  CBFO  10% 
208 
Relative 
weight 
10% 
15% 
10% 
10% 
15% 
15% 
10% 
5% 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
members  
Examples  of  projects 
supported 
that  can  be 
Examples  of  projects  that  cannot  be 
supported 
Items eligible for support 
Items not eligible for support 
Documentation Requirements 
Farmer Groups support to improve productivity 
  Mapping exercises for old groups 
 
  CBFO –FSP dialogue for linkages 
  CBFO  –High  value  market  players  dialogue 
for 
linkages 
  Mobilisation of new groups 
  Automated  FSP  Product  developments  eligible  under 
IoF 
 
FSP-CBFO linkages that are not mutually beneficial  
  CBFO-High  value  market  player  linkages  that  are  not 
mutually beneficial   
Training of CBFOs and FSPs 
 
  Mapping exercises support costs 
  CBFO- FSP dialogue 
  CBFO- High value market players dialogue 
  Products  and  services    that  make  CBFOs  more 
sustainable 
 Vehicles 
  Physical infrastructure 
 
  Board and lodging for participants 
Travel costs for participants 
 
  One year after the conduct of the measures: Brief 
certification prepared by the grantee on: (i) the 
number of members, value of savings and loans 
and profits realized by the groups during the year 
after termination of intensive support; and (ii) the 
external institutional linkages maintained by the 
CBFOs supported; and (iii) an assessment of the 
future prospects of sustainability of the supported  
  Record of activities Implemented 
Terms and conditions for Market Research and Feasibility Studies Window 
Item 
Objectives 
Direct Target Groups 
Eligibility Criteria 
Selection criteria 
Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
To  increase  access  to  new  and  innovative  financial 
services  and  low-cost  delivery  mechanisms  for  poor 
rural households and MSMEs 
To  support  the  scaling  up  of proven  financial services 
and delivery mechanisms. 
Technical  Service  Providers 
agencies and  
TSPs etc. 
(TSPs),  Research 
Legally recognized body collaborating with licensed 
FSPs 
Licensed FSPs 
 
  Audited financial statements for 2 years 
  Clear implementation plan and schedule 
Relative 
weight 
  Commercial viability 
  Outreach  to  reach  poor  households  (directly  or  indirectly  through  SMEs)  and 
 
simplicity of processes and methods 
‘Fit” of the project with the strategic plan and market positioning of proposing 
organization, 
Technical capacity or credibly to implement proposed project 
  Special features to reach women and youth,  
  Profitability  of  the  innovation,  product  or  services  to  be  developed  under  the 
15% 
15% 
10% 
15% 
10% 
15% 
proposal 
209 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
  Uniqueness and innovativeness of the proposal 
  Potential replicability of proposed project/approach 
10% 
10% 
Examples  of  projects 
supported 
that  can  be 
Examples  of  projects  that  cannot  be 
supported 
Items eligible for support 
Items not eligible for support 
Documentation Requirements 
Institutional assessment 
  Market Research 
 
  Study tours and exchange visits 
 
Long term academic courses 
  All projects in Window II and III 
 
 
 
 
  Vehicles 
 
TA  
Logistic costs for undertaking fieldwork 
Transport costs 
Infrastructure costs 
Travel cost for participants 
Board and lodging for participants 
  One year after the conduct of the measures: Brief 
certification prepared by the grantee on: (i) the 
number of members, value of savings and loans 
and profits realized by the groups during the year 
after termination of intensive support; and (ii) the 
external institutional linkages maintained by the 
CBFOs supported; and (iii) an assessment of the 
future prospects of sustainability of the supported  
  Record of activities Implemented 
Terms and conditions for Pilot Testing and Innovation Window 
Item 
Objectives 
Direct Target Groups 
Eligibility Criteria 
Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
To  increase  access  to  new  and  innovative  financial 
services  and  low-cost  delivery  mechanisms  for  poor 
rural households and MSMEs 
To  support  the  scaling  up  of  proven  financial  services 
and delivery mechanisms. 
FSPs,  MNOs,  Input  suppliers,  agribusiness  companies, 
warehouse operators, and commodity exchange etc. 
Legally recognized body collaborating with licensed 
FSPs  
Licensed FSPs 
 
  Audited financial statements for 2 years 
  Clear implementation plan and schedule 
Selection criteria 
Relative weight 
  Commercial viability 
  Outreach  to  reach  poor  households  (directly  or  indirectly  through  SMEs)  and 
 
simplicity of processes and methods 
‘Fit” of the project with the strategic plan and market positioning of proposing 
organization, 
Technical capacity or credibly to implement proposed project 
  Special features to reach women and youth,  
  Profitability  of  the  innovation,  product  or  services  to  be  developed  under  the 
proposal 
  Uniqueness and innovativeness of the proposal 
  Potential replicability of proposed project/approach 
15% 
15% 
10% 
15% 
10% 
15% 
10% 
10% 
Examples  of  projects 
supported 
that  can  be 
  Savings products including mobile enabled services 
  Commitment savings products 
210 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
Examples  of  projects  that  cannot  be 
supported 
Items eligible for support 
Items not eligible for support 
Documentation Requirements 
 
Investment or school fees products 
  Cash flow multi-purpose loan products 
  Warehouse receipt financing 
  Crop and livestock insurance 
  All projects  in Window I and III 
  Products without prior market research 
Technical Service Providers (TSPs   
 
 
Logistic costs for undertaking fieldwork 
  Staff training 
 
  Management information systems 
 
  Equipment 
 
  Vehicles 
 
  Board and lodging for clients 
Travel cost for clients 
Infrastructure costs 
Transport costs 
Information and Communication Technology updates 
  One year after the conduct of the measures: Brief 
certification prepared by the grantee on: (i) the 
number of members, value of savings and loans and 
profits realized by the groups during the year after 
termination of intensive support; and (ii) the external 
institutional linkages maintained by the CBFOs 
supported; and (iii) an assessment of the future 
prospects of sustainability of the supported  
  Record of activities Implemented 
Terms and conditions for Expanding Outreach Window 
Item 
Objectives 
Direct Target Groups 
Eligibility Criteria 
Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
To  increase  access  to  new  and  innovative  financial 
services  and  low-cost  delivery  mechanisms  for  poor 
rural households and MSMEs 
To  support  the  scaling  up  of  proven  financial  services 
and delivery mechanisms. 
FSPs,  MNOs,  Input  suppliers,  agribusiness  companies, 
warehouse operators, and commodity exchange etc. 
Legally recognized body collaborating with licensed 
FSPs  
Licensed FSPs 
 
  Audited financial statements for 2 years 
  Clear implementation plan and schedule 
Selection criteria 
Relative weight 
  Commercial viability 
  Outreach  to  reach  poor  households  (directly  or  indirectly  through  SMEs)  and 
simplicity of processes and methods 
‘Fit” of the project with the strategic  plan and market positioning of proposing 
organization, 
Technical capacity or credibly to implement proposed project 
 
  Special features to reach women and youth,  
  Profitability  of  the  innovation,  product  or  services  to  be  developed  under  the 
proposal 
  Uniqueness and innovativeness of the proposal 
  Potential replicability of proposed project/approach 
15% 
15% 
10% 
15% 
10% 
15% 
10% 
10% 
Examples  of  projects 
that  can  be 
  Savings products including mobile enabled services 
211 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
supported 
Examples  of  projects  that  cannot  be 
supported 
Items eligible for support 
Items not eligible for support 
Documentation Requirements 
  Commitment savings products 
 
Investment or school fees products 
  Cash flow multi-purpose loan products 
  Warehouse receipt financing 
  Crop and livestock insurance 
  Products without prior piloting  
Information and Communication Technology updates 
  Technical Service Providers (TSPs   
  Staff training 
  Draft manuals 
  Transport costs 
  Management information systems 
 
  Equipment 
  Low cost branches and agencies 
  Vehicles 
  Training and capacity development of prospective clients 
  Travel cost for clients 
  Board and lodging for clients 
  One year after the conduct of the measures: Brief 
certification prepared by the grantee on: (i) the number of 
members, value of savings and loans and profits realized 
by the groups during the year after termination of intensive 
support; and (ii) the external institutional linkages 
maintained by the CBFOs supported; and (iii) an 
assessment of the future prospects of sustainability of the 
supported  
  Record of activities Implemented 
XI. 
10.0  GRANT APPRAISAL UNDER COMPONENT 2 
77.  Appraisal of grants for grants under CBFO support and the three IOF Windows. A number of 
formal  steps  of  appraisal  of  grant  applications  are  envisaged.  A  rigorous  appraisal  requires  that  three 
different  technical  instances  review  applications  and  decide  its  merits.  In  order  to  avoid  compromises, 
these three instances would have to conduct their review in a pre-determined sequence and independent 
of each other. This also implies that no person engaged at one level could participate again at another. 
For  transparency  and  accountability  purposes,  full  documentation  of  the  steps  and  the  outcomes  is 
expected at the end of each step. 
78.  There  are  two  main  phases  for  grant  approval,  concept  note  and  proposal  phase.  If  a  proposal 
successfully passes the internal review at the concept note stage, they progress to write a full proposal 
which is subject to internal and external technical review, and an independent approval body. 
79.  Duration  of  processing.  The  processing  of  grant  applications,  starting  from  the  receipt  of  the 
concept  note  to  the  approval  by  the  Proposals  Review    Committee  (PRC),  shall  be  done  with  all  due 
diligence and as short as possible. For all project applications received, the duration of processing until 
disbursement  of  the  first  tranche  shall  be  measured  and  monitored.  For  this  purpose,  the  PMU  will  be 
required to  install or create a  database for all applications received  which  will  permit an  assessment of 
the  duration  of  all  appraisal  steps. The  database  shall  contain  the  dates  of  the  main  steps  of  the  grant 
process,  namely,  the  receipt  of  concept  notes  and  proposals,  when  decisions  are  made,  and  when 
applicants are informed. The database may also track the following: 
(i)  All disbursements  
(ii)  Dates of receipt of periodical implementation reports  
(iii)  Dates of receipt of financial reports and  
(iv)  Project closure  
The following targets for the average duration of processing shall be aspired: 
212 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
Table 1: Average duration of main appraisal steps for grant processing  
Steps 
CONCEPT NOTE PHASE 
Receipt of Concept Note 
Acknowledgement of Receipt of Concept Note 
Internal Review 
Notification to Applicant 
PROPOSAL PHASE 
Proposal Workshop (two weeks after Notification to Applicant) 
Supplementary Questions 
Proposal Submission 
Decision on compliance of application with Manual by PMU 
Acknowledgement of receipt 
Sub-Total 
Selection and Recruitment of External Reviewers, and Transmission of Applications to 
Reviewers 
Receipt of Technical Reviews by External Reviewers 
CTS Prepares Proposal Summaries for PRC (concurrent with External Reviewers) 
IRC Reviews Proposal Summaries and Proposals prior to PRC submission 
PRC Meeting Called and Proposals Submitted 
PRC Meeting held, proposals Reviewed and decisions made 
Offer Letter Notification of Applicant on Decision of PRC, sends Detailed Implementation Plans 
and Disbursement Request Form and arranges Pre-implementation Workshop 
Grant Recipient Accepts Offer 
CTS Prepares Grant Agreement 
Pre-Implementation Workshop 
Grant Recipient submits Detailed Implementation Plan, and Disbursement Request 
Finance Process Disbursement Request 
Disbursement of first tranche to grant recipient 
Sub-Total 
TOTAL 
Max wks. 
0 
0.5 
2 
0.5 
3 
2 
1 
1 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
1.5 
1 
1 
2 
0 
1 
1 
0.5 
0.5 
1 
0.5 
0.5 
16 
18 
i. 
Concept Note Phase 
80.  The concept note phase is designed to filter out any projects and organisations that do not meet’s 
general provisions. Concept notes are received in either hardcopy, at the office, or softcopy, sent to the 
FARMSE  email  address.  The  Procurement  Specialist  or  designated  officer  receives  the  concept  notes, 
inputs  the  receipt  of  the  document  into  the  database,  which  tracks  the  number  of  days/weeks  between 
actions  taken  by  the  PMU  on  a  project,  and  allocates  the  project  a  unique  identifier.  The  role  of  this 
database  is  to  track  and  monitor  the  time  taken  between  receiving  a  concept  note  (or  proposal), 
reviewing the proposal and notifying the applicant. The concept  note phase should take no longer than 
four weeks from receipt of the concept note. 
213 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
81.  The  Procurement  Specialist  or  designated  officer  then  forwards  the  documents  to  the  CTS  who 
records the project in the pipeline management tool. The role of the pipeline management tool is for the 
CTS to closely manage the project pipeline.  
82.  The  IRC  is  chaired  by  a  representative  from  the  Pensions  and  Financial  Sector  Policy  (PFSP) 
Department in the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development (MoFEDP),the senior staff 
from  the  PMU  comprise  the  rest  of  the  committee.  The  Procurement  Specialist  or  designated  officer 
keeps  the  minutes  for  the  meeting.  The  IRC  has  three  options,  “approve”,  “reject”  or  “defer  approval”. 
They can defer approval if they feel the concept has merit, but requires clarification on information that is 
immaterial to the approach. A decision is reached via simple majority vote.  
ii. 
Proposal Phase 
83.  The  Procurement  Specialist  collates  the  IRC  comments  and  notifies  the  applicant  as  to  whether 
they  were  successful  in  moving  to  the  proposal  phase  and  informs  them  of  the  next  steps,  including  a 
proposal  workshop,  which  is  to  be  held  within  two  weeks  of  notification.  The  date  of  review  and 
notification are recorded in the database.  
84.  The PMU informs the Applicant, in the notification letter, that they are provided with four weeks to 
write the proposal from date of notification. The proposal require significantly more information, including: 
  Compliance; date the organisation was registered, and date of the last board meeting; 
  Organisation overview: Mission, vision and values, organisational history, governance structure, 
management  overview,  a  description  of  their  systems  and  processes,  and  their  current 
products/services and their portfolio; 
  An overview of their current projects and any similar projects they may have undertaken; 
  A  simplified  income  statement  and  balance  sheet,  along  with  their  sources  of  funding,  and 
portfolio information to show their financial capacity; 
  Then  a  detailed  description  of  how  they  intend  to  implement  the  project,  including  a  detailed 
explanation of each activity, task and deliverable/output required achieve the project objectives; 
  The applicant must also complete a logframe, and identify project risk and mitigation strategies; 
 
If  they  are  using  a  technical  implementing  partner,  they  must  describe  the  capacity  of  the 
technical implementing partner and their role within the project. 
85.  As  mentioned,  Applicants  are  invited  to  a  proposal  workshop  within  two  weeks  of  date  of 
notification  to  submit  a  full  proposal. The  purpose  of  the  proposal  workshop  is  to  walk  the  organisation 
through  the  proposal  format  and  answer  any  questions  about  the  proposal  process.  The  proposal 
workshop  is  held  with  multiple  applicants  where  possible  with  the  aim  of  being  as  efficient  as  possible. 
Following the proposal workshop, the applicant is expected to submit their proposal within two weeks.  
86.  Because  the  proposal  workshop  is  held  with  several  organisations,  some  organisations  may  not 
want to share detailed information about their project design. As such, organisations have up to one week 
after  the  proposal  workshop  to  submit  supplementary  questions.  The  PMU  will  respond  to  the 
supplementary questions within 2 days. 
87.  Applicants  can  submit  their  proposal  either  as  a  hardcopy,  directly  to  the  FARMSE  office,  or 
softcopy, via email. Applicants are expected to submit four weeks  after the transmission of the proposal 
notification  letter.  The  Procurement  Specialist  or  designated  officer  receives  the  proposals  and  records 
the date of receipt in the database. He then notifies the applicant of the receipt of the proposal.  
88.  First  level  review.  The  proposal  is  passed  to  the  CTA  who  conducts  an  initial  review  of  the 
proposal to ensure all the sections are complete, and assess its compliance with all terms and conditions 
and  eligibility  criteria.  Because  of  the  concept  note  phase,  it  is  expected  that  the  vast  majority  of 
proposals and organisations will meet the terms and conditions and eligibility criteria. Any proposals that 
the CTA does not believe meet the terms and conditions or eligibility criteria are sent directly to the PC for 
a secondary review. If further clarification is required, then the PMU will notify the applicant in writing seek 
clarification. The proposal will then be deferred to the next review cycle. At this stage, the PMU may not 
reject the proposal outright, unless it is clear that the proposal and organisation do not meet the requisite 
214 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
criteria and will not be able to proceed through the proposal review stage. This decision is unlikely to be 
made  at  this  stage,  due  to  the  concept  note  phase  and  the  support  provided  (proposal  workshop). 
However, if such a decision is made, the PMU, via the Procurement Specialist or designated, will notify 
the applicant, detailing why the proposal did not meet the criteria and request a meeting to discuss the 
areas  of  non-compliance.  If  the  applicant  can  correct  the  areas  of  non-compliance,  they  are  free  to 
resubmit the proposal with the modifications. The PMU must inform the PRC), who oversee the approval 
of  proposals,  about  the  decision  not  to  progress  the  proposal,  providing  a  detailed  justification  for  the 
decision. The CTA may not make a unilateral decision to reject a proposal.  
89.  The  PC  and  CTA  have  fortnightly  meetings  to  discuss  the  proposal  pipeline,  in  addition  to  daily 
communication  about  day-to-day  work.  These  meetings  are  an  opportunity  for  the  PC  to  oversee  the 
progress  of  each  proposal  and  identify  any  proposals  that  may  not  meet  the  terms  and  conditions  and 
eligibility  criteria,  and  CTA  to  provide  justification  for  progressing  each  proposal.  This  is  a  critical 
management  tool  for  keeping  the  pipeline  moving  and  to  ensure  that  the  Programme  is  operating 
efficiently. The CTA uses the pipeline management tool to report to the PC. 
90.  External reviewers. The initial review by the CTA will also enable the PMU to select appropriate 
External  Reviewers  who  will  review  the  proposal  prior  to  the  PRC.  The  PMU  will  establish  a  roster  of 
highly  qualified  domestic  and  international  experts  in  each  area.  Consultants  will  be  invited  through  a 
public  invitation  to  submit  their  expression  of  interest  to  support  FARMSE.  The  invitation  will  be  made 
through  different  media,  including  relevant  local  print  and  internet  media.  In  the  future,  FARMSE  will 
periodically  review  and  update  the  consultant’s  database. A  clear  terms  of  reference  will  be  developed 
and used to assess the applicants. 
91.  An external reviewer shall be accredited, or deleted from the list, upon a joint decision made by the 
IRC. Reviewers are paid a fixed honorarium per case reviewed,  which  will be agreed by the PSC as a 
maximum of USD250 per case. Any increase over this amount requires the non-objection of IFAD. They 
will be contracted using an Indefinite Delivery, Indefinite Quantity159 (IDIQ) contract which allows the PMU 
to quickly mobilise the reviewers rather than having to draw up new contracts for each proposal reviewed. 
92.  The  PMU  will  send  the  full  proposal  (minus  any  additional  supporting  documentation,  such  as 
printed/bound  financial  audits,  etc.)  to  the  External  Reviewers,  along  with  an  MS  Excel  based  external 
review score sheet which guides them through the scoring of the proposal. The scoresheet requires the 
External Reviews to score set criteria on a range of 1-5, with 1 being sub-standard and 5 being excellent. 
The  PMU  provides  guidance  to  the  External  Reviewers  on  how  to  complete  the  scoresheet  and  is  on 
hand to answer any concerns/questions that may  arise. The scoresheet mirrors the  grant proposal, the 
external reviewers score questions that cover the following topics: 
i)  Organizational  capacity;  governance,  systems,  current  and  past  performance,  and 
ii) 
financial capacity 
Interventional analysis; Problem statement and context analysis, outreach and scale, the 
implementation approach, sustainability, social and environmental impact and innovation 
iii)  Project budget; value for money 
iv)  Technical implementing partner assessment; Implementing partner capacity; project role, 
and partner arrangements. 
93.  The  scoring  sections  are  weighted,  the  weighting  may  be  adjusted  as  the  Programme  develops 
and we review more proposals using this template. 
159 IDIQ contracts are most often used for on-call service contracts. Minimum and maximum quantity limits are specified in the basic 
contract as either number of units (for supplies) or as dollar values (for services). An IDIQ contract allows for a certain amount of 
contract process streamlining. 
215 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
94.  There  is  also  a  brief  narrative  section  which  asks  the  external  review  to  give  the  strengths  and 
weaknesses for the technical and financial aspects of the proposal and any recommendations they might 
have for improving the proposal.  
95. 
158.  The external reviewer can  print, sign and scan the file, or  add a digital signature and  PDF 
the document. If the external review is local, they can bring a hardcopy to the office, but it is ideal to send 
the completed file via email to the PMU.  
96.  Summary  analysis  of  proposal.  Immediately  after  the  proposal  has  been  received,  the  CTA 
begins to develop a summary analysis of the proposal, which will be submitted to the IRC and PRC along 
with the full proposal. The summary analysis includes the following information: 
 
 
Introductory information about the organization and project; 
Internal and External Reviewer ratings and recommendations; 
  Proposal SWOT analysis (this may be upgraded to a TOWS analysis in the future); 
  Analysis of the organizations institutional and financial capacity; 
  Analysis of the organizations past and current performance with similar projects; 
  An overview of the project implementation goals, objectives and approach; 
  Analysis of the budget and financing plan; 
  Assessment of the proposed Gantt chart; 
  Analysis on the sustainability and scalability of the proposed activities; 
  Analysis of the organizations M&E systems and approach; 
  Assessment  of  the  potential  effect  on  the  key  issues  of  nutrition,  environment  and  social 
inequalities; and 
  An assessment of the technical implementing partner if the grantee intends to use one. 
The  summary  analysis  is  designed  to  follow  the  proposal  flow  and  support  the  IRC  and  PAC  in  their 
review of the full proposal. 
97. 
Internal  Review  Committee.  The  IRC  is  chaired  by  a  representative  from  the  Pensions  and 
Financial  Sector  Policy  (PFSP)  Department  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Economic  Planning  and 
Development  (MoFEDP),  the  senior  staff  from  the  PMU  comprise  the  rest  of  the  committee.  Once  the 
concept  has  been  approved  by  the  IRC  at  the  concept  note  phase  the  organisation  is  deemed  eligible 
and  the  concept  valid.  Therefore,  during  the  proposal  stage  the  full  IRC  is  involved  once  the  CTA  has 
completed the summary analysis. As the CTA completes each summary analysis, the document is sent to 
the  IRC  for  review  and  assessment  via  email.  The  IRC  scores  the  proposal  in  the  same  way  that  the 
External  Reviewers  have  done,  using  the  same  template,  and  this  is  added  to  the  summary  analysis 
along with any additional comments. The IRC comprises of the:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
PFSP Representative; 
Programme Coordinator;  
Chief Technical Advisor 
Rural and Microfinance Specialist 
CBFO Specialist 
Procurement Specialist; 
M&E Specialist 
Meetings of the internal review committee will be held every month subject to cases pending for 
clearance. The IRC is chaired by the PFSP representative.  
98.  As  has  been  previously  stated,  it  is  anticipated  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  full  proposals  will  be 
compliant and meet all the terms and eligibility criteria, having gone through the concept note phase and 
initial  review  by  the  CTA.  However,  even  at  this  stage,  the  IRC  may  identify  issues  that  need  further 
clarification,  or  in  some  cases  they  may  identify  some  projects,  that  following  previous  interventions  by 
216 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
the  PD  and  CTA  to  seek  clarification,  are  not  compliant.  Therefore  the  IRC  may  make  the  following 
decisions: 
Approval: 
Where the proposal is deemed to be compliant with all terms and conditions, the 
IRC  would  decide  to  proceed  with  the  appraisal  and  prepare  its  rating  of  the 
proposal along the selection criteria;   
Defer Approval:  In case additional information or clarification would be needed, the CTA would be 
tasked to obtain such from the applicant and re-submit the proposal to the next 
IRC; and 
In case the proposal would not be compliant with the conditions as laid down in 
this manual, the CTA would inform the applicant accordingly, by detailing exactly 
where the proposal would not be compliant, and by inviting the applicant to work 
on areas of weakness and re-submit at a future date. 
Reject: 
99. 
In case the IRC  would  deem the proposal not to be compliant  with the terms and conditions, the 
CTA through the  PMU  would  inform the applicant in  writing of probable  areas of non-compliance of the 
proposal  with the guidelines and conditions and invite its representatives for a discussion on  how such 
areas of non-compliance could be adjusted to make the proposal compliant. The applicant is free to:  
(i) 
(ii) 
Accept such a meeting and any eventual proposal made by the PMU; and  
Modify the proposal accordingly and resubmit. 
100. 
In case the IRC would deem a proposal to be non-compliant with the rules and regulations, and the 
applicant  would  insist  on  maintaining  the  application  as  it  was  submitted,  the  PD  would  inform  the 
applicant about the rejection. The PMU must also inform the PAC about the decision not to progress the 
proposal. 
101.  Another  function  of  the  IRC  is  to  review  and  provide  comment  on  the  summary  analysis  as 
provided by the  CTA and ensure that  it covers all the  areas required for the  PRC and that  it accurately 
represents the proposal. 
102.  Proposals Review Committee. The final  instance of grant  appraisal for the Financial Innovation 
and Outreach Component will be the PRC. The PRC is comprised of eight members, as follows: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
A representative from Reserve Bank of Malawi (RBM);  
A  representative  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Economic  Planning  and 
Development (MoFEDP);  
A representative from the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development 
A representative from the board of Bankers Association of Malawi  
A representative of the board of Malawi Microfinance Network,;  
A  representative 
Malawi/FUM/Association of financial cooperatives 
Two  private  sector  representatives  recruited  through  a  tender  process  or 
appropriate  process  as  may  be  determined  by  the  PSC.These  representatives 
shall preferably be persons familiar with banking and finance, but not be actively 
engaged in the financial sector. 
the  National  Smallholder  Farmers  Association  of 
from 
  The  PC  is  not  a  member  of  the  PRC,  but  serves  as  convenor  of  and  secretary  to  the 
PRC,  facilitates  presentation  of  the  cases  submitted  for  approval,  and  responds  to 
queries.  Other  experts  may  be  co-opted  as  the  need  arises  upon  majority  decision. 
Neither the PC nor co-opted experts shall have voting rights at the PRC.  
  The appointment of the institutional representatives is done by the Steering Committee of 
the  FARMSE  upon  nomination  by  the  respective  Chief  Executive  Officer,  or  other 
217 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
authorized  representative,  of  the  respective  institution  and  the  results  of  the  open 
recruitment/tender process.  
  All members of the PRC are requested to indicate at the beginning of the first session of 
the  PRC  any  affiliation  and/or  economic  interests  with  financial  institutions,  potential 
service  providers  and  other  relevant  institutions.  Persons  with  affiliations  and/or 
economic  interests  in  an  institution  applying  for  a  grant  under  FARMSE  or  seeking  to 
supply goods or services under a contract shall be excluded from the deliberations and 
decisions as regards this particular case, and shall not be replaced by other persons. A 
member of the PRC who fails to fully declare her or his affiliations and economic interests 
shall automatically cease to be a member of the PRC. In such cases, the chairperson of 
the PRC will notify the respective chief executive officer accordingly.  
  All  nominated  PRC  members  who  fail  to  attend  three  consecutive  meetings  will 
automatically cease to be members of the committee. In such a case, the PC informs the 
respective  chief  executive  officer  of  the  institution  concerned  and  requests  for  a  new 
appointment or start a new recruitment process, as the case may be. 
  The  PRC  undertakes  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  each  application,  checks 
compliance of a proposal  with all terms and conditions, ensures that all procedures are 
complied  with  and  appraises  the  proposal  along  the  selection  criteria.  The  PRC  is  not 
permitted to change any part of the proposal they received. The PRC ultimately decides 
on the rejection or approval of an eligible application. In case a proposal is rejected, the 
reasons for rejection have to be detailed in the minutes of the session.  
  The PRC uses the proposal approval guidelines. The PRC does not score the proposal, 
but uses the  weightings as an indication as to the  importance they should give  to each 
consideration when they are reviewing the proposal. 
  Following  a  detailed  discussion  about  the  merits  and  shortcomings  of  a  proposal,  a 
committee member proposes a decision, which must be seconded by another committee 
member before a vote is taken. A decision is reached by simple majority. 
  The  PRC  will  be  convened  about  every  six  to  eight  weeks  by  the  PC.  The  quorum  at 
PRC meetings is attained if 5 out of the 8 members are present; decisions are made with 
the majority of votes, i.e. at least five votes, in favour of a support or 3 if the quorum is 5; 
if this majority is not attained, the proposal is deemed to be rejected.  
  The decisions of the PRC are final.  
  All documents to members of the PRC shall be circulated in electronic format at least one 
full  week  before  the  meeting.  In  addition  to  a  standardized  presentation  of  each  single 
proposal, a summary sheet covering essentials of all projects shall also be circulated to 
the  PRC  members.  The  documents  shall  include  in  tabular  form  the  scoring  of  each 
proposal along the selection criteria as made by the external reviewers and the IRC.  
  All members of the PRC shall receive an allowance compensating them against the time 
spent and efforts made to render competent and professional advice to the Committee. 
The allowance shall be fixed in terms of the net time spent at PRC meetings, and shall 
amount to USD 30 per full hour. 
103.  PRC  sub-committee.  For  grants  below  a  value  of  USD  30,000,  the  PRC  will  establish  a  sub-
committee authorised to make decisions on its behalf. This committee is comprised of four members of 
the  PRC. The members will  be elected  with  a simple  majority by the  PRC from among volunteers. The 
quorum  required  for  decisions  of  the  sub-committee  is  four  members,  and  decisions  require  a  majority 
(i.e. three out of four). This committee will be operational once at least five regular meetings of the PRC 
218 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
have been held. After one  year of functioning, the  PRC may increase  the  approval limit to USD 70,000 
per case. The minutes of the meetings of the sub-committee will be submitted to the full PRC through the 
PC.  
104.  Minutes.  The  chairpersons  of  the  IRC  and  of  the  PRC  ensure  that  minutes  of  all  meetings  are 
properly  kept  by  the  Procurement  Specialist  or  designated  officer.  The  secretaries  of  the  IRC  and  the 
PRC will, respectively, submit the minutes of any meeting via email within one week to all members. The 
final  version  of  the  minutes  shall  be  distributed  to  all  members  attending  the  respective  session 
immediately upon finalization, as well as to all members of the IRC.  
105.  Exclusions from decision making. Members of the PRC are not permitted to attend meetings of 
the IRC or act as external reviewers. Members of the PMU are not entitled to act as external reviewers or 
as  members  of  the  PRC.  External  reviewers  are  not  entitled  to  attend  the  IRC  or  PRC  meetings.  An 
exception of this is the PC, who shall serve as secretary to the PRC without voting rights.  
106.  As the final decision making authority for grants, the PRC may make the following decisions: 
Approval: 
Deferred Approval: 
In case the proposal would be deemed to be compliant with all terms 
and conditions by the PRC and exceeding the minimum selection 
threshold, the PRC would approve the proposal and instruct the PD 
accordingly. The PR may also introduce conditions and/or deadlines for 
disbursement of tranches. 
The PRC may decide that the proposal has merit, and would ordinarily 
be approved, but that they are seeking clarification to items immaterial to 
the implementation approach of the proposal. If the applicant is able to 
provide clarification, then the PVC may approve the proposal at the next 
PRC meeting, or via email. 
Rejection:  The PRC may decide to reject a proposal on three grounds:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The proposal is deemed to be non-compliant with the conditions as laid 
down in this manual;  
The  rating  of  the  proposal  along  the  specific  selection  criteria  is  lower 
than those of competitors, and the funds available under the window do 
not permit funding of this proposal; or  
The  rating  of  the  proposal  is  below  the  minimum  threshold  defined  for 
the  specific  window.  In  either  of  such  cases,  the  PRC  would  decide  to 
reject  the  proposal  and  instruct  the  PC  to  inform  the  applicant 
accordingly,  by  detailing  exactly  where  the  proposal  would  not  be 
compliant  or  scoring  below 
requirements/standards  set  by 
the 
competitors,  and  by  inviting  the  applicant  to  modify  the  proposal 
accordingly and re-submit it. 
107.  Notification. All applicants are notified by the PC of the final outcome regarding their application. 
In  the  case  of  approval  the  PMU  drafts  an  offer  letter,  and  begins  to  draft  the  grant  agreement.  The 
notification  informs  the Applicant  that  they  can  commence  appointing  staff  or  start  tender/procurement 
processes. In case of rejection by the PRC, the PC notifies the applicant of the decision and the reasons 
for  rejection  as  stated  by  the  PRC,  and  informs  about  the  opportunity  to  re-submit  the  application, 
eventually after modification.  
108.  Re-submission.  In  case  an  application  has  been  rejected  on  the  grounds  of  receiving  a  lower 
score  or  non-compliance  with  terms  and  conditions,  the  applicant  is  permitted  to  re-submit  it  a  second 
time  after  incorporating  the  appropriate  modifications.  The  modifications  should  address  the  comments 
and suggestions made by the PRC. The PMU shall treat such applications as modified applications and 
commence the normal appraisal process. 
219 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
109.  Grant Agreement.  The  grant  agreement  is  prepared  by  the  PMU  following  the  PRC  approval,  it 
may include the following information: 
i)  Expected contribution by each party 
ii)  Duration of the project 
iii)  Obligations of the parties, including an overview of the project implementation 
activities 
iv)  Reporting requirements 
v)  Disbursements 
vi)  Supervision of the project by FARMSE 
vii)  Non-compliance, conflict resolution and force majeure 
viii) Termination conditions 
ix)  Confidentiality 
x)  Severability and renegotiation; and 
xi)  The governing law 
110.  The  grant  agreement  can  be  authorised  by  the  Chairperson  of  the  PRC  in  order  to  improve  the 
speed at which grants can be approved and funds disbursed. 
Implementation of Activities 
implementation  plan 
111.  A  detailed 
the  grant  agreement.  The  detailed 
is  sent  along  with 
implementation plan requires the grantee to revisit their implementation activities, Gantt chart and budget. 
The purpose  is to receive  a detailed monthly and quarterly plan for their  activities,  with  which the  PMU 
can track the project performance, at both a budget and output level.  
112.  Pre-implementation  Orientation.  Prior  to  the  grantee  beginning  implementation,  the  PMU  will 
provide  a  comprehensive  orientation  on  programme  goals,  objectives  and  reporting  for  respective  staff 
counterparts in the grantee organisation, including  data generation and  indicator  tracking requirements, 
orientation on reporting formats and obligations, as well as potential consequences of non-compliance. 
a)  Funding Arrangements 
i. 
Disbursements 
113.  Disbursements.  All  disbursements  shall  exclusively  be  made  by  way  of  bank  transfer  in  the 
currency specified in the grant agreement (MWK or USD) into a specified account of the grant recipient. 
The  respective  account  shall  be  specified  in  the  grant  agreement.  No  cash  or  in-kind  releases  are 
permitted.  Requests  for  fund  transfers  shall  be  submitted  by  the  CTS  to  the  Financial  Controller  upon 
approval by the PC. Implementing Partners are requested to confirm receipt of funds transferred by email 
within one week after receipt.  
114.  Disbursements  in  tranches.  Disbursements  to  Implementing  Partners  will  be  in  tranches,  as 
stated  in  the  table  below.  Payment  of  grants  shall  be  made  within  two  weeks  upon  submission  of  an 
invoice compliant with the specific requirements. 
Window 1: Disbursement Modalities and Conditions 
Modalities 
  Initial advance of 50% of provisional 
amount 
  Disbursement of second tranche when the 
partner reaches 70% of expenditure of the 
first tranche. 
No. 
Of 
Tranches 
2 
Conditions 
disbursement 
for 
First tranche, detailed 
implementation plan, procurement 
plan, disbursement request form 
Second tranche, submission of 
invoice, and implementation and 
financial progress reports 
220 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 11:  Programme Implementation Manual 
115.  As a summary, prior to disbursing FARMSE funding, Implementing Partners must provide detailed 
information  about  their  planned  activities,  and  they  must  specify  which  bank  account  they  will  receive 
funds into. The disbursement requirements are as follows: 
  Monthly and quarterly implementation plans  
  Procurement plan (see the Procurement Sub-Manual for more details) 
ii. 
  Financial Management 
116.  As mentioned previously, the PMU analysis information gathered during the post approval capacity 
survey  process  to  assess  the  grantee’s  financial  management  capability.  It  is  expected  that  larger 
Implementing  Partners  will  use  a  formal  financial  management  software,  either  proprietary  or  off-the-
shelf. If the grantee does not use a formal financial management software, FARMSE provides them with 
a MS Excel based expenditure tracking and reporting tool. 
117.  Record  keeping  requirements  of  expenses  by  Implementing  Partners.  All  Implementing 
Partners are requested to keep records as per the specific monitoring and reporting requirements of their 
project  and  as  specified  in  the  grant  agreement.  All  grant  agreements  contain  clear  reporting 
requirements  along  specific  indicators,  and  contain  a  clause  pursuant  to  which  the  grant  recipient 
commits to comply with the set reporting requirements. 
b)  Procurement 
118.  Ownership  of  goods,  data  and  information  obtained. All  goods  acquired  by  the  Implementing 
Partner from the proceeds of the grant shall be used for the purposes of the project as submitted in the 
grant application and as approved in the grant approval letter. All goods remain the exclusive property of 
the grant recipient, i.e. a corporate body. As owner, the grant recipient is solely responsible for taking care 
of all property, providing for proper maintenance of goods and insuring property against common losses 
and risks. All data and information gathered during and after the completion of the project remain for the 
exclusive  use  of  the  grant  recipient,  with  the  provision  that  experiences  and  information  gathered  can 
also be used by the PMUfor reporting to the GOM and IFAD and for dissemination to the general public in 
generic  form.  In  case  of  cancellation  of  a  grant,  goods  remain  the  property  of  the  grant  recipient, 
irrespective of the right of the MoFEPD to request for reimbursement of the full grant or a portion thereof. 
c)  Knowledge Management 
119.  During  the  pre-implementation  workshop  the  KM  Specialist  provides  guidance  to  Implementing 
Partners  on  how  to  identify  and  record  interesting  human  interest  and  other  stories.  The  PMU  and 
grantee  must  jointly  approve  any  publications  before  publication.  As  each  partnership  and  project  is 
different, the KM Specialist works with the grantee to establish a tailored plan for publications, based on 
the KM Strategy. 
221 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies 
Policy 
Alignment with IFAD Policy 
IFAD Strategic 
Framework 2016-
2025: « Enabling 
Inclusive and 
Sustainable Rural 
Transformation » 
Country level 
policy 
engagement 
Targeting policy 
Gender equality 
and women’s 
empowerment 
policy 
Rural finance 
policy 
IFAD’s fifth Strategic Framework covers the period 2016-2025, serving as an overarching 
policy  guideline  to  provide  direction  to  IFAD’s  work,  and  as  a  key  instrument  for 
the  new  global 
consolidating 
environment  and  positions  IFAD  to  play  a  crucial  role  within  it  –  by  enabling  the 
transformation of rural areas in a manner that is both more inclusive and sustainable. The 
framework has three strategic objectives:  
IFAD’s  development  effectiveness. 
It  responds 
to 
1.  SO1: Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities – investing in rural 
people  to  enhance  their  access  to  and  control  over  assets  and  resources. 
FARMSE’s objectives of increasing access to financial services, and increasing 
income and asset development, support this SO. 
2.  SO2:  Increase  poor  rural  people’s  benefits  from  market  participation  – 
improving  the engagement of  poor  rural  people in  markets  for  goods, services 
and wage labour. FARMSE will boost the rural investment environment, thereby 
increasing poor rural people’s linkages to the markets.  
3.  SO3: Strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of 
poor  rural  people’s  economic  activities.  Environmental  sustainability  for 
FARMSE is further described in the SECAP Review Note.  
IFAD  promotes  policy  engagement  in  projects  in  order  to  reach  two  main  objectives: 
(i) help  create  an  enabling  environment  for  implementation  and  achieving  the  project's 
impact, and (ii) help create the conditions for a large number of rural population to out of 
poverty.  It  is  a  key  element  of  the  scaling  up  agenda.  IFAD's  role  is  not  intended  to 
advocate for specific policy outcomes; it is rather to assist governments to use the project 
experience in  the  design  or  reform of  policies,  and  to  facilitate  dialogue  among national 
stakeholders on key policy issues. FARMSE is in line with these objectives and principles, 
seeking  to  create  and  provide  spaces  for  policy  strengthening,  formulation  and 
implementation in a consultative way through the establishment of an Agricultural Finance 
Working Group.  
FARMSE is consistent with IFAD’s Targeting guidelines and has/will follow three steps to 
good targeting practice: i) gender-sensitive poverty and livelihoods analysis in design, at 
start-up  and  during  implementation;  ii)  identification  and  implementation  of  a  targeting 
strategy; and three monitoring and evaluation of targeting performance. 
FARMSE  is  consistent  with  IFAD’s  Gender  and  Women’s  Empowerment  Policy  (2012) 
which  has 
three  strategic  objectives:  Strategic  objective  1:  Promote  economic 
empowerment to enable rural women and men to have equal opportunity to participate in, 
and  benefit  from,  profitable  economic  activities.  •  Strategic  objective  2:  Enable  women 
and  men  to  have  equal  voice  and  influence  in  rural  institutions  and  organizations.  • 
Strategic objective 3: Achieve a more equitable balance in workloads and in the sharing 
of economic and social benefits between women and men. 
FARMSE  is  consistent  with  IFAD's  Rural  Finance  Policy  (2009)  which  has  six  guiding 
principles  to  be  applied  at  the  micro,  meso  and  macro  levels:  (i)  support  access  to  a 
variety of financial services; (ii) promote a wide range of financial institutions, models and 
delivery channels; (iii) support demand driven and innovative approaches; (iv) encourage 
– in collaboration with private sector partners – market-based approaches that strengthen 
rural  financial  markets,  avoid  distortions  in  the  financial  sector  and  leverage  IFAD’s 
resources;  (v)  develop  and  support  long-term  strategies  focusing  on  sustainability  and 
poverty  outreach;  and  (vi)  participate  in  policy  dialogues  that  promote  an  enabling 
environment for rural finance. 
Knowledge 
management 
The  Knowledge  Management  strategy  suggests  that  projects  should  have  baseline 
studies  and  should  have  dedicated  frameworks  for  knowledge  management  in  order  to 
"learn systematically and collectively from its own projects and programmes, and from the 
experience  of  its  partners,  particularly  poor  rural  people,  in  order  to  deliver  high-quality 
223 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Policy 
Alignment with IFAD Policy 
Scaling up 
services  and  to enable its partners  to  find  innovative  ways to  overcome poverty,  and  to 
use  the  knowledge  acquired  to  foster  pro-poor  policy  reforms."  FARMSE  will  have  a 
dedicated M&E system and a strong M&E capacity at PMU level.  
FARMSE  is  consistent  with  IFAD's  vision  of scaling  up.  The  definition  adopted by  IFAD 
for  scaling  up  is:  “expanding,  adapting  and  supporting  successful  policies,  programmes 
and knowledge, so that they can leverage resources and partners to deliver larger results 
for a greater number of rural poor in a sustainable way”. Scaling up results does not mean 
transforming  small  IFAD  projects  into  larger  projects.  While  FARMSE  has  a  significant 
size on its own, the objective is to leverage greater impact through partnerships with other 
projects,  piloting  new  approaches  with  implementing  partners  and  replicating  those  that 
are  successful,  and  fostering  knowledge  exchanges  that  will  support  a  structural 
transformation of Malawi’s rural finance sector. 
224 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Appendix 13: Contents of the Project Life File 
Country strategy 
  Republic of Malawi Country strategic opportunities programme 
Mission documents 
 
 
 
Aide Memoires of design missions 
FARMSE Programme Design Concept paper 
Terms of Reference for design missions 
Working papers (as prepared by the technical mission of October 2016) 
  COSTAB file 
 
Economic and Financial Analysis Excel files 
Environmental and social safeguards 
 
SECAP Review Note (Appendix 14 to programme design report) 
Review documents 
  OSC minutes 
  CPMT minutes 
  QE panel report 
  QA minutes 
Documents Consulted 
Africa Economic Outlook (2015). 
Arndt  et  al,  (2015),  The  Economy-wide  Impacts  and  Risks  of  Malawi's  Farm  Input  Subsidy 
Program. Amer. Journal of Agr Econ.  
Carolina  Population  Center.  (2016).  Malawi  Social  Cash  Transfer  Programme  Endline  Impact 
Evaluation Report DRAFT. 
Cenfri. (2015). Making Access Possible, Malawi.    
CGAP and Ford Foundation. (2014). From Extreme Poverty to Sustainable Livelihoods. A Technical 
Guide to the Graduation Approach. 
Cornia, Doti, Sassi. (2016). Source of food price volatility and child malnutrition in Niger and Malawi, 
Food Policy;  
Draft National Forest Policy of Malawi, 2013. 
FAO, From Protection to Production: Productive Impacts of the Malawi Social Cash Transfer Scheme. 
FinMark Trust (2008) Malawi FinScope Consumer Survey 2008. 
FinMark Trust. (2014). FinScope Consumer Survey Malawi 2014. 
GIZ/ (2015).  A Rapid Field Assessment of the Gender Responsiveness of the Malawi Social Support 
Programme (MNSSP) for GIZ. 
GIZ.  (2016).  Overview  on  the  Implementation  of  the  Economic  Empowerment  Pilot  Project  in 
Mwanza. 
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis & Malawi, the German Government, European Union, World 
Bank and Irish Aid. 
Harttgen, Klasen, Rischke. (2016). Analyzing nutritional impacts of price and income related shocks in 
Malawi, Food Policy. 
Human  Centered  Design.  See:  https://www.cgap.org/publications/what-human-centered-design-
means-financial-inclusion for further information. 
Ibrahim 
(http://www.moibrahimfoundation.org/iiag). 
IFAD. (2014). Case Study: Gender Action Learning System in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, 
and Uganda. 
of  African  Governance,  Country 
Insights,  Malawi. 
(2015).  See: 
Index 
225 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
IFAD. (2014). Case Study: Household Approach for Gender, HIV and AIDS Mainstreaming, Malawi. 
IFAD.  (2014).  Household  Methodologies:  Harnessing  the  Family´s  Potential  for  Change.  Gender, 
Targeting and Social Inclusion. 
IFAD. (2014). Lessons learned Community-based financial organizations 
IFAD.  (2016).  Baseline  Report  on  Food  Knowledge,  Attitude,  and  Practice  (KAP);  and  Scaling-up 
Nutrition Malawi.  
IFAD. (2016). SAPP Mid Term Review Report. 
IFAD Malawi. (2015). Food Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) survey,  
IFAD. (2014). Case Study: Gender Action Learning System in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, 
and Uganda. Gender, Targeting and Social Inclusion. 
IFAD.  (2014).  Household  Methodologies:  Harnessing  the  Family´s  Potential  for  Change.  Gender, 
Targeting and Social Inclusion. 
IFAD. (2016). SAPP Mid Term Review Report. 
IFRI.  (2015).  Mapping  the  Linkages  of  Agriculture,  Food  Security,  and  Nutrition.    Malawi  Strategy 
Support Programme.  
Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio-Economic Characteristics Report. 
International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute.  (2015).  Nutrition  Country  Profile,  Malawi.    Global 
Nutrition Report.  
120. 
IPA. (2016). Impact of the Graduation Approach: Findings from the CGAP – Ford Foundation 
Pilots. 
IPA. (2016). Impact of the Graduation Approach: Findings from the CGAP – Ford Foundation Pilots. 
Kassie et al., (2015). Gendered Food Security in Rural Malawi, Springer. 
Kirui. (2016). Economics of Land Degradation and Improvements in Tanzania and Malawi.  
Malawi Vulnerability Assessment Committee. (2016).   
Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Food  Security.  (2010).  The  National  Agricultural  Policy:  Promoting 
Agricultural Productivity for National Food Security and Economic Growth and Development Through 
Value Chain Development. 
Ministry  of  Economic  Planning  and  Development.  (2009).  Social  Support  Policy:  Social  Support,  a 
Right for All.   
Ministry  of  Economic  Planning  and  Development.  (2012).  Malawi  National  Social  Support 
Programme. 
Ministry of Gender, Children, and Community Development. (2011). National Gender Policy. 
Ministry  of  Local  Government  and  Rural  Development.  (2016).  Integrated  Rural  Development 
Strategy. 
Ministry of Youth and Sports. (2013). National Youth Policy. 
National Food and Nutrition Security Forecast. (2016).  Bulletin No.12/16 Volume 1. 
National  Statistical  Office.  (2005).  Integrated  Household  Survey  2004-2005,  Volume  I  Household 
Socio-Economic Characteristics. 
National Statistical Office. (2008). 2008 Population and Housing Census. 
National Statistical Office. (2010), 2010 Malawi Demographic and Health Survey. 
National  Statistical  Office.  (2012).  Integrated  Household  Survey  2010-2011:  Household  Socio-
Economic Characteristics Report. 
National  Statistical  Office.  (2014).  Integrated  Household  Panel  Survey.  Household  Socio-Economic 
Characteristics Report. 
National Statistical Office, Population Projections Malawi.   
ODI.  (2016).  Options  for  a  Graduation  Strategy  from  Malawi´s  Social  Cash  Transfer  Programme 
(SCTP). 
Office  of  the  President  and  Cabinet.  (2007).  National  Nutrition  Policy.  Ministry  of  Health,  2007.  
National Nutrition Guidelines for Malawi.  
OPHI. (2013). Country Briefing Malawi. 
Population Reference Bureau. (2014). 
Republic of Malawi. (2012). Integrated Household Survey. 
Rui  &  Thurlow.  (2016).  Development  of  a  Rural  Investment  and  Policy  Analysis  (RIAPA)  Modelling 
Toolkit.  
226 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the Project Life File 
The  Malawi  Vulnerability  Assessment  Committee.  (2016).  National  Food  and  Nutrition  Security 
Forecast, April 2016 to March 2015.  Bulletin No.12/16 Volume 1. 
Thurlow  et  al,.  (2015).  Contribution  of  Cities  and  Towns  to  National  Growth  and  Development  in 
Malawi; World Bank Urban Review. 
UNDP. (2015). Human Development Report, Malawi summary. 
Wheeler and von Braun. (2013). Climate change impact on food security. 
Websites Consulted 
www.thesavix.org/p:en/index.html.  
http://data.worldbank.org/country/malawi 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/MWI.pdf. 
http://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/malawi 
http://www.nasfam.org/index.php/membership-benefits accessed 10th November 2016. 
227 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 14:  SECAP review note 
Appendix 14: 
SECAP review note 
I.  Major landscape characteristics and Issues   
A. 
Socio-cultural context 
Malawi’s  population  is  16.8 million  people,  out  of  which  85  per  cent  is  rural. Two  out  of  three 
1. 
people  are  under  age  25.  Population  is  predicted  to  further  grow  to  26  million  by  2030.  Poverty 
headcount  stands  at  50.7  per  cent,  with  almost  30  per  cent  being  severe  poor.  Poverty  is  most 
pronounced  in  rural  areas  of  the  north  and  south,  while  it  decreased  in  urban  areas.  High  rates  of 
malnutrition paired with ca. 10 per cent of the population infected by HIV/AIDS, hamper the country’s 
productivity and require high care efforts by family members, especially women. More details on the 
socio-cultural context can be found in Appendices I and II. 
B. 
Natural resources and climate 
2. 
The  most  important  geomorphic  feature  of  Malawi  is  the  Great  Rift  Valley  that  extends  from 
north to south and forms Lake Malawi.  Malawi can  be divided into four main agro-ecological  zones: 
lowlands  (<900  m,  including  the  shores  of  Lake  Malawi  and  the  floodplains  of  the  Shire  River), 
highlands (900-1,400 m), mountains (1,400 – 2,500 m) and escarpment areas (steep slopes between 
highlands and lowlands).  
3. 
Malawi has an extensive network of river systems, the major rivers being perennial. Per capita 
water  resource  availability  is  low  at  an  estimated  937  m3/year  (2015)  and  rapidly  declining  due 
population  growth160.  While  Malawi  has  a  long  dry  season  (May  –  October),  only  4%  of  cultivated 
lands are irrigated often using inefficient irrigation techniques161. While agricultural commodities under 
irrigation contribute only 2-4% to Malawi’s GDP, they make up the bulk of Malawi’s exports and are of 
particular significance to food and nutrition security. The GOM is therefore actively seeking to increase 
land under irrigation, by investing in water storage and irrigation schemes such as the IFAD-financed 
PRIDE and the Shire Valley Irrigation Project. 
4. 
Soils  are  generally  moderately  fertile,  but  fertility  of  smallholder-managed  soils  has  been 
steadily reducing due to continuous maize production, low fertilizer use and discontinuation of fallow 
systems due to rising population pressure162. Soil organic matter contents are reportedly even falling 
to levels that limit responsiveness to fertilizer and do not support maize growth163.  
Soils  are  not  the  only  natural  resource  suffering  from  poor  management.  The  country  is 
5. 
estimated  to  lose  USD  190  million  per  year  due  to  unsustainable  fishing,  deforestation  and  soil 
degradation164.  Significant  public  financial  resources  are  equally  spent  on  halting  and  reversing 
degradation  trends;  yet  the  underlying  economic  drivers  severely  limit  the  effectiveness  of  these 
efforts.  
6. 
Climate  conditions  in  Malawi  are  influenced  by  both  the  Inter-Tropical  Convergence  Zone  as 
well  as  the  Indian  Ocean  system,  creating  high  inter-annual  variability.  The  sub-tropical  climate  is 
divided into three weather variations: warm-wet (November to April), cool-dry winter (May to August) 
and hot-dry season (September to October). Due to the country’s position between climate systems, 
and 
Water 
(2015) 
USAID 
Malawi 
Sanitation 
160 
Available 
http://www.vub.ac.be/klimostoolkit/sites/default/files/documents/malawi_water__sanitation_profile_usaid.pdf  
161 Ministry of Water Development and Irrigation (2015), Irrigation Master Plan and Investment Framework. 
162  Kanyama-Phiri,  G.,  et  al  (2000).  Towards  integrated  soil  fertility  management  in  Malawi.  Available  online  at 
http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/7422IIED.pdf  
163  Snapp,  S. 
https://agrilinks.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/MalawiGreenRevolutioninJeopardySnapp.pdf  
164 Ministry of Finance and Development Planning (2011).  The Economic Evaluation of Sustainable Natural Resource Use in 
Malawi. 
at 
http://www.mw.undp.org/content/dam/malawi/docs/environment/Economic%20Valuation%20of%20Sustainable%20Natural%20
Resources%20Use%20in%20Malawi.pdf  
in  Malawi.  Michigan  State  University.  Available  online  at 
(2015).  A  Greener  Revolution 
Available 
Profile. 
online 
online 
at 
229 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 14:  SECAP review note 
climatic responses to El Niño and La Niña events vary and are difficult to predict. The 2016 El Niño 
event negatively affected nearly half of Malawi’s population, pushing as many as 6 million people into 
emergency food assistance programs. 
7. 
Climate change is observed in Malawi in terms of increasing mean annual temperatures (0.9°C 
between 1960 and 2006). A further increase of 1.1  – 3.0 °C is expected by the 2060s. There are no 
statistically significant historic trends in rainfall patterns, and different climate models show diverging 
results  for  future  climates.  It  is  however  likely  that  the  intensity  of  both  wet  and  dry  seasons  will 
increase165. This in turn will have an effect on the availability of surface water resources during the dry 
season, increasing the need for water storage.  
8. 
Smallholders identify flooding, late rains, short rains, dry spells, droughts and strong winds as 
the  main  climate  related  risks  that  they  face.  The  main  impacts  of  the  climate  risks  noted  by  the 
farmers are crop damage by floods, crops drying before maturity during dry spells, reduced crop yield, 
reduction in land availability for farming due to siltation, loss of soil fertility and soil erosion. The most 
immediate reported outcome after a climate shock regardless of the type of shock is decline in crop 
yield,  which  threatens  household  food  security.  Increased  food  shortage,  loss  of  assets  and  income 
are also reported. 
C. 
9. 
Key Issues 
Taking into account the rural finance thrust of the proposed project, key relevant issues are: 
(a)  High  natural  resource  dependency,  high  vulnerability.  The  majority  of  Malawian 
smallholders  are  primary  dependents  of  the  availability  and  quality  of  natural  resources, 
such as good soils for cultivation, grazing lands, firewood and water. Without any buffers 
or alternative income stream, smallholder farmers are highly vulnerable to climatic shocks 
such as floods and droughts. 
(b) 
Steadily degrading natural resource base. At the same time, the availability and quality 
of  natural  resources  is  continuously  declining,  primarily  due  to  poor  management.  This 
process is often self-reinforcing: low investments in soil fertility reduce maize yields, which 
push  people  to  resort  to  charcoal  making,  which  increases  erosion,  and  so  forth. 
Increasing  investments  in  good  agricultural  practices  and  buffers for  difficult  periods  can 
reverse this trend. 
(c) 
Increase  in  extreme  events.  The  increasing  occurrence  of  intense  rainfall  events  and 
droughts means an increasing number of shocks to smallholders, with increasing severity.  
(d)  Complexity  of  translating  financial  inclusion  into  improved  livelihood  outcomes, 
especially  for  poorest  households.  Given  the  above,  and  the  multifaceted  nature  of 
inputs and circumstances producing sustainable livelihoods outcomes, the programme will 
need to leverage with interventions addressing upstream and downstream factors in rural 
value  chains  to  ensure  that  programme  investments  translate  into  benefits  for  targeted 
households.  
(e) 
Integration  of  good  environmental  and  social  practices  into  the  policies  and 
procedures  of  financial  institutions.  Financial  institutions  can  play  a  major  role  in 
promoting and financing only good environmental and social practices, yet their in-house 
capacity to assess this is often limited. 
165 UNDP (2011). Malawi Climate Change Country Profile. Available online at 
http://www.geog.ox.ac.uk/research/climate/projects/undp-cp/UNDP_reports/Malawi/Malawi.lowres.report.pdf  
230 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 14:  SECAP review note 
II.  Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks 
A. 
Key potential impacts 
10.  The expected positive impact of FARMSE comprises: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
Improved food security 
Increased savings 
Accumulation of (productive) assets 
Income diversification 
Economic potential of household enhanced 
Improved income management 
11.  The  combined  effect  of  these  benefits  will  be  reduced  poverty,  improved  livelihoods  and 
enhanced resilience of rural households. 
12.  The  potential  negative  impact  can  be  assessed  at  two  levels:  those  of  activities  directly 
financed  by  the  project,  and  those  resulting  from  the  activities  indirectly  enabled  by  project 
interventions.  In  the  former  category,  potential  negative  effects  are  restricted  to  mostly  the  limited 
environmental impact of small-scale infrastructure. The project may finance small-scale infrastructure 
such  as  small  offices  (branches),  storage  facilities,  roads  or  market  sheds.  Negative  effects  could 
include  clearance  of  vegetation,  loss  of  habitat,  noise  of  construction  and  improper  waste 
management, but all at very limited scale. 
In addition, the implementation of programme activities will increase exposure and vulnerability 
13. 
of  programme  beneficiaries  and  members  of  target  communities  to  HIV,  especially  among  girls, 
female youth and poor women. Specific measures should be considered in light of this in terms of HIV 
awareness-raising, education and prevention. A possible negative impact of interventions stimulating 
loan acquisition is generating situations of over-indebtedness among target households. Programme 
activities will include loan risk assessment for both formal and informal financial services supported. 
14.  Direct  targeting  of  women  can  increase  intra-household  pressures  and  increase  gender 
inequality  for  both  men  and  women  if  not  supported  by  an  overarching  approach  aiming  to  achieve 
increased household wellbeing.   
15. 
Indirect  effects  will  derive  from  the  increased  economic  activity  caused  by  the  project.  The 
increased  availability  of  funds  may  enable  farmers  to,  amongst  others,  invest  in  irrigation  (pumps, 
pipes),  expand  their  agricultural  lands,  purchase  and  apply  pesticides,  or  build  small-scale 
infrastructure.  The  expected  potential  negative  impact  of  each  of  these  interventions  is  small,  but 
cumulative environmental effects may arise from widespread adoption. These may include increased 
competition over freshwater resources, pollution of water resources by fuel spills or pesticide/fertilizer 
run-off and clearance of bush / forest land.  
B. 
Climate change and adaptation 
16.  As  mentioned,  the  direct  effects  of  climate  change  include  increasing  temperatures  and 
increasing  frequency  and  intensity  of  extreme  events.  There  is  limited  decisive  information  on  the 
climate vulnerability of, or expected impact of these changes  on, specific agricultural commodities or 
value chains. For example, studies modelling climate change impact on maize yields come to different 
conclusions, some projecting yield increases, others yield declines. 
17.  FARMSE  will  not  finance  planned  climate  change  adaptation  per  se,  but  will  be  an  important 
enabler of autonomous adaptation by farmers through the improved availability of financing. There are 
several  ongoing  projects  that  will  complement  FARMSE  in  this  regard,  most  notably  the  improved 
availability  of  weather  and  climate  information  through WFP-assisted  climate  information  centres166, 
166 See http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/newsroom/wfp253152.pdf  
231 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 14:  SECAP review note 
improved  year-round  access  to  irrigation  water  such  as  through  PRIDE,  or  the  FAO  and  NEPAD 
initiatives  on  Climate  Smart Agriculture  which  include  applied  research  on  drought-tolerant  species 
and improved post-harvest facilities. 
III.  Environmental and social category  
18.  The potential negative social and environmental impact caused by the project, as identified in 
section  II,  is  limited.  The  impact  of  directly-financed  activities  is  limited  to  specific  sites  and  can  be 
mitigated  using  readily  available  measures.  The  cumulative  impact  of  an  increase  in  economic 
activities,  indirectly  caused  by  the  project,  may  cover  a  wider  geographical  area  and  be  less  easily 
mitigated by the project, but will have limited impact severity. Overall, the Project has been assessed 
as environmental and social Category B. 
IV.  Climate risk category 
19.  The high vulnerability of the target beneficiaries to climate-related shocks, will pose a risk to the 
project achieving its objectives. Major events such as droughts or floods, such as those experienced 
in  2015  and  2016,  may  disturb  the  expected  development  trajectory  of  those  farmers  under  the 
graduation  model  or  negatively  affect  the  ability  of  households  to  repay  loans.  The  climate  risk 
category is thus assessed as Medium. 
V.  Recommended features of project design and implementation  
A.  Mitigation measures 
20.  Mitigation measures for the potential negative impacts identified in Section II include: 
(a)  Develop an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) outlining standard 
operating  procedures  for  the  financing  of  small-scale  infrastructure,  as  addendum  to  the 
Project Implementation Manual and aligned with the national guidelines on Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment. The ESMF should also make explicit reference to the IFC 
Exclusion List167 outlining investments not eligible for project support; 
(b)  Monitor  implementation  of  ESMF  as  part  of  the  overall  M&E  system  with  an  aggregate 
indicator featuring in the project Logframe; 
(c)  Conduct  due  diligence  on  to-be-engaged  Financial  Service  Providers  (FSPs)  in  terms  of 
environment, social and governance (ESG)168 policies and procedures, and their capacity 
to implement those. If found inadequate, develop an operational plan to improve capacity; 
(d) 
Specifically  address  intra-household  dynamics,  for  instance  by  using  the  Gender  Action 
Learning System (GALS) methodology; 
(e) 
Set up a grievance redress mechanism at programme level. 
B. 
Incentives for good practices 
21.  Apart from mitigating potential negative impact, the following measures could enhance positive 
impacts:  
(a) 
For  the  graduation  model  activities  under  component  1:  Combine  asset  transfer  with 
training  on  environmental  management,  e.g.  grazing  and  manure 
appropriate 
167 See 
http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ifc+projects+database/projects/aips+
added+value/ifc_project_exclusion_list  
168 ESG is the terminology increasingly used in impact investing and social enterprises. Several ESG toolkits for 
microfinance institutions have been developed, and IFAD is looking to mainstream these into its rural finance 
operations 
232 
Republic of Malawi 
Financial Access for Rural Markets, Smallholders and Enterprise Programme (FARMSE) 
Final design report 
Appendix 14:  SECAP review note 
management  for  livestock  provision,  water-efficient  irrigation  management  for  irrigation 
equipment provision. 
(b) 
Implement  a  pro-active  gender  empowerment  methodology  such  as  the  Gender  Action 
Learning System (GALS) which not only addresses structural power imbalances affecting 
women,  it  also  provides  opportunities  for  men  to  use  their  potential.    It  also  bolsters  the 
economic potential of households and increases the chances of reaching  and sustaining 
gains generated by the programme. 
(c) 
For  the  CBMFIs  under  component  2.1:  incentivize  service  providers  to  mainstream  ESG 
issues  in  their  approach;  require  proposals  to  explicitly  state  how  these  issues  are 
addressed, and include ESG  criteria as part of the proposal evaluation 
(d) 
For  the  FSPs  under  component  2.2:  incentivize  the  development  of  products  that 
specifically address financial risks related to weather variability and extreme events;  
VI.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
22.  Guidance for monitoring and evaluation of the project’s environmental and social performance 
should  be  detailed  in  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework. The  project  M&E  and 
KM  officers  should  be  trained  on  how  to  monitor  environmental  and  social  performance  of  service 
providers. 
233 
