Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AA
ADB
AICT
ARC
Authorized Allocation
Asian Development Bank
Agriculture Information and Communication Technology
Agriculture Research Center
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
BARI
CAI
Bangladesh Agriculture Research Institute
Commercial Agricultural Island
CGIAR
Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research
CSN
CTA
CVA
DA
DWT
ELF
EOI
EIRR
FA
FAO
FADIP
FM
GAP
GDP
GoM
Country Strategy Note
Chief Technical Advisor
Climate Vulnerability Assessment
Designated Account
Dead weight tonnage
Extension Link Farmer
Expression of Interest
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Financing Agreement
Food and Agriculture Organization
Fisheries and Agriculture Diversification Programme
Financial Management
Good Agricultural Practice
Gross Domestic Product
Government of Maldives
HACCP
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point
ICP
ICT
ICU
IFAD
IGA
IPM
IPSAS
KM
LDH
Ltd.
LTB/R
MACO
MAP
M&E
MED
IFAD Client Portal
Information and Communication Technology
Implementation Coordination Unit (ICU)
International Fund for Agriculture Development
Income Generating Activity
Integrated Pest Management
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
Knowledge Management
Loan Disbursement Handbook
Limited
Letter to Borrower/Recipient
Maldives Agro Corporation
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Monitoring and Evaluation
Ministry of Economic Development
MEDEP
MGAP
Mariculture Enterprise Development Project
Maldives Good Agricultural Practice
MGFSS
Ministry of Gender Family and Social Services
MFLC
Maldives Finance Leasing Company
MOFMRA
MOF
Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture
Ministry of Finance
MONPI
Ministry of National Planning and Infrastructure
MoU
MSME
NPV
ORMS
PCR
PD
PIU
PIM
PSC
Pvt.
RCF
SDFC
SDG
Memorandum of Understanding
Micro, Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises
Net Present Value
Operational Results Measurement System
Project Completion Review/Report
Programme Director
Programme Implementation Unit
Programme Implementation Manual
Programme Steering Committee
Private
Revolving Credit Fund
SME Development Finance Corporation
Sustainable Development Goal
SECAP
Social Environment and Climate Assessment
SME
SOE
TA
Small and Medium Enterprises
Statement of Expenditure
Technical Assistance
UNOPS
United Nations’ Office for Project Services
VC
WA
WFP
Value Chain
Withdrawal Application
World Food Programme
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender transformational ☐ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/26
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$3,264,000
N/A
$3,264,000
Rationale. The agriculture sector is the third sector of the Maldives economy after tourism and fisheries. However, it is lagging behind
due to a set of constraints. The country faces complex challenges posed by a fragile ecology and climate change vulnerability.
Cultivable land is limited, as is the availability of technology to enhance production and productivity. Logistics and market access are
also significant challenges. Farming is mostly practiced in an unorganized manner and on a limited scale. Small farmers in the outer
atolls suffer the most in terms of periodic food insecurity and poverty. There is limited public and private investment in the sector; as a
result, the country relies heavily on imported agricultural products. In light of the challenges, and in the absence of systematic
investment in agriculture, implementation of the national Agricultural Development Master Plan has been successful.
The Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) will help the Government to address these challenges. It will support the Ministry of
Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMRA) to refine its evolving vision and implement a structured policy and incentive
framework for the agriculture sector. It will provide investment resources to capitalise on the opportunities existing for sectoral growth.
It will introduce climate-smart technological solutions suitable for the Maldives, which overcome land/soil constraints and mitigate
against climate change, and which are available globally. It will capitalise on the significant market for local crop production,
considering that local demand is rising rapidly as incomes increase and consumers become more aware of nutrition and food safety
considerations, and that the tourism sector imports substantial volumes of agricultural commodities per year.
Climate change. The Maldives is highly vulnerable to climate change. The potential impacts include salt-water intrusion and erosion
due to gradual rise in the sea level, change in rainfall patterns and increase in frequency of extreme climatic events. Salt-water
intrusion due to gradual rise in the sea level is devastating for agriculture. The global mean sea level rose 10-20 cm during the 20th
century at the rate of 1 to 2 mm/year. For the Maldives, the long-term trend observed in the relative rise of the sea level for Hulhule is
1.7 mm/year. Investment in the agriculture sector must necessarily be climate-smart.
Goal and objective. The programme's goal is to sustainably increase the incomes, food security and nutrition status of small farmer
households. Its development objective is the strengthened enabling environment for sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture. This
objective will be achieved through reformed policies, strengthened institutions and services, enhanced agricultural technologies and
better access to financing and markets for small farmer households.
Programme area. The programme will be nationwide in scope, articulated within the National Spatial Plan, covering all regional and
sub-regional hubs, clusters and islands where agriculture is undertaken by small farmers. Investments will initially be focused in
regions 1-3 of the northern atolls, where poverty and vulnerability among the farming communities is greater, and will subsequently
expand nationwide.
Target groups. The target group consists of small farmers. They include women, men, and youth belonging to households of different
socio-economic categories. With a considerable socio-economic and socio-cultural divide between rural and urban populations, also
with respect to gender and age, small farmers who depend mainly on agriculture for their livelihood are economically one of the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups in the country.
Gender. The programme will ensure equal opportunity for women in all activities and investments – management, planning, decision
making, participation in training, access to inputs, technology, financing, services and markets, and access to an equal share of
social, financial and economic benefits. Of the direct beneficiaries, at least 53% will be women.
Youth. The programme will systematically target young farmers, particularly those inclined to adopt advanced production techniques.
It will explore opportunities to engage the youth in agribusiness development, agri-technologies and knowledge transfer, modern
agriculture management, market linkages and IT technologies in support of production and post-production management. Of the
direct beneficiaries, at least 20% will be the youth.
Components. The programme has three inter-linked components: (i) enabling policy, institutions and services; (ii) climate-smart
production; and, (iii) market connection.
Component 1 - Enabling policy, institutions and services. The expected outcome of this component is the development of the enabling
policy, institutional and service provision environment that will allow increased productivity and production of agricultural commodities
demanded by the market. It has five outputs: (i) policy knowledge products on sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture will be
completed based on relevant thematic and sector analysis, and will be applied to promote an enabling environment for agriculture; (ii)
the capability of the Agriculture Research Centre in Hanimadhoo Island to generate climate resilient knowledge and technology will be
upgraded; (iii) packages of recommendations for increasing financial returns and enhancing resilience will be developed for small
farmers; (iv) new technologies and improved inputs will be transferred to small farmers; and, (v) an Agriculture Information and
Communication Technology (AICT) service will be established.
Component 2 – Knowledge and technology. The expected outcome of this component is the increased productivity and production of
agricultural commodities demanded by the market. It has three outputs: (i) climate-smart production of high value commodities by
small farmers will be increased through the application of improved inputs, equipment and modern technologies; (ii) Island Farmer
Forums’ capability to provide the required quantity and quality of produce in response to market demand will be enhanced; and (iii)
farmer access to agriculture financing will be improved.
2/26
Component 3 – Market connection. The expected outcome of this component is the development of market linkages and upgraded
transportation logistics among organised producers and buyers. Four marketing channels will be offered to Island Farmer Forums: (i)
wholesale markets at regional hubs, sub-regional hubs, and central/satellite clusters with improved facilities; (ii) commercial
agriculture islands operating on contract farming basis; (iii) central (Malé) wholesale market and associated logistics; and, (iv) tourism
resorts.
Programme management. The programme will be managed by MOFMRA, operating through a Programme Implementation Unit (PIU)
which will be established with strong management skills and technical resources. The PIU will play a crucial role in the overall project
management and coordination mechanism of MAP. It will be responsible for the daily project management and implementation, and
also the coordination among all implementing agencies. It will be composed of a programme director, three component coordinators,
technical staff on targeting/gender, and fiduciary staff (financial management, procurement). UNOPS will be contracted to strengthen
programme management capacities within MOFMRA and to support the PIU in the implementation of MAP. UNOPS will provide a
qualified and experienced Chief Technical Advisor on long-term basis, and short-term technical specialists as required.
Programme implementation. The structure of programme implementation responsibilities is outlined below.
Component
Component/Subcomponent
Implementing Agencies
Component 1
Enabling policy, institutions, services
MOFMRA
Subcomponent 1.1
Knowledge and technology
ARC
Subcomponent 1.2
Input supply
MACO and ARC
Component 2
Climate-smart production
MACO, ARC, SDFC, MFLC
Component 3
Market connection
MOFMRA, MACO, SDFC, MFLC
Management
Technical assistance
UNOPS
Programme costs and financing. The total programme cost amounts to USD 12.9 million (MVR 195.8 billion) over a five-year
implementation period. It will be financed by an IFAD loan of USD 3.3 million, an IFAD grant of USD 1.2 million, MACO contribution of
USD 0.2 million, private investment (commercial islands, MFLC, beneficiaries) of USD 1.1 million, SDFC cofinancing of USD 5.0
million, and Government contribution in cash of USD 2.1 million. IFAD financing will be provided on 73% highly concessional basis
and 27% DSF grant basis. Opportunities to leverage cofinancing from partners would be sought during implementation.
Economic analysis. The programme’s economic internal rate of return (EIRR) over a 20-year period is 12.9%, and the economic net
present value is USD 9.1 million. This indicates that the programme is a technically and economically viable investment for the
economy. The sensitivity analysis shows that the programme is robust in light of potential risks in terms of increased costs, decreased
benefits or time overruns.
Beneficiaries. MAP will directly benefit 6,000 households consisting of 31,800 persons. These consist of 1,720 households benefitting
from the full range of investments (training, loans, matching grants, market infrastructure), 4,280 households benefiting from training
and market access investments, and 2,460 incremental full time job equivalents created.
SECAP and climate risk. The programme is classified as environmental and social category B, as its activities will not trigger any
category A criteria. The climate risk category for MAP is rated as High, as it meets 4 of the 7 initial criteria of climate risk screening.
Accordingly, appropriate mitigation measures have been put in place.
Alignment and partnerships. MAP is aligned with the national Agricultural Development Master Plan 2010-2025, the agriculture sector
elements of the national Strategic Action Plan 2019-2023, and the Government’s evolving vision for the agriculture sector. It is also
aligned with the IFAD approach paper on Small Island Developing States, the country strategy note for the Maldives, and the South-
South and Triangular Cooperation framework. MAP will seek partnerships with national programmes, externally financed projects, and
stakeholder consultation platforms in the country.
Financial management. Programme financial management will comply with IFAD and Government guidelines and requirements. It will
be structured around proper accounting and reporting, strengthened internal controls, an internal audit framework, and annual
external audit by the Auditor General, which is the supreme audit institution in the country.
Procurement. Procurement under MAP will be undertaken by the PIU in accordance with the National Procurement Regulations
(Chapter 10 of the Public Financial Regulations) to the extent that they do not contradict IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and
Procurement Handbook; where there are contradictions, IFAD’s Guidelines and Handbook will prevail.
3/26
Planning, M&E, KM. The programme will apply a results-based management approach which establishes solid linkages between
planning/budgeting, implementation, monitoring and results. An integrated M&E and KM system will be developed, and output,
outcome and impact data generated by the system will inform case studies, briefs and reports, to be used for policy dialogue,
learning, and scaling-up. KM activities will focus on the relationships between the enabling environment, climate-smart production,
and agricultural modernisation.
Sustainability. The design of MAP integrates substantial elements to assure its financial, sectoral, institutional, nutritional, technical
and environmental sustainability.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Background. An ecologically fragile Small Island Developing State highly vulnerable to climate change, the Maldives consists of a
chain of 26 atolls and over 1,190 islands of which 188 are inhabited and 132 are tourism resorts. The population was estimated
to be 436,330 in 2017. Of the total land area of 30,000 hectares, only 4,000 hectares are considered to be arable across some
197 islands. A total of 8,057 farms are registered, with an aggregate land area of 573 hectares and an average farm size of over
700 square meters.
Macro-economic context. Maldives is classified as a middle-income country, with GDP estimated at USD 4.7 billion in 2018 and a
per capita income of USD 10,330 in current terms. GDP growth amounted to 7.5% in 2018, with agriculture, industry and services
(including tourism) contributing 6.6%, 14.9% and 78.5% respectively. GDP is expected to continue growing in the medium term
due to growth in tourism and construction, and related sectors such as transport, communications, and trade. However, the
current account deficit widened sharply from 3.2% in 2014 to an estimated 29.8% in 2018, driven by the large increase in
investment-related imports. The recent World Bank-IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis assessed Maldives’ risk of external debt
distress as high, mainly due to widening of the current account deficit, low international reserves and rapid debt build-up. The
Government also recognises that further efforts are required to make growth more regionally balanced and inclusive, as the
economic disparities between Malé and other inhabited islands are widening, but transport infrastructure remains limited.
Poverty. Although GDP growth has been impressive in recent years, poverty continues to be a challenge, particularly in the outer
atolls. The Household and Expenditure Survey of 2016 found 8.2% of the population to be living below the national poverty line.
However, regional disparities are significant; poverty incidence was only 1.7% in Malé but 12.8% in the atolls. Urban-rural
disparities are also striking; it is estimated that rural poverty is three times higher than urban poverty. Poverty is correlated with
sector of employment of the household head; those working in agriculture and fisheries are found to be poorer than those in
industry or services. Although improving, the Gini coefficient of 0.31 (2016) confirms the incidence of relative inequality in the
country. The 2014 Census found that of the 15,130 persons employed in fisheries and agriculture, 13,598 (90%) are employed in
the atolls.
Agriculture. The agriculture sector is the third sector of the economy after tourism and fisheries. However, it is lagging behind due
to a series of challenges. The country faces the complex challenges posed by a fragile ecology and climate change vulnerability.
Cultivable land is limited, as is the availability of technology to enhance production and productivity. Logistics and market access
are also significant challenges. Farming is mostly practiced in an unorganized manner and on a limited scale. Small farmers in
the outer atolls suffer the most in terms of periodic food insecurity and poverty. The absence of organized agriculture data also
hinders the orientation of public and private investments in the sector; as a result, the country relies heavily on imported
agricultural products. In light of these challenges, and in the absence of systematic investment in agriculture, implementation of
the national Agricultural Development Master Plan has been successful.
Food security. The Maldives has reached an Average Dietary Energy Supply Adequacy ratio of above 120, which is higher than
the average in Asia at 117. However, it is estimated that 20% Maldivians suffer from food insecurity. Given that about 95% of the
country's food consumption is met by imports, the Maldives is extremely vulnerable to changes or shocks in global food supply
and prices. Food trade, storage and distribution play a critical role in the access and availability dimensions of food security. With
water constituting 99% the territorial area, and with distantly located small island populations scattered across the country,
marine transport is the most important mode for the transport of all goods including food items. The quantity of food items
transported to outlying islands in a single trip by a cargo boat is limited and delivery is often unreliable. Hence, it is common for
the rural population to experience periodic food shortages, especially of nutritious fresh products such as milk, eggs, vegetables
and fruit. Food storage facilities in the northern atolls (main warehouse in Kulhudhuffushi) and southern atolls (main warehouse
in Hithadhoo) are insufficient to maintain food reserves, particularly in times of emergency. Given the dependence on imports,
unreliable distribution patterns, and inadequate decentralised storage facilities, the rural population in the Maldives face serious
risks of periodic food insecurity.
6.
Logistics and transportation. Logistics and transportation along agriculture value chains are a major constraint for agriculture
market linkages. The most common sea vessels for inter-island cargo transport are wooden mechanised boats (dhonis) ranging
in size from small one-person boats to 30-40 meter boats with a dead weight tonnage (DWT) of up to 160 mt. Most dhonis are
fishing vessels, but several hundred are used as cargo boats; the smaller ones move between nearby islands, while the larger
vessels ply the waters between the regions and Malé. Most resort islands have a large vessel with cold storage for collecting
supplies once or twice a week from the Malé region, including meat, dairy products, fish and vegetables. Some resorts also use
these vessels for collecting vegetables from the airport islands, and from regional and sub-regional hubs having a vegetable
wholesale market. Most commercial agricultural islands also have refrigerated cargo vessels mainly used to transport produce to
Malé and to a less extent to resort islands. Despite this fleet of vessels, most inhabited islands where agriculture is practised face
unreliable transport services and mostly as ambient cargo, resulting in substantial losses, rendering crop production unprofitable.
This situation makes transportation of agriculture produce one of the most limiting factors along the value chain.
4/26
7.
8.
Financial services. An initiative of the Maldives Monetary Authority and the International Finance Corporation, the Maldives
Finance Leasing Company Pvt Ltd (MFLC) has been in operation since June 2002. The primary objective of setting up the
company was to diversify the Maldivian financial sector. In April 2014, MFLC was acquired by Tree Top Investments Pvt Ltd, a
company founded in 2013 by a group of successful businesspersons with illustrious careers. MFLC finances the lease of
movable assets to small and medium scale business enterprises. It finances the lease of marine vessels, mainly fishing boats
with cold storage, plant, machinery, equipment, and vehicles, to the commercial sector, and more recently, motorbikes and
consumer durables to individuals.
The SME Development Finance Corporation (SDFC) was established in February 2019 as a specialized financial institution to
provide financial products and ancillary services to enterprises and entrepreneurial start-ups, with the primary objective of easing
access to finance for MSMEs. SDFC is under the patronage of the Ministry of Economic Development (MED). It has developed
and introduced six products, of which the ‘Dhanduveri Nafaa’ product is specifically for the agriculture sector and provides loans
of up to MVR 75,000 for home-based farmers, MVR 500,000 for non-registered business individuals, and MVR 2 million for
companies and partnership business entities. This loan product was introduced in collaboration with MOFMRA to help provide
access to finance for individuals and corporative societies in the agriculture sector, with a focus on encouraging the integration of
new technologies in farming. It requires 20% equity by the applicant and 120% of the loan amount as collateral. The assets
procured through the loan are regarded as collateral.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
Climate change. The Maldives is highly vulnerable to climate change. The potential impacts include salt-water intrusion and
erosion due to gradual rise in the sea level, change in rainfall patterns and increase in frequency of extreme climatic events, such
as flooding. This may result in increased pollution and contamination of surface water from overflowing of the septic tank into the
aquifer.
Salt-water intrusion due to gradual rise in the sea level is devastating for agriculture. The global mean sea level rose 10-20 cm
during the 20th century at the rate of 1 to 2 mm/year. For the Maldives, the long-term trend observed in the relative rise of the sea
level for Hulhule is 1.7 mm/year. Sea level rise causes salinization of groundwater. Freshwater is vital for sustaining agriculture,
but little water can be drawn without changing its salinity level. Increasing salinity changes soil quality, affecting plant growth and
yield. The vulnerability of agriculture to salt-water intrusion was evident from the damage caused by the Indian Ocean tsunami of
2004.
Sea level rise also exacerbates erosion. In 2009, forty-one inhabited islands reported severe beach erosion. Empirical evidence
suggests that many plant species in close proximity of the coastline are affected by erosion. Coconut and other salt tolerant
species are destroyed by severe erosion. Coconut is the dominant crop in the country and constitutes an important part in the
diet and a key source of livelihoods. Coconut timber is used for boat building and house construction, while thatch from leaves is
used in construction of tourist resorts. Tender coconut is sold throughout the year, especially in Malé and the resorts. Damage to
agriculture including coconut palms affects livelihood and incomes, directly affecting food security.
Decline in rainfall patterns can be devastating to agriculture production. Crops are either rainfed or irrigated from harvested rain
water, and surface water is inadequate throughout the country. Traditionally, farmers depended on shallow wells as a source of
water for agriculture; today, in many islands the groundwater cannot be used due to contamination. The thickness of the
groundwater aquifer at island level is determined by the rainfall recharge, island size and permeability of the soil column.
Freshwater aquifers already stressed from over-extraction face the risk of total depletion during dry spells. However, climate
change predictions depict an increase in annual rainfall for the Maldives, indicating a positive impact on freshwater resources.
An elevated sea level, with high winds during storm surges, causes significant damage and losses to agricultural land. Storm
surges can create high waves causing destruction of crops and storage facilities. Flooding and strong winds have also curtailed
production by uprooting trees and plants. Loss of fertile top soil further deteriorates productivity, and causes changes in pest and
disease voracity and weed growth.
Nutrition. The Maldives Health Profile of 2016 highlighted that in spite of improvements in many areas of health, malnutrition
among children continues to be a public health concern. The Maldives Demographic Health Survey of 2016-17 found that 15% of
children under 5 years of age were stunted, 15% were underweight, and 9% were wasted. In addition, half of the children aged 6-
59 months and 63% of women aged 15-49 were found to be anaemic, indicating high levels of micro-nutrient deficiencies.
Weaning and feeding practices of infants and children are a major cause of the continued malnutrition problem; deficiencies in
iron, zinc and vitamin A, particularly among women and pregnant women, were found to be of significant concern.
Gender and social inclusion. The Maldives ranks 101st of 164 countries rated by the Gender Development Index (2017), 106th of
144 countries rated by the Gender Gap Index (2017), and 76th of 160 countries rated by the Gender Inequality Index. These
rankings confirm that much needs to be done to improve women's empowerment and their access to services and opportunities.
Furthermore, women's participation in the labour force, at only 37% in 2017, is very low. The 2014 National Bureau of Statistics
data showed that women make up only 12% of labour force in agriculture and fisheries, while a more significant proportion (88%)
is engaged in the processing and manufacturing sub-sectors of agriculture and fisheries.
16.
17.
18.
19.
Women are also most widely engaged in vegetable and horticulture production in home gardens and in small isolated plots,
which play a vital role in rural livelihoods, food security and income generation. They are predominantly used for perennial crops
such as coconut, breadfruit, mango, guava, bilimbi, water-apple, Malay apple, stone apple, banana, papaya, betel leaf and curry
leaf, as well as root crops such as taro on certain islands. This produce is often used for household consumption or sold on the
island or to neighbouring islands.
5/26
There are 3,992 registered women farmers that account for 53% of all registered farmers, indicating that there is no gender
disparity in allocating arable land. The general practise is for Island Councils to allocate land to community members who apply
for farming. In the agriculture sector, gender division across roles exists; generally women contribute to crop production, value
addition and natural resource management. Women often assist men in farming activities, while some are also fully engaged in
related value-added activities. Selling produce in markets is considered a male responsibility. Although gender roles are largely
fixed in agriculture and fisheries, as modernisation brings changes to the island way of life some women are taking up the tasks
traditionally performed by men as the need arises.
In general, gender inequalities within political, economic and social spheres are evident and are the result of structural, functional
and cultural barriers to women’s participation in public life. Gender identity is mediated through social positioning along the lines
of cultural and socio-economic status, as well as the urban/outer island divide. Women are not a homogenous group and do not
always share the same constraints and opportunities to participate in public life. The Government has taken measures to improve
gender equality, most importantly through ratification of the Gender Equality Act in 2017. This Act defines the role of Government,
political parties and businesses in bridging gender gaps in the political, economic and social aspects of life. Its enforcement is
governed by a set of regulations to eliminate gender-based violence, combat discrimination and sexual harassment, provide
equal opportunity and equal pay, and enhance women’s participation in the labour force.
Youth. In the Maldives, the youth are defined as men and women aged between 18 and 34. The 2014 Population and Housing
Census established that 47.5% of the population was below the age of 25. Literacy rates for the youth aged 15 to 24 are very
high, with close to 100% literacy in Dhivehi and over 90% in English. The Census also found the proportion of men and women
aged 15 to 34 who were not in education, employment or training to be high, particularly for women in the outer islands. Young
people constitute a significant proportion of the labour force. More than half (54%) of the labour force is aged 18-34, while 23% is
aged 15-24. The youth (18-34) unemployment rate was estimated at 8% in 2016.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
The Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) aims to assist the Government of Maldives (GoM) address important elements of
those Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that fall within IFAD's comparative advantage. It particular, it will address SDG 1
(no poverty), SDG 2 (zero hunger), SDG 5 (gender equality), SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth), SDG 10 (reduced
inequalities) and SDG 13 (climate action).
In spite of economic growth over the past few years, the Maldives continues to be challenged by poverty and social and
economic disparities, especially in the outer atolls and inhabited agricultural islands. In particular, the islanders of the northern
atolls suffer from low incomes and high vulnerbility.
There remains a strong need to increase crop productivity and production by generating knowledge through adaptive research,
transferring technology to farmers, improving the efficiency of irrigation, and ensuring access to input supply, finance and
markets. Although there have been efforts to raise the quality of crops, food safety remains a challenge. While the Government
has developed the basic food safety and quality standards, these need to be enhanced in line with international norms.
Furthermore, there is an evident concentration of women in processing, sorting and packaging activities across agricultural value
chains, however, women do not have adequate access to technology, information, inputs and services to improve the productivity
and marketability of output. Women’s participation in public spheres, especially in community based organisations, is limited.
There is scope to increase value addition in agriculture through basic processing, sorting and packaging. As output is perishable,
producers by necessity become price-takers. As a result, net returns to farming remain low. Improvements in processing would
help improve livelihoods by raising returns and reducing the volatility of farm gate prices.
In line with the 2010-2025 Agricultural Development Master Plan, the programme will assist the GoM to strengthen and position
the agriculture sector as the third driving force of the economy (after tourism and fisheries), expand livelihood options for rural
people, increase incomes by enhancing employment opportunities, and improve food security and nutrition. In particular, it will
support the Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMRA) to refine and implement a comprehensive
strategy for the agriculture sector based on a review of the Master Plan and contribute to the Agriculture Policy that is under
development. As such, the programme's rationale is guided by the Government's strategic vision for the sector. It covers all six
policy directions of the vision: (i) agricultural value chain coordination; (ii) food security and nutrition; (iii) ecological resilience; (iv)
institutional support; (v) community empowerment; and, (vi) national and multisectoral partnerships. The rationale is further
anchored in the draft National Fisheries and Agricultural Policy 2019-2029, and will take into account the information that will
become available after the completion of the Agriculture Survey that is currently underway.
The programme is well aligned with IFAD's mandate of rural transformation and the strategic objectives of the Country Strategy
Note (CSN) 2019-21. In line with the CSN, IFAD investment will facilitate farmers' access to improved services from the public
and private sectors, and strengthen their productive capacity to meet market demand. In addition, it will strengthen extension
services, increase yields for target crops, introduce climate change adaptation measures to strengthen farmers’ resilience,
improve processing and marketing services, and help increase farmers’ incomes. The programme is aligned with the strategic
objectives of IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-25, in particular: (i) increase poor rural people’s productive capacities; (ii)
increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation; and (iii) strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate
resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities.
26.
The programme will help address a number of challenges in the Maldives' agriculture sector. These are:      
27.
(i)     limited progress in the implementation of Agricultural Development Master Plan;
6/26
28.
(ii)    fragile ecology and climate change vulnerability;     
29.
(iii)   limited arable land, requiring adaptive technology for high productivity to overcome low soil fertility and quality, inadequate
organic  matter, and low water retention capacity;
30.
(iv)   limited water availability and threat of saltwater intrusion into groundwater;     
31.
(v)    complexity and high cost of logistics;
32.
(vi)   dependency on imported high cost inputs and technology;
33.
(vii)  limited farmer knowledge combined with limited extension services;
34.
(viii)  limited compliance with standards for quality and safety of agricultural output; and,
35.
(ix)   lack of market access.
36.
37.
38.
39.
There are substantial opportunities for agriculture sector growth. The GoM is keenly intent to finalise its efforts for a
comprehensive structured policy and incentive framework for the sector, as well as required investments and activities. Climate
smart technological solutions suitable for the Maldives, which overcome land/soil constraints and mitigate against climate change,
are available globally. The market for local crop production is potentially significant, considering that local demand is rising rapidly
as incomes increase and consumers become more aware of nutrition and food safety considerations, and that the tourism sector
imports substantial volumes of agricultural commodities per year.
The programme will support MOFMRA to refine its evolving vision and implement a structured policy and incentive framework for
the agriculture sector, and provide investment resources to address the challenges and capitalise on the opportunities outlined
above.
Gender transformation. MAP intends to be gender transformative as defined in the mainstreaming approaches of the IFAD Action
Plan 2019-2025. While there is evidence of feminization of post-harvest activities in agriculture, this is not correlated with a
subsequent increase in women’s income, an improved access to training, or greater decision-making roles in community
organisations. MAP will expand women’s empowerment through better access to training and finance, and a greater role in
community institutions particularly in decision-making positions.
Nutrition focus. MAP intends to be nutrition-sensitive as defined in the mainstreaming approaches of the IFAD Action Plan 2019-
2025. Gender transformation will be complemented by a specific focus on nutrition outcomes for women and their households. As
rural women are engaged in large numbers in home vegetable gardening for household consumption and sale at local markets;
MAP will provide targeted interventions to improve nutritional outcomes for women and their communities.
40.
Climate resilience. MAP intends to be harmonised with the mainstreaming approaches of the IFAD Action Plan on environment
and climate change. Indeed, the focus of the programme is to promote agriculture that is environmentally sustainable and resilient
to climate change.
B. Lessons learned
41.
42.
43.
44.
Since 1982, IFAD has invested in six projects in the Maldives valued at USD 46.4 million, of which USD 18.2 million financed by
IFAD and USD 28.2 by partners and domestic sources. This concept note builds on lessons derived from these programmes, as
well as the operations of development partners. It also benefits from the analytical work of IFAD’s Independent Office of
Evaluation (IOE), most recently the PCR validation of the Fisheries and Agriculture Diversification Programme (FADIP), which
closed in September 2018. Key lessons of relevance for the programme are outlined below.
Collective action. Expectations regarding community organisations should be realistic. Collective arrangements have worked well
when the benefits and costs are well defined, and ownership of the resource-generating assets is clear; they did not succeed in
programmes which promoted joint ownership in formally registered cooperatives or companies. MAP will promote Island Farmers’
Forums at island level for group-based extension using a link farmer approach and technology transfer, not for joint ownership in
economic activities.
Targeting women. Evaluation work by IOE notes the potential for improvement of the IFAD Maldives country programme in
promoting women’s access to services. It recommends that, in order to mainstream women's participation, project design needs
to include support for processing and other activities where women are mostly involved. Training should also be customized to
the special needs of women with respect to location, timing and method of delivery. These recommendations have been taken on
board in the design of MAP.
Access to finance. Previous projects such as FADIP and the Mariculture Enterprise Development Project (MEDEP) were unable
to provide sustainable credit services for farmers or mariculture producers due to a combination of factors, such as strict
collateral requirements by the lending institution (Bank of Maldives), lack of financial products adapted to credit purposes,
unviable income generating activities (IGA) disconnected from the targeted supply chains, and absence of timely implementation
support when challenges arose. The MAP will promote a number of financial products which overcome the collateral barrier, and
will target IGAs whose operational and financial risks will be reduced by strengthened technical extension and connection to
specific market segments. It will operate through the newly-established SME Development Finance Corporation (SDFC), a
45.
46.
47.
specialized financial institution providing financial products and ancillary services to micro, small and medium-scale enterprises
(MSMEs) and entrepreneurial start-ups for a number of sectors including agriculture.
7/26
Access to markets. Access to markets, and related facilitation of logistics, is fundamental for producers scattered across the
remote island network. Previous projects which did not invest in market access, or which promoted marketing directly by the
programme or public entities, did not succeed in creating sustainable market linkages. MAP will facilitate logistics and offer
market choices to farmers, all of which are commercially driven by the private sector.
Project management. The importance of establishing robust project management capacity has been demonstrated by the
experiences of IFAD and development partners in the Maldives. Management capacity has proven to be insufficient in relation to
the demands placed on programme teams. In agreement with MOFMRA, the programme management team will be
strengthened in terms of management skills and technical resources, and an external project management agency / technical
assistance will be contracted to support the team.
Project design. Several design deficiencies were noted in FADIP and MEDEP due to insufficient contextual information available
at the time, particularly related to value chain development. As a result, the role of cooperatives was over-estimated at FADIP
design and proved unsuccessful during implementation. The implementation of MEDEP was challenged by targeting value
chains in a relatively new mariculture sub-sector, and absence of in-depth value chain analysis before and during
implementation. MAP will be designed based on a large body of relevant information now available, such as the National
Fisheries and Agricultural Policy (2019-2029), the Household and Expenditure Survey (2016), the National Spatial Plan (2020-
2040), the Gender Assessment of the Agriculture and Rural Sector (2018), and the five assessment reports of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (the last in 2015). Identification of potentially viable value chains is incorporated in
MAP design, particularly in the testing and screening exercise under component 1 and the agri-business planning and market
connection under components 2 and 3. This will be in close collaboration with relevant public and private stakeholders across the
selected value chains.
48.
Coordination between IFAD and GoM. Previous projects, particularly FADIP, suffered from slow and difficult implementation also
as a result of insufficient communication between IFAD and MOFMRA which delayed the resolution of implementation issues,
while MEDEP was not supported by the timely provision of relevant technical expertise. This has been addressed with
substantial strengthening of the relationship between the two parties, which has been made possible by IFAD’s operational
decentralization and placement of the country team in the same sub-region and similar time zone.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
49.
50.
51.
52.
Goal and objective. The programme's goal is to sustainably increase the incomes, food security and nutrition status of small
farmer households. Its development objective is the strengthened enabling environment for sustainable and climate-resilient
agriculture. This objective will be achieved through reformed policies, strengthened institutions and services, enhanced
agricultural technologies, and better access to financing and markets for small farmer households, with an over-arching goal of
gender transformation.
Geographic area. GoM is presently developing a National Spatial Plan (2020-2040) with the objective of reducing disparity
among the capital and regions, facilitating effective regional development, providing affordable transport connections to
communities, promoting economically sustainable infrastructure development and improving island-level livelihoods to create
prosperous societies. The Spatial Plan will be based on growth hubs with the Malé area being the central hub and five regional
hubs, nine sub-regional hubs, three central clusters and six satellite clusters. MAP will be articulated within the National Spatial
Plan as part of the alignment with Government development strategies.
The programme will be nationwide in scope, articulated within the Spatial Plan, covering all regional and sub-regional hubs,
clusters and islands where agriculture is undertaken by small farmers. Investments will initially be focused in the northern atolls,
where poverty and vulnerability among the farming communities is greater, in alignment with the Spatial Plan.
Component 1 of Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services will initially focus on regions 1-3 covering 3 atolls consisting of 26
inhabited agriculture islands and 6 uninhabited active commercial agriculture islands. Subsequently, it will be expanded to
become nationwide in scope across all 19 atolls and 21 regions. At full development, Component 1 will cover 98 inhabited
agriculture islands and 50 uninhabited active commercial agriculture islands, of which 24 are actively producing crops.
53.
Component 2 of Climate Smart Production will focus on regions 1-3 covering 3 atolls consisting of 26 inhabited agriculture
islands and 6 uninhabited active commercial agriculture islands.
54.
Component 3 of Market Connection will initially focus on regions 1-3 covering 3 atolls consisting of 26 inhabited agriculture
islands and 6 uninhabited active commercial agriculture islands during the first two years. It will subsequently expand to regions
4-7, and finally cover the whole country.
55.
The main hubs for programme activities in region 1-3 are Haa Alif Hoarafushi for region 1, Haa Dhaalu Vaikaradhoo for region 2,
and Shaviyani Milandhoo for region 3. These hubs will serve 8, 9 and 9 inhabited agriculture islands respectively.
56.
Target groups. The programme’s target group consists of small farming households. They include women, men, and youth
belonging to households of different socio-economic categories. With a considerable socio-economic and socio-cultural divide
57.
58.
between rural and urban populations, also with respect to gender and age, small farmers who depend mainly on agriculture for
their livelihood are economically one of the most vulnerable groups in the country. Analysis of poverty correlated with economic
sector indicates that those working in agriculture and fisheries are far more likely to be poorer than those in industry or services.
8/26
Women continue to have important roles in agriculture, and are key actors for achieving food security and improving nutrition.
The programme will pay special attention to ensuring equal opportunity for women in all activities and investments –
management, planning, decision making, participation in training, access to inputs, technology, financing, services and markets,
and access to an equal share of social, financial and economic benefits. Support to participating individuals will be inclusive and
gender sensitive. A detailed gender strategy will be defined at start-up, and an associated action plan elaborated and
implemented. The strategy will define a set of actions to achieve the following: (i) increase gender awareness for programme
staff, participating agencies, service providers and business partners at all levels; (ii) integrate gender analysis and gender-
disaggregated targets and data into planning, monitoring and reporting; (iii) ensure women have equal opportunities to assume
leadership positions in Island Farmer Forums and as Extension Link Farmers (ELFs); and (iv) increase the opportunities for rural
women to access agriculture resources and services.
Youth in the Maldives are motivated and dynamic. They are an important segment of the target group, as their engagement is
crucial for the future of agriculture in the country. Field visits suggest that the youth constitute about 20% of the labour force in
rural communities. Considering that MAP will promote modernised, technologically advanced forms of agriculture, efforts will be
made to specifically and systematically target young farmers, particularly those inclined to adopt advanced production techniques.
MAP will explore opportunities to engage the youth in agribusiness development, agri-technologies and knowledge transfer,
modern agriculture management, market linkages and IT technologies in support of production and post-production
management. As concrete measures: (i) youth participation will be recorded and reported in the M&E system; (ii) youth will be
encouraged to take active part in adoption of technologies and compliance with Maldives Good Agricultural Practices (MGAP)
under components 1 and 2, (ii) youth will be given equal access to opportunities as Island Farmer Forum leaders and ELFs; (iii)
youth will be encouraged to take an active part in production and marketing where modern technologies and IT tools are
introduced.
59.
Migrant workers. It is estimated that over one-fourth of the population in the Maldives is composed of migrant workers coming
from overseas. Migrants work throughout the economy, particularly in tourism, construction and services, but also in fisheries and
agriculture. In the agriculture sector, migrant workers are heavily involved in both production and marketing, and are increasingly
renting agriculture land. However, they are currently excluded from extension and other services. In light of their importance in
the sector, MAP will ensure the inclusion of migrant workers in training activities and extension services.
60.
Targeting strategy. In light of the above, the programme’s targeting strategy is outlined below: The targeting strategy will be
implemented through specific measures integrated within each component.
Geographical targeting. Nationwide programme with the core of investments initially focused in the northern atolls where
poverty and vulnerability among the farming community is greater.
Sectoral targeting. Targeting of all small farmers in the country, as well as relevant agriculture-related value chain participants
(input suppliers, traders, marketers, transporters, retailers, wholesalers, commercial islands).
Inclusive targeting. Specific measures to ensure inclusion direct targeting of women-headed households, women farmers, and
young farmers; and ensuring access of migrant workers in training and extension services.
Enabling environment. Fostering of an enabling environment of equal opportunity for women, men, and youth for their
meaningful participation in decision-making, implementation, and the flow of benefits; and ensuring relevant actions are in
place to optimise women’s benefits from programme services.
61.
The estimated numbers of beneficiaries per component are outlined below:
62.
(i)     Component 1 of Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services will directly target 6,000 small farm households, and indirectly
target 4,170 small farm households. The total number of beneficiary households will be 10,170. Of the farmers targeted, 53% will
be women and 20% youth.
63.
(ii)    Component 2 of Climate Smart Production will directly target 2,795 small farm households. Of the farmers targeted, 53% will
be women and 20% youth.  
64.
(iii)  Component 3 of Market connection will directly target 2,795 small farm households and indirectly target 7,375 small farm
households. The total number of beneficiary households will be 10,170. Of the farmers targeted, 53% will be women and 20%
youth.
65.
Table 1: MAP Targeting by Component
Directly Targeted
Indirectly Targeted
Component
Registered Farm HHs
Non-registered Farm HHs
*
Registered Farm HHs
Non-registered Farm HHs *
#
Ha
#
Ha
#
Ha
#
Ha
1
2
3
6,000
615
0
9/26
0
1,800
185
2,370
4,402
2,150
220
645
1,198
0
0
0
0
2,150
220
645
1,198
5,650
580
1,725
3,204
66.
Source: Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture
67.
* Non-registered farmers include commercial islands
68.
69.
70.
Island Farmer Forum. The key instrument for ensuring community participation, targeting small farmers and promoting equal
opportunity and inclusion will be the Island Farmer Forum in each inhabited agricultural island. Each participating island will
establish a Forum on a consultative and participatory basis, with equal representation of women, men and the youth. This Forum
will represent the island in its interface with MAP and with services, financing, logistics and markets. It will participate in annual
work planning/budgeting, implementation, and monitoring. It will also build a network of women participants, including gender
exchange activities with Island Councils and Regional Farmer Forums. MAP will ensure that at least 40% of Island Farmer
Forums, and at least 33% of Regional Farmer Forums, are led by women.
Regional Farmer Forum. The main instrument for ensuring farmer participation in policy dialogue and advocacy will be the
Regional Farmer Forum. Each of the three targeted northern regions will establish a Regional Farmer Forum composed of the
representatives of the Island Farmer Forums in the region. A representative of each Regional Farmer Forum will represent its
farmers/islands in the high-level MAP steering committee.
It is envisaged that Island and Regional Farmer Forums will improve the prospects for sustainability of MAP investments and
activities. Guidelines and procedures for establishment, management and operation of the Island and Regional Farmer Forums
will be detailed by programme management, supported by technical assistance, at the start of implementation. These procedures
will be subject to review and clearance by MOFMRA and IFAD.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
71.
The programme will support agriculture and agribusiness development in the Maldives by investing in the generation and transfer
of modern climate-smart agricultural technologies which are tailored to respond to identified market opportunities. This will be
achieved through three inter-linked components: (i) enabling policy, institutions and services; (ii) climate-smart production; and,
(iii) market connection. The operational approach is to focus on high value commodities with market demand and growth
potential, cluster investments in the northern regions to facilitate scale and logistics, apply the group-based ELF approach
together with Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for knowledge and technology transfer, link organised farmers
with markets, and provide access to appropriate financial products.
a.     Component 1: Enabling policy, institutions and services
72.
The expected outcome of this component is the development of the enabling policy, institutional and service provision
environment that will allow increased productivity and production of agricultural commodities demanded by the market.
73.
74.
75.
The Government is in the process of setting up a public company – the Maldives Agro Corporation (MACO) – that will strengthen
the capacities of farmers and their organisations to engage in profitable agribusiness. It will be mandated to ensure availability
and supply of high-quality consumable inputs, equipment and machinery for the agricultural sector. MACO will also develop
mechanisms to ensure the competitiveness of domestic production compared with imports. The project will build the capacity of
MACO to deliver services to small farmers, such as input supply, extension and training, introduction of food quality and safety
standards, and technology transfer. Modern technologies adapted to local conditions for transfer to farmers will include
greenhouses, hydroponic systems, drip fertigation systems, and grafting equipment. MACO staff will be trained in selection,
quality control and supply of inputs and equipment required by small farmers for modern production systems, and in
dissemination of MGAP protocols in conjunction with sustainable, climate-smart input management. Support will also be provided
to refine the policy framework and strengthen the institutional capacity of MOFMRA and its Agriculture Research Centre (ARC) in
Hanimadhoo Island.
Production technologies and MGAP will initially be transferred to the 26 inhabited islands and 6 uninhabited commercial
agriculture islands in regions 1-3. These islands will be clustered around 3 hubs: (i) Haa Alif Hoarafushi for region 1; (ii) Haa
Dhaalu Vaikaradhoo for region 2; and, (iii) Shaviyani Milandhoo for region 3. Programme activities under each hub will be
supported by an agriculture advisor from MACO trained by the project.
In each inhabited agricultural island, the Island Farmer Forum will be the focal point for decisions on crops to be produced, and
will appoint an Extension Link Farmer (ELF) as the focal point for interacting with extension services and sharing knowledge with
other farmers at island level. The ELFs will also serve as input retailers. They will receive technical training and financial support
to establish agricultural input retail enterprises at island level. Results from ARC’s adaptive research will be validated through
field trials/demonstrations in a representative island under each hub; the ELFs from these islands will be trained in conducting
on-farm trials and demonstrations, farmers field schools and farmers field days. At least 40% of ELFs will be women.
76.
This component will directly benefit 2,150 farming households across the three northern regions, and migrant workers who are
hired as farm labour or who operate on rented land. It will also generate financial benefits for six commercial islands, three
regional markets, one wholesale market in Malé, and four wholesale companies. Furthermore, it will create greater national
impact, as 3,850 farming households in other regions will be supported by MOFMRA and MACO applying the same Island
Farmer Forum and ELF methodology.
10/26
77.
Subcomponent 1.1. Knowledge and technology
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
Output 1.1.1. Policy knowledge products on sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture will be completed (research, study,
strategy, bylaw) based on relevant thematic and sector analysis, and will be applied to promote an enabling environment for
agriculture.
MAP will enhance the participation of the agribusiness community in policy processes. This will promote the inclusion of
agribusiness players, supporters and influencers in policy formulation processes with regulators such as MOFMRA. Thematic
and sector issues of strategic interest will be discussed with agribusiness stakeholders (input suppliers, farmers, traders,
transporters, processors, wholesalers, retailers) to ensure responsiveness to their concerns. Partnership with policy research
entities will be established in order to carry out relevant research in support of policy formulation. Technical assistance and
training will be provided as appropriate. Relevant topics may include: (i) methods to link MSME financing to production and
markets; (ii) operational procedures for distribution and application of quality inputs; (iii) regulations governing compliance with
MGAP, certification and traceability; (iv) regulations governing groundwater extraction; (v) regulations governing the import of
agriculture commodities; (vi) procedures to establish an ISO 17025 accredited laboratory for analysis of pesticide and heavy
metals residue; and (vii) guidelines on the safe handling, use and disposal of agricultural chemicals. All policy and institutional
strengthening work will mainstream climate change, sea level rise and natural hazard issues and impacts.
MAP will support MOFMRA to refine and implement a comprehensive strategy for the agriculture sector based on a review of the
Master Plan, and to contribute to the Agriculture Policy that is under development. The MAP management team, supported by
TA, will be at the forefront of identifying and prioritizing the policy revisions required to strengthen the sector and ensure that
results achieved under MAP and other interventions are sustained. The programme will act as the secretariat of, and guide the
senior leadership of the MOFMRA, in its policy-making process that is already in place and is structured around twice-weekly
meetings. Participants in this process include all section heads and project directors under MOFMRA. This is the primary forum
within MOFMRA that identifies the needs for policy interventions. MAP will also participate actively in the technical committee on
agriculture that is chaired by the Permanent Secretary in order to guide and influence relevant Government policies. This will be
done by undertaking policy research, preparing policy papers, organizing policy dialogues, and making policy recommendations
that are based on evidence generated by MAP at the national and atoll levels. In order to ensure meaningful stakeholder
engagement and to coordinate policy and development work, MAP will formulate coordination mechanisms with other
development projects such as the Water Project funded by the Green Climate Fund, and the Sustainable Fisheries Resources
Development Project and Maldives Clean Environment Project funded by the World Bank. Regional Farmer Forums established
by MAP will be actively consulted on policy issues.
In addition, MAP will support the Government in organizing the next Maldives Partnership Forum. This Forum provides a platform
to discuss development priorities, seek partnerships and investments for the development agenda, and formulate plans with
bilateral and multilateral partners. It covers themes ranging from the blue economy to sustainable and inclusive development, and
fosters the concept of its status as an island economy.
Output 1.1.2. The capability of ARC in Hanimadhoo Island to generate climate resilient knowledge and technology will be
upgraded. Adaptive research and testing will be organised at ARC and on farmers' fields (particularly for root crops, cereals, and
inter-cropping within coconut plantations). Testing will cover selected commercial seed varieties for the types of vegetables
cultivated and imported; selected planting materials for nut and tree crops; grafting of selected varieties of tomato, passionfruit,
melons, mangoes, guava and papaya on selected root stock; and, cropping systems for coconuts, and cover crops for coconuts
for fertilization and compost production. On this basis, production packages will be configured for adoption by small farmers using
own equity, purchase-hire, and/or debt financing. Island Farmer Forums will be actively consulted in developing the research
agenda.
Investments for ARC in Hanimadhoo Island will include: (i) new facilities for examining water, soil, tissue and plant diseases; (ii)
greenhouse for humid and hot climate hydroponic systems; (iii) insulated house with vertical production under artificial light; (iv)
different types of net houses; (v) machinery and apron for compost-making; (vi) open field hydroponic systems; (vii) reagents for
analysis, fertilizer, and pest control agents (chemical and biological); (viii) tools such as refractometers, tissue and soil nutrition
analysis meters, insect catch plates and microscopes; (ix) open field drip irrigation; (x) HDPE drain cell/storage and rainwater
collection sheets with pump sump and pillow water bladder storage tank; (xi) grafting equipment; (xii) irrigation technology for
home gardens to ensure food security and nutritional diversity as well as contributing to decreasing women’s workload; and, (xiii)
photovoltaic systems with battery backup. All facilities will be flood-proofed in design and construction.
MAP will provide technical assistance for the development of ARC’s adaptive research programme, the knowledge required for
specific crops, and modern production systems. Equipment suppliers will be contractually responsible for installation and for
providing initial training to ARC staff in the use of the equipment provided, with subsequent refresher training to be provided by
the Maldives National University and contracted service providers as appropriate. For the transfer of production technologies to
farmers, ARC will train MACO agriculture advisors, dealers/input suppliers, extension link farmers, and farmers interested in
investing in these technologies.
85.
Output 1.1.3. Packages of recommendations for increasing financial returns and enhancing resilience to risks will be developed
for small farmers. Adaptive research will focus on: (i) best varieties of various crops; (ii) hydroponic fertilisation for greenhouses,
closed systems and field systems; (iii) drip fertigation for open fields; (iv) compost use for crop production in open fields; (v) IPM
and organic pest recommendations for various crops in greenhouses, closed systems and open fields; and (vi) relevant farm
budgets and calendars based on field records.
86.
MAP will provide technical assistance and training to ARC staff for conducting on-station adaptive research and off-station
validation trials, assessing farmer acceptability, and studying the nutritional and market impact of well-performing varieties.
Tested technologies will be evaluated jointly by ARC and farmers on the three selected test islands prior to widespread
dissemination. Evaluation will be based on well-prepared protocols measuring parameters related to yields, palatability, use of
water from aquifers, harvested rainwater, pesticide use and effect on the environment and overall ecological footprint.
11/26
87.
MAP will deploy technical assistance to help ARC develop a knowledge management strategy and methodology. ARC will
prepare promotional materials, videos, pamphlets, and prospectus for technologies being promoted, and publish its findings and
recommendations on its webpage. Attention will be devoted to detailed production guides and financial analyses.
88.
Subcomponent: 1.2: Input supply
89.
90.
91.
92.
MAP will provide technical assistance to MACO to develop its management capacity, its business planning, and its strategy for
scaling up and sustainability. It will support MACO to import and distribute appropriate high quality inputs such as planting
material and initial rootstock for grafting; fertilizer and pest control agents for conventional and organic production; power tillers
and implements; tropical natural ventilated and forced ventilated green/screen houses with water harvesting systems; and
hydroponic growth vessels with shade nets, solar/ photovoltaic systems, drip fertigation and water harvesting liners. It will assist
MACO to procure simple processing equipment for commodities such as coconut chips and UHT coconut water, pickles, jam and
juice. MACO will sell these inputs and equipment to farmers, ideally at market rates. MAP will provide the initial capital to MACO
to procure an initial stock of inputs and equipment; MACO would thereafter operate the scheme on a financially sustainable
basis. MACO will further explore the possibility of procuring some inputs locally (for instance organic inputs, seeds, planting
material and compost).
Output 1.2.1. New technologies and improved inputs will be transferred to small farmers. MAP will support MACO to recruit and
train six agronomists/extension staff. These staff will create awareness of the programme at island level, help to establish the
Island Farmers’ Forums for decision-making on types of produce to ensure scale of production, and provide training to ELFs.
MAP will also provide technical assistance to develop commodity-specific MGAP protocols as well as handbooks for MGAP
implementation, and to develop a set of master MGAP trainers to be appointed by MOFMRA.
MACO personnel will be trained in the validation of adaptive research results and the provision of advisory/extension services
applying the ELF group-based model. MACO staff will support ARC in conducting field validation trials/demonstration, which will
provide them with in-depth knowledge of new technologies being extended. MACO will also support ARC to provide training to
ELFs in production techniques, MGAP compliance, financial literacy, water management, and business planning.
ELFs will have dual roles as island level extensionists and input retailers. For group-based extension functions, ELFs will receive
training in extension methods, farmers’ field schools, input application, use of equipment, modern production systems, and
MGAP compliance. As input retailers, ELFs will be trained in inventory management, distribution/retail management of capital
goods and consumable inputs, business aspects of operating a retail outlet, and technical aspects of the application of inputs and
use of capital goods. Safeguards will be developed to ensure proper separation of ELF input supply and extension functions,
such as certification mechanisms with code of conduct and verification by MOFMRA and Island Farmer Forums, traceability of
inputs for accountability and food safety, and compliance of use of fertilisers and pesticides with publically available
documentation published by ARC.
93.
Output 1.2.2. An Agriculture Information and Communication Technology (AICT) service will be established. MAP will contract a
service provider to establish an AICT platform and data bank, and to develop a mobile app for providing real-time market
information and agricultural advisory services to farmers. The app will incorporate a marketing module for transactions among
input suppliers, producers and buyers. Income from traffic on the app will be shared in order to ensure sustainability.
b.     Component 2: Climate-smart production
94.
95.
96.
97.
The expected outcome of this component is the increased productivity and production of agricultural commodities demanded by
the market. Further to the training and technology transfer organised under component 1, farming households in regions 1-3 will
begin to receive the services under component 2 from PY2 onwards.
Output 2.1. Climate-smart production of high-value commodities by small farmers will be increased through the application of
improved inputs, equipment and modern technologies. Farmers will be supported to apply inputs supplied by MACO (through
ELFs), seeds and technologies/production packages provided by ARC, and agricultural financing from selected financial
institutions. Irrigation water supply will typically come from investment in rainwater harvesting schemes. Farmers will apply
modern production techniques, MGAP standards, Codex Alimentarius and preliminary steps to HACCP if required, branding,
sorting and grading, quality control, aggregation, and basic processing for value addition where applicable. Islands with
substantial aggregation of output may be supported with hybrid (solar/battery) pre-cooling facilities depending on demand.
A gender-responsive approach will be adopted for climate-smart production technology, to ensure that it also meets the particular
needs, priorities, and realities of women, so that both men and women can equally benefit from new technology. As resilience-
enhancing practices and approaches are developed, information will be made available and discussed with women farmers to
mitigate any potential increases in workload. Eventually, this gender-responsive agriculture model may generate evidence of
impact on women’s productivity and empowerment, and could be proposed to MOFMRA for scaling up.
Home gardens will be the entry points for improved dietary diversification of families on the islands. MAP will support farmers to
cultivate and consume more nutritious foods in climate-resilient ways. Home gardeners will be trained in improved soil and water
management and the use of better planting materials. This will be complemented by direct support for improving the root crops
and tree crops that are part of traditional household food production systems, but are at low productivity levels or compromised
by changing climatic conditions. Educational and food-preparation materials and training will address issues of behaviour,
consumption choices and nutritional awareness, including information on dietary diversification and good diet practices at the
household level.
12/26
98.
99.
Farmers will be supported to comply with MGAP. MACO extension staff will develop a training schedule based on the MGAP
crop protocols and mentor ELFs to pass on the training to farmers. Farmers will initially receive training for the selected high
value commodities, followed by training on MGAP leading to audit and certification. Migrant workers who are hired by farmers or
who undertake production on rented land will also receive training and other project services.
Farmers, in particular women farmers, will also be trained in aggregation and post-harvest management of the selected high
value commodities demanded by the market. A service provider would train producer households in food preservation, such as
conversion to purees, jams and pickles. This could be an activity on inhabited agriculture islands as well as commercial islands.
Grading and sorting produce according to cosmetics and qualities according to Codex Alimentarius will ensure a uniform product
for the market, allowing competition with imported produce. This will also feed into branding of produce from Maldives.
100.
Other forms of production-related training for farmers will include: (i) climate-sensitive cropping and water management; (ii)
operation and maintenance of greenhouses, closed vertical production systems, hydroponic systems, open field drip and
hydroscopic systems, walking tractors, and photovoltaic systems; (iii) installation and maintenance of water harvesting and
storage systems; (iv) irrigation technology for home gardens; (v) precooling, refrigeration, hygiene, and maintenance of cold
storage facilities; (vi) compost production and application on open fields, with adjustment for chemical fertiliser application
accordingly; (vii) mulching using compost and biodegradable polythene; and, (viii) grafting to improve climate resilience
(resistance to pest and disease, and improved heat tolerance).
101.
Output 2.2. Island Farmer Forums’ capability to provide the required quantity and quality of produce in response to market
demand will be enhanced. These Forums will serve as the focal point for appointing ELFs, selecting commodities to be produced
and staggering their production, introducing MGAP and certification, creating links with financial institutions, aggregating produce
for marketing, developing linkages with markets, and organising contract farming arrangements with commercial agriculture
islands, tourism resorts, wholesalers in Malé, and MACO. Technical assistance will be provided to each Forum to undertake
these activities.
102.
Output 2.3. Small farmer access to agriculture financing will be improved. On the supply side, MAP will collaborate with SDFC
and MFLC to build their operational capacities and increase their agribusiness lending portfolios. Specifically, MAP support will
include: (i) technical assistance for developing new financial products where required; (ii) training relevant SDFC and MFLC staff
in using the new financial products; and, (iii) training relevant SDFC and MFLC staff in business plan assessment and loan
appraisal. SDFC and MFLC will also be supported to provide diversified agriculture financing products, such as value chain
financing (tri-partite arrangement involving financial institution, producer, and buyer where the forward contract serves as
collateral and loan repayments are made by the buyer on behalf of the borrower), receivable financing (where a company uses its
receivables as collateral in a financing agreement), and supplier or inventory credit and insurance. The feasibility of introducing
mobile technology-based payment services will also be explored.
103.
As SDFC is still in its early operational phase, its financial services to the MSME sector in terms of range and coverage are still
limited. MAP will invest in improving and increasing SDFC’s agriculture and agribusiness lending portfolio. MAP will also
collaborate with MFLC for hire purchase products for vessels with cold storage facilities (eight vessels estimated) and cold
storage facilities (five regional/sub regional facilities estimated).
104.
On the demand side, MACO staff will support farmers and enterprises develop business plans. Poorer farmers with lower
incomes and higher vulnerability (some 15% of the target group), with priority focus on women farmers, will be eligible for
matching grants to substitute their 20% equity contribution for accessing SDFC loans, with clear selection criteria outlined in the
PIM, while the remaining farmers will contribute their own equity. Based on demand analysis and financial modelling, it is
projected that SDFC will finance USD 7.5 million of loans, of which USD 5 million as incremental financing and USD 2.5 million
through reflows.
105.
Programme management will support the preparation of feasibility studies/business plans for the estimated eight enterprises
investing in cargo vessels with cold storage and the five enterprises investing in regional/sub-regional cold storage facilities.
These thirteen enterprises will be identified and selected by in a competitive manner and their financial viability duly analyzed by
MFLC. They will be eligible to receive 20% matching grants as down payment for their investments through hire purchase
products from MFLC. MFLC will be the legal owner of the assets until the hire purchase arrangement has matured; thereafter,
ownership will be transferred to the investor.
c.     Component 3: Market connection
106.
The expected outcome of this component is the development of market linkages and upgraded transportation logistics among
organised producers and buyers. Four marketing channels will be offered to Island Farmer Forums:
1. 
1. 
1.  Wholesale markets at regional hubs, sub-regional hubs, and central/satellite clusters. MAP will invest in post-
harvest management and processing at island level, and cold storage facilities at sub-regional or regional hub
level. These wholesale markets will partially meet decentralised domestic demand, with positive effects on
food security and nutrition for atoll/island inhabitants. Their linkages with the central (Malé) wholesale market
and tourism resorts will also be upgraded.
2.  Commercial agriculture islands. These islands produce high value commodities for sale to the tourism sector.
While they have established marketing channels to resorts, they are currently able to meet only a small fraction
of demand. MAP will link commercial islands with organised farmers on inhabited agriculture islands for
contract farming arrangements.
3.  Central (Malé) wholesale market. MAP will facilitate logistical arrangements for the cold-chain transport of
aggregated output from organised farmers to the central wholesale market in Malé;
4.  Tourism resorts. MAP will facilitate the development of market linkages among organised farmers and tourism
resorts.
13/26
107.
At wholesale market level, MAP will support private enterprises interested to establish cold storage facilities at the three regional
or sub-regional hubs. This support will be in the form of assistance to obtain MFLC or SDFC loans, matching grants (with
detailed eligibility criteria and operating procedures spelled out in the PIM), technical training in cold storage management, and
compliance with food safety standards. Any cold storage facilities will be flood-proofed.
108.
At commercial agriculture island level, MAP will support contract farming arrangements with organised farmers in inhabited
agriculture islands. The commercial islands will be offered incentives in the form of: (i) assistance to obtain MFLC or SDCF
loans; (ii) matching grants for investments in cold storage on cargo vessels (under output 2.3 above), thereby expanding their
purchasing logistics capabilities and allowing purchase and transport of produce from inhabited agriculture islands to markets; (iii)
upgraded production facilities on the commercial island to be used as training facilities for farmers; (iv) cost-sharing of embedded
supply chain managers, on a declining basis, to provide specific training and inputs (where needed) to contracted farmers on
varieties, production techniques, quality control, sorting and grading, and proper handling; and, (v) training in MGAP compliance.
109.
In regions 1-3, the average distance between islands and hubs is 21 km, while the longest distance is 56 km; and the average
distance from the northern hubs to Malé is 275 km. With the projected incremental production of agriculture commodities in these
regions, an additional four refrigerated vessels will be required, each with 120 DWT cold storage capacity, to move produce to
central, regional and sub regional markets. MAP will support interested dhoni owners to upgrade their vessels with cold storage
through assistance to link with MFLC or SDFC, matching grants (detailed in the PIM), and provision of MGAP
training/certification. To qualify for this support, a dhoni owner will be contractually bound to service a specific number of
inhabited agriculture islands on a pre-agreed regular basis.
110.
When the remaining regions are included in the market arrangement, an additional eight vessels are required. It is envisioned
that market forces will ensure that the demand for refrigerated cargo service is met with limited interventions from the public
sector when the market connections are expanded beyond the initial three regions. If still a need for additional transport services
during third year of implementation, MAP can reallocate funds for procuring up to three refrigerated vessels to be owned by
MACO.
E. Theory of Change
111.
More than 10,000 small farm households practising agriculture as registered or non-registered farmers face continued challenges
in terms of limited cultivable land areas, lack of access to modern technologies and knowledge to enhance productivity and
production, and costly logistics for market connection. This is particularly severe for the 2,870 farming households in the northern
atolls in regions 1 –3, where MAP will directly invest in agricultural production and market linkages. Farming in the programme
area is mostly practiced in an unorganized manner and at limited scale. Small farmers in the outer atolls suffer the most in terms
of periodic food insecurity and poverty. The absence of organized agriculture data also hinders the orientation of public and
private investments in the sector. As result, the country has relied heavily on imported agricultural produce and foods.
112.
The challenges outlined above have affected the agricultural development in the Maldives, leading to a number of risks such as:
(i) declining performance of the agricultural sector that could disappear if the trend is not reversed; (ii) reduced national food
sovereignty due to extreme reliance on imports; (iii) lack of well-oriented strategic investments from the public and private sector;
(iv) reduced quality and quantity of natural resources for agriculture; and (v) crowding out of local producers due to low cost-
effectiveness of agribusiness logistics.
113.
Furthermore, despite the increasing feminization of post-harvest activities, there is little evidence of an increase in women’s
incomes, participation in training, or decision making roles in community organisations. Women are affected by lack of access to
technology, finance and leadership roles, with a disproportionate impact on their economic empowerment. Lack of access to
productive assets and knowledge also translates into low productivity. This challenge is compounded by the lack of nutrition
security, particularly among women and children. The detrimental impact of micronutrients insufficiency on women’s productivity
is well established.
114.
Despite these challenges, there is robust potential for agriculture growth. National efforts are underway to develop a
comprehensive and structured policy and incentive framework for the sector. In addition, the Government is considering related
investments and activities. Internationally tested and practised climate change mitigation and adaptation technologies and
solutions that are suitable for the Maldivian context can be introduced to overcome soil and water management issues. With the
steady growth of the economy, the demand and the size of the local market for agricultural output is rising rapidly. With enhanced
incomes, consumers are becoming increasingly more aware of nutrition and food safety issues. Furthermore, the tourism sector
imports substantial volumes of agricultural commodities per year that could be supplied by the domestic producers.
115.
The MAP theory of change is premised on a proactive approach to synergistic investments that build and strengthen the
responsiveness and competitiveness of small farm households in organized production, processing, preserving and marketing,
supported by the adoption of sustainable and climate-smart technologies and practices. It is based on the assumptions that: (i)
small farmers involved in enhanced crop production, post-production management and marketing would benefit from inclusion in
a sustainable and business-oriented model; (ii) selection of high value commodities, supported by demand-driven research and
improved technical services, would offer small farmers the opportunity to enhance production and meet market demand; (iii)
improved management of natural, physical and financial resources would allow small farmers to strengthen climate resilience of
production and reduce vulnerability to climate change; (iv) enhancing nutritional status and gender relations at household and
community levels as well as policy engagement on specific issues (equal voice and equitable workload for women and
opportunity to influence gender responsive policies) will improve agricultural growth; (iv) access to improved technology and a
participatory gender approach will also ensure reduction in workload of women; and, (v) strategic investments in these areas
would contribute to achieving the Agricultural Development Master Plan and generate sustainable increase in the incomes, food
security and nutrition of small farmer households.
14/26
116.
MAP will therefore invest in a number of strategically interlinked priorities – developing the enabling environment of policy,
institutions and services, enhancing the climate-smart production of high value commodities, and upgrading market connections
between producers and a range of markets. The expected outcomes are an improved policy and incentive framework for the
sector, increased productivity and production of agricultural commodities demanded by the market, and development of market
linkages and upgraded transportation logistics among organised producers and buyers.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
117.
Alignment with national policy. In line with the 2010-2025 Agricultural Development Master Plan, MAP will assist the Government
to strengthen and position the agriculture sector as the third driving force of the economy, expand livelihood options for rural
people, increase incomes and enhance employment opportunities, and improve food security and nutrition. In addition, it will
support MOFMRA to refine and implement a comprehensive strategy for the agriculture sector based on a review of the Master
Plan and contribute to the Agriculture Policy that is under development. As such, the programme’s rationale is guided by the
Government's strategic vision for the sector. It covers all six policy directions of the vision: (i) agricultural value chain
coordination; (ii) food security and nutrition; (iii) ecological resilience; (iv) institutional support; (v) community empowerment; and
(vi) national and multisectoral partnerships. The rationale is further anchored in the draft National Fisheries and Agricultural Policy
2019-2029. MAP will also take into account the information and analysis that would eventually become available after the
ongoing national Agriculture Survey is completed.
118.
Alignment with IFAD policies. MAP is well aligned with IFAD’s “Approach in Small Island Developing States” paper published in
2014. It will invest in two of the three identified priority areas: (i) opportunities and employment for smallholder agriculture; and (ii)
environment and climate change. The programme addresses three of the four identified operational programme management
areas: (i) public-private-producer partnerships; (ii) additional investment and financing; and (iii) technical assistance.
Furthermore, MAP is aligned with IFAD’s rural transformation agenda, the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025, and the
objectives of the 2018 Country Strategy Note (particularly farmers’ access to services and markets, and climate change
adaptation interventions). MAP is also aligned with IFAD’s Transition Framework as evidenced by the gradual phasing in of the
lending terms and conditions, and the substantial emphasis on policy engagement. Its mainstreaming themes are informed by
IFAD’s thematic Action Plans on gender transformative approaches, nutrition mainstreaming, youth action, and environment and
climate change.
119.
South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC). MAP will support MOFMRA to share experiences, best practices, innovations
and solutions with other SIDS on small island agriculture and climate change adaptation for small farmers. Options for cross-
learning, exchange of expertise, and promotion of greater institutional links will be explored. The outcomes may also help inform
the design of future development investments in SIDS. Synergies will be developed with IFAD-financed investments in other
SIDS, in particular in the Pacific. MAP will also inform the Maldives’ participation in the SIDS Action Platform set up by the Third
International Conference on SIDS in 2014. In addition, MAP will consider application of the lessons learned from the first
generation of IFAD’s SSTC initiatives, such as, the South-South Cooperation for Scaling up Climate Resilient Value Chains
Initiatives project. Furthermore, MAP will also study how IFAD’s SSTC Strategy has supported the mainstreaming of IFAD’s main
thematic areas of work, namely, climate change, nutrition and gender, and apply the strategic principles to achieves results under
the MAP activities focused on these thematic areas.
120.
Ownership. MAP responds directly to the national Strategic Action Plan 2019-2023 in the area of agricultural development and
addresses several policy interventions, such as strengthening agricultural value chains and the productive capacities of farmers,
increasing the role of agriculture in achieving food safety and food security, mainstreaming sustainable agricultural practices, and
strengthening institutional coordination, the policy and regulatory framework, and availability of relevant data. MAP will contribute
to agribusiness development and related business models that MOFMRA as lead implementing agency is seeking.
121.
Partnerships and RBAs. MAP will actively seek collaboration with development partners, and participate in stakeholder
consultation platforms in the country. The programme will build on research generated by WFP and FAO on nutrition, as both
institutions have developed a substantial knowledge base in this area, and synergies will be developed with FAO-led platforms
on extension, food safety, livelihoods and marketing. Complementarity with other development initiatives will be activated through
the annual Maldives Partnership Forum, which provides a platform for policy, investment coordination, and partnership fostering,
and relevant donor coordination meetings. MAP will also explore partnerships with the private sector (e.g. Maldives National
University, MFLC and other financial institutions), agencies engaged in Good Agricultural Practices, and relevant organisations
operating in the field of rural enterprise development.
122.
Specific programmatic synergies. In its efforts to promote an island-specific integrative approach, MAP will define collaborative
approaches with relevant national programmes in particular with respect to solid waste, integrative water management, and
climate adaptation interventions. MAP will seek to develop synergies with the World Bank-financed ‘Clean Environment Project’
in the area of solid waste management, the Asian Development Bank-financed ‘Preparing Outer Islands for Sustainable Energy
Development Project’ in the area of renewable energy (particularly photovoltaic systems), and the EU-financed climate change
adaptation initiative to implement the Nationally Determined Contributions commitments.
123.
Other partnerships. These will include agreements with: (i) MACO, MFLC and SDFC for the provision of inputs, services and
financing; (ii) Ministry of Health and Ministry of Gender, Family and Social Services for gender, youth and nutrition activities; (iii)
CGIAR institutes, the Coconut Research Institute of Sri Lanka, the Coconut Research Station Kerala, India and Bangladesh
Agricultural Research Institute for generation of new technologies, particularly planting material; (iv) Business Development
Services Centre, ADB’s Inclusive Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprise Development Project, and its seven business
centres across the country, for business services; (v) UNICEF Maldives and the Resilient Island Foundation for work with ultra-
poor families on food security, health care and household income generating activities; and (vi) at decentralised level, synergies
will be sought with health and nutrition programmes financed by other partners.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
15/26
a. Project costs
124.
The key assumptions underlying the derivation of programme costs are: (i) programme costing is based on November 2019
prices; (ii) consumer price inflation is projected at 1%, as calculated by the Economist Intelligence Unit; (iii) the official exchange
rate of MVR 15.35 to USD 1 prevailing in November-December 2019 is the base exchange rate applied; (iv) there are no taxes
on agricultural goods nor inputs; any future taxes on goods and services procured under MAP will be financed by the
Government; and, (v) physical and price contingencies are estimated at 2% of base costs.
125.
The total programme cost amounts to USD 12.9 million (MVR 195.8 billion) over a five-year implementation period. All costs and
exchange rates are based on currently prevailing prices/rates in the Maldives. Management amounts to 15% of total costs.
Programme costs by component, by expenditure category, and by year are presented in Tables 2-4.
126.
Table 2: Programme costs by component (and sub-components) and financier
127.
(Thousands of United States dollars)
128.
Table 3: Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
129.
(Thousands of United States dollars)
130.
Table 4: Programme costs by component and year
131.
(Thousands of United States dollars)
16/26
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
132.
IFAD financing is provided as a 73% highly concessional loan and a 27% DSF grant. The programme will be financed by an
IFAD loan of USD 3.3 million, an IFAD grant of USD 1.2 million, MACO contribution of USD 0.2 million, private investment
(commercial islands, MFLC, beneficiaries) of USD 1.1 million, SDFC cofinancing of USD 5.0 million, and Government
contribution in cash of USD 2.1 million. Opportunities to leverage cofinancing from external partners will be sought during
implementation.
133.
Climate finance. The calculated IFAD climate finance for the programme amounts to USD 3,264,000, which represents 73% of
the total IFAD financing envelope. This calculated amount represents climate change adaptation finance.
c. Disbursement
134.
Withdrawal of funds and use of loan and grant proceeds is governed by IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (LDH) and the
Financing Agreement. Applicable procedures for disbursement, financial reporting and maintenance of programme records will
be detailed in a Letter to the Borrower/Recipient (LTB/R) upon signature of the Financing Agreement.
135.
Three standard disbursement procedures are available for withdrawal of financing: (i) advance withdrawal; (ii) direct payment;
and (iii) reimbursement. These are detailed in the LDH and will be outlined in the LTB/R.
136.
Flow of funds. MAP will open, maintain and operate two Designated Accounts (DAs) denominated in USD in the central bank
(Maldives Monetary Authority) to receive the loan and grant proceeds respectively. The DAs will be administered on the basis of
imprest arrangements, in which an initial amount of the loan and grant is advanced and then replenished periodically based on
justified expenditures. The maximum advances provided by IFAD to the DAs will be established as an authorized allocation in the
LTB/R.
137.
For all programme expenditure, a payment request will be prepared by the accountant and approved by the finance executive
(budget section) and programme director. It will then be submitted to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) based on which funds will be
disbursed by the MMA directly to the bank account of the vendor or other payee as required. Expenditure incurred by MACO will
follow a similar pattern; the accounts team at MACO will send a payment request to the MoF for which funds will be disbursed by
the MMA on approval to the vendor. Except petty cash, no other cash transactions will be permitted by the programme.
138.
The counterpart funds from the Government will be recorded in the books of accounts of the PIU. The process for claiming
counterpart funds will also be similar to IFAD expenditure, with a payment request being made by the PIU to MOFMRA which in
turn will submit it to MoF. On approval by MoF, the MMA will release the funds to the payee as requested. Thus, all funds for the
programme implementation will be released by the MMA based on approved payment requests from the PIU, and the PIU will not
have any other programme bank account.
139.
Retro-active financing. Upon Government request, a portion of IFAD financing can be provided as retroactive financing, as an
exception to the General Conditions and with Executive Board approval, to cover eligible expenditures between the date of
approval of the design document by IFAD and the date of Entry into Force. Activities that can be funded under retroactive
financing may be: (i) eligible costs related to MACO set up; (ii) staff recruitment costs and salaries; (iii) purchase of a minimum set
of equipment and materials; and (vi) activities related to the baseline survey. To be eligible for retroactive financing, goods and
services must have been procured according to IFAD procurement procedures. It is expected that the costs for such activities will
not exceed USD 450,000 and will be charged to the respective loan categories. GoM pre-finances retroactive expenditures at its
own risk. If the financing is not approved by the Executive Board, or does not enter into force, expenditures will not be
reimbursed. The date after which expenditures become eligible for retroactive financing should not be earlier than the
programme design date.
140.
All financing and programme expenditure shall be exempt from all taxes. Any applicable taxes will be covered by the GoM
contribution to the programme. Social security benefits, if any, (employee’s portion) and income tax (employee deductions) are
eligible for IFAD financing.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
141.
Beneficiaries. MAP will directly benefit 6,000 small farm households consisting of 31,800 persons. These consist of 2,795
households benefitting from the full range of investments (services, training, financing, market access) and 3,205 households
benefiting from a set of investments (services, training, market access). In addition, 2,460 incremental full time job equivalents will
be created. MAP will indirectly benefit all other small farm households in the Maldives.
17/26
142.
Benefits. The programme will generate a range of social, nutritional, financial, economic and institutional benefits. Financial and
economic benefits would accrue from: (i) increased farm productivity and reduced production costs due to the adoption of climate
smart technologies; (ii) reduced post-harvest losses and consequent increased proportion of marketed output; (iii) improved
quality and safety of agricultural and food products, attracting higher prices and increased sales and net margins; (iv) increased
farm incomes through diversification to high value commodities; (v) increased employment for hired labour; (vi) reduced imports
and improved balance of payments; and, (vii) increased revenues for the Government as a result of increased volume of taxable
production (GST).
143.
Nutritional benefits will derive from the substantially greater production of high value commodities which are nutrition-sensitive,
such as vegetables, fruits, nuts (both indigenous and conventional) and root crops. Additional intake of vegetables, fruit/nuts and
root crops will reduce micronutrient deficiencies, especially among children and women. Nutritionally beneficial incremental
vegetable production will include tomato, eggplants, okra, squash, pumpkin, lettuce, cabbage, chilli, bell pepper, microgreens,
cucumber, herbs, leeks, onions, watercress, broccoli, string beans and chives, while incremental fruit production will include
papaya, banana, citrus, coconuts and mango. Incremental root crop production will focus on sweet potato, taro and yam.
Production of nutrition-sensitive crops will be intensified in areas with substantial micronutrient deficiencies, in consultation with
Ministry of Health. Production of nutrition-sensitive crops will be accompanied by awareness-raising of nutrition issues.
144.
Financial analysis. The main results of the financial analysis include: (i) a significant increase in gross and net returns from each
model between the without and with project situation; (ii) positive benefit/cost ratios illustrating the worthiness of the investments;
the respective NPVs range from USD 3,812 to USD 76,056, while the IRRs range from 12% to 50%, which are comparable to
those of existing similar operations in the region. The analysis shows that the models are more sensitive to changes in
productivity and price assumptions than they are to variations in investment and operating costs.
145.
Economic analysis. The economic analysis hinges on the following assumptions: (i) programme life is assumed for 20 years in
light of the investments lifecycle; (ii) inputs and outputs are valued at their economic parity prices; (iii) a 7% financial discount rate
is applied, which is the same as MMA’s refinancing rate (latest update 29 November 2019), and the same rate is used for the
economic discount; (iv) the opportunity cost of rural labour is estimated considering the official unemployment rate (6%); as such
the shadow wage rate factor is equal to 0.94, or a daily wage of MVR 611 (USD 39.8); (v) the shadow exchange rate factor is
1.04 and the shadow exchange rate, estimated using international trade data, is equal to MVR 16.02 per USD 1.0; (vi) it is
assumed that at least 80% of investments will achieve the estimated returns; and (vii) financing flows are included in the
calculations as they are already reflected in the production costs.
146.
Based on the above, the programme’s economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 12.9% and the economic net present value is
USD 9.1 million. This indicates that the programme is a technically and economically viable investment for the economy as a
whole.
147.
Sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analysis shows that the programme is economically robust in light of potential risks in terms of
increased costs, decreased benefits or time overruns. Cost increases by 10%-20%, benefit decreases of 10%-20%, or time
overruns of one or two years yield EIRRs that are higher than the opportunity cost of capital and therefore indicate that the
proposed investments are indeed robust.
148.
Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
149.
Sustainability. The design of MAP integrates substantial elements to assure the financial, institutional, nutritional, technical and
environmental sustainability of the programme.
Financial sustainability. The underlying commercial business relationships to be fostered among input supply, extension,
financing, production and markets, supplemented by enhanced logistics, provide a solid foundation for financial sustainability.
Once profitable business relationships among value chain actors are structured and operational, programme interventions will
no longer be required. The market is significant and assured, considering that 95% of food is currently imported, that local
demand is rising rapidly as incomes increase, and that the tourism sector imports substantial volumes of agricultural
commodities.
Sectoral sustainability. MAP will contribute to developing a structured policy environment and incentive framework for the
agriculture sector led by MOFMRA, a strengthened institutional support system through MACO and ARC, and group-based
ELF extension through ARC and commercial islands. The entire agriculture sector will thus be upgraded, with nationwide
benefits outlasting the programme.
Institutional sustainability. The representation, advocacy and operational functions of Island and Regional Farmer Forums will
ensure the sustainability of the strengthened interface of farmers with MOFMRA and with services, financing, logistics and
markets. Once these Forums have developed relationships across the value chain, incremental programmatic support will not
be required.
Nutritional sustainability. MAP will introduce and modernise nutritionally-sensitive value chains for vegetables, fruits and root
crops, all of which provide improved nutrition and reduce micronutrient deficiencies, combined with nutrition awareness
raising. Once these value chains are well established at production and market levels, external intervention will no longer be
required, also considering that many consumers are demanding food products with better nutritional characteristics.
Technical sustainability. Climate-smart technological solutions suitable for the Maldives, which overcome land/soil/water
constraints and mitigate against climate change, are available globally. Once they are tested, adapted to local conditions, and
successfully demonstrated, their sustainability is not perceived to be a risk.
Environmental sustainability. MAP investments are designed to be environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient across the
board. Indeed, in many cases, the soil/water/chemicals-efficient production technologies to be introduced will replace current
activities that are ecologically unsustainable and damaging.
18/26
150.
Exit strategy. The programme’s exit strategy is to systematically ensure the financial, sectoral, institutional, nutritional, technical
and environmental sustainability of its activities, to the point where programme interventions are no longer required.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
1.  The main assessed risk categories and sub-categories, the inherent and residual risk levels, and the mitigation measures
under the programme are outlined below.
151.
MAP – Integrated Programme Risk Framework (IPRM)
#
Risk category/sub-category/ description
Inherent risk
Residual risk MAP Mitigation
1.
Country context
Governance.
1.1
Weak agriculture sector governance and
institutions may undermine implementation.
Moderate
Low
1. institutional strengthening
2. Island Farmer Forums
3. FM/procurement compliance
4. internal/external audit
2.
Sector strategy/policy
Policy development and implementation.
2.1
Government policy for agri. sector is
evolving. Weak implementation of
Agriculture Development Master Plan.
Moderate
Low
1. policy strengthening
2. sector incentive framework
3. investment across sector
4. modernisation/commercialisation
5. Master Plan alignment
6. RBA partnerships
3.
Environment/climate
#
Risk category/sub-category/ description
Inherent risk
19/26
Residual risk MAP Mitigation
Environment vulnerability.
3.1
Groundwater over-extraction, misuse of
fertiliser and pesticides, coastal erosion are
risks.
Substantial
Low
1. rainwater harvesting
2. water treatment protocols
3. balanced fertiliser use
4. IPM/biological control
5. resilient planting materials
6. intercropping with legumes
7. improved soil productivity
8. improved soil water retention
1. drought tolerant cropping
2. vertical hydroponic systems
3. enclosed greenhouses
4. water harvesting
Climate vulnerability.
3.2
Maldives is vulnerable to unpredictable
rainfall, global warming, sea level rise,
extreme weather events.
4
Institutional capacity for
implementation/sustainability
High
High
5. drip irrigation/efficiency
6. island-level integrative approach
7. flood-proofing of infrastructure
8. solar energy systems
9. CC institutional awareness
Implementation arrangements.
4.1
MOFMRA has weak programme
implementation capacity.
Substantial
Low
2. UNOPS providing robust TA
1. PIU with strong appointed staff
3. intensive IFAD oversight/support
6
Project procurement
#
Risk category/sub-category/ description
Inherent risk
20/26
Residual risk MAP Mitigation
Capability in public procurement.
6.1
MOFMRA and PIU have limited procurement
capacity. Standard bidding documents not
available for all procurement methods. Bid
submission timelines differ from those
required by IFAD.
Moderate
Low
7
Environment, social and climate impact
1. Deploy full-time procurement specialist in
the beginning of programme
2. Impart procurement training staff strong TA
support from UNOPS
3. use IFAD /approved standard bid
documents
4. use IFAD bid submission timelines
5. intensive IFAD procurement and contract
monitoring / Support
Resource efficiency and pollution prevention.
7.1
The programme may damage fragile
groundwater aquifers.
1. rainwater harvesting
2. water treatment protocols
Moderate
Low
3. balanced fertiliser use
4. IPM and biological control
5. discourage groundwater extraction
Vulnerability of target populations and
ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards.
7.2
The programme may increase the exposure
of farming to climate variability and hazards
due to the increasing impacts of climate
change.
1. drought tolerant cropping
2. vertical hydroponic systems
3. enclosed greenhouses
4. water harvesting
High
Low
5. drip irrigation/efficiency
6. island-level integrative approach
7. flood-proofing of infrastructure
8. solar energy systems
9. CC institutional awareness
8
Stakeholders
#
Risk category/sub-category/ description
Inherent risk
21/26
Residual risk MAP Mitigation
Stakeholder engagement.
8.1
Insufficient consultation with stakeholders
may undermine implementation and
achievement of objectives.
Moderate
Low
1. inclusive targeting
2. intensive stakeholder involvement
3. consultation in planning/execution
4. Island Farmer Forums
5. participatory nature of ELFs
6. intensive IFAD oversight/support
7. annual institutional assessments
8. outsourced evaluations
9
Force majeure
Coronavirus.
9.1
The global spread of coronavirus will
substantially reduce tourism income, with
adverse effects on the Government budget.
The fiscal deficit will expand sharply in the
short term.
High
High
This risk is exogenous and cannot be
mitigated. However, MAP will increase
national food production and help to reduce
the current account deficit.
#
5
Risk category/sub-category/ description Inherent risk Residual risk MAP Mitigation
Financial management
Organisation and staffing.
5.1
Risk of inadequate FM staff in MOFMRA.
Familiarity with IFAD processes and
reporting formats.
Moderate
Moderate
Internal controls.
5.2
Risk of inadequacy of internal controls for
the type of activities to be carried out
Moderate
Moderate
1. adequate finance staff, clear JDs
2. training, software, PIM
1. segregation of fiduciary duties
2. periodic reconciliations
3. restricted access to documents
4. periodic count of inventory/assets
#
5.3
5.4
Risk category/sub-category/ description Inherent risk Residual risk MAP Mitigation
22/26
Accounting & financial reporting.
Risk that accounting systems are not
integrated/reliable, leading to inaccuracies
in financial records. Risk that lack of
appropriate financial information reduces
utility for monitoring.
External audit.
Risk that independent audit is not in place
or performed timely, with possible
misrepresentation of financial results or
suspension or other remedies due to
compliance breaches.
1. use of accounting software
2. back-up of accounting records
High
Substantial
3. use of registry of fixed assets
4. PIM to detail requirements
5. use of proper reporting templates
1. Audit by Office of Auditor General
2. compliance with IFAD guidelines
3. implement audit observations
4. technical assistance in FM
Moderate
Moderate
I. Environment and Social category
152.
The programme is classified as environmental and social Category B. In environmental terms, its activities will not trigger any
Category A criteria and are consistent with the following criteria and categories characteristic of Category B projects: (i) the
development of agro-processing facilities; (ii) agricultural intensification and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas;
and (iv) credit operations through financial service providers. These will likely have adverse environmental impacts on habitats,
ecosystems and/or livelihoods that are site-specific, and are mitigated by known measures included in MAP design and ESMP.
153.
These mitigation measures include: (i) rainwater harvesting measures (tide ridges for field and tree crops; lined ponds and
greenhouse roof collection mechanisms for hydroponic and drip fertigation systems) rather than the current practice of
groundwater extraction in the dry season which is leading to overexploitation; (ii) clear protocols for disposal of irrigation water
from hydroponic systems in an environmentally safe manner; (iii) environmentally sustainable production practices (balanced
fertilizer use, green manure and mulching, composting, integrated pest management, drip fertigation, closed vertical hydroponics
and grafting, photovoltaic systems for energy); (iv) biological control agents and IPM minimising use of pesticides which will be
managed through the introduction of MGAP; this will reduce leaching of chemicals into the water lens; (v) dwarf coconuts for
replanting of old senile coconut plantations, which are higher yielding, withstand storms better than tall varieties, and facilitate
control of the rhino beetle; (vi) inter-cropping of legumes in coconut plantations, which will reduce costal erosion and improve soil
productivity and water retention capacity. Furthermore, during implementation, island-specific diagnostic profiles will be prepared
to identify synergies with relevant national programmes in terms of solid waste, integrative water management efforts and climate
change adaptation interventions.
154.
Similarly, in social terms, the programme meets the following social criteria typical of a category B project: (i) agricultural
intensification and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas that may have adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems
and/or livelihoods; (ii) short-term public health and safety concerns; and, (iii) requiring a migrant workforce or seasonal workers
(for construction, planting, harvesting). These social risks are deemed to be minimal, with MAP activities aimed at
comprehensive social inclusion (women, youth, migrants), nutrition awareness and compliance with MGAP standards, in line with
the ESMP.
J. Climate Risk classification
155.
The Maldives’ fragile ecological profile and low elevation combined with its economic dependence on limited sectors makes it
among the world’s most vulnerable nations subject to the effects of climate change. Over 80% of the total land area is less than
1m above MSL. As sea level is projected to rise within the range of 9cm to 88cm between 1990 and 2100, many islands would
be submerged in the projected worst case scenario. The coral islands that make up the Maldives are morphologically unstable
and change in their size, shape, elevation and position on reef platforms over time. The small size of the islands forces people,
infrastructure and livelihood systems to be in close proximity to the sea which, in combination with the low elevation of islands,
contribute to severe risk of inundation with higher sea levels. The main climate change-related impacts in Maldives are
associated with: (i) more unpredictable rainfall patterns, (ii) steadily increasing surface temperature, (iii) continued sea level rise,
(iv) frequent exposure to natural disasters and extreme events.
156.
The climate risk category for MAP is rated as High, as it meets 4 of the 7 initial criteria of climate risk screening. These are: (i) the
programme area is subject to extreme climatic events (1), (ii) the programme would make investments in low-lying areas
exposed to tropical storms (3), (iii) the programme would be located in areas where rural development activities have
experienced significant weather-related losses in the past (6); and (iv) the programme would support infrastructure in areas
characterized by extreme weather events (7).
157.
As such, a detailed Climate Risk Analysis has been carried out, and relevant climate adaptation measures incorporated in MAP
design. These include: (i) shifting to thermophilic and drought tolerant crops; (ii) water harvesting combined with increased
irrigation efficiencies (hydroponic schemes, drip irrigation); (iii) shifting to covered infrastructure (greenhouses and net covered
growing platforms that support hydroponic and fertigation schemes); (iv) promotion of an island-specific integrative approach to
define collaborative approaches with relevant national programmes in particular with respect to solid waste, integrative water
management, and climate adaptation interventions; (v) flood-proofing in the design of MAP-supported infrastructure; (vi)
mainstreaming climate change, sea level rise and natural hazard issues into all institutional capacity building work.
23/26
158.
The programme is unlikely to result in any significant impacts to existing land use (deforestation/reforestation),
grassland/livestock systems, forest and peat soil management, existing wetland systems and/or fisheries. There however may be
some increase in carbon emissions associated with possible changes to perennial cropland systems and increased use of
chemical inputs. This will be offset by promotion of more efficient farming practices, reduced application of nitrogen-based
fertilizers, a shift to highly productive agriculture (e.g. hydroponics) and promotion of increased use of solar energy systems.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
159.
The overall responsibility for MAP management and implementation will be assumed by the MOFMRA, which is the Lead
Programme Agency. MoF will be responsible for ensuring the timely flow of funds to MOFMRA for implementation. The Ministry
of Economic Development (MED) will be responsible for guiding the setting up of MACO that will serve as implementing agency
of the programme. The Ministry of National Planning and Infrastructure (MONPI) will partner with MOFMRA to set up cold storage
facilities and other relevant infrastructure.
160.
Project Steering Committee (PSC). The PSC will provide oversight and strategic guidance to the programme. It will be chaired by
the Minister, MOFMRA, and consist of representatives from MOFMRA, MOF, MED, MONPI, MOE, and other relevant agencies.
Representatives from other stakeholder groups, such as MACO, the private sector, and farmer organisations, will be invited to
join the PSC as required. The PSC will meet at least bi-annually, and on ad hoc basis when necessary. It will: (i) ensure that
programme activities comply with Government and IFAD policies; (ii) approve AWPBs and procurement plans; (iii) oversee
programme progress and performance; (iv) ensure and monitor efficiency and inter-agency coordination; (v) ensure adherence to
financial management and procurement procedures; (vi) facilitate implementation; (vii) ensure mainstreaming of climate change,
gender and nutrition themes; (viii) recommend changes where necessary, in consultation with IFAD; and (ix) provide policy
direction. Ad hoc technical committees can be formed under the PSC if required to create synergy with other stakeholders and
partners.
161.
Programme Implementation Unit (PIU). The importance of establishing robust project management capacity has been
demonstrated by the experiences of IFAD and partners in the Maldives. The PIU will be established with strong management
skills and technical resources. The PIU will play a crucial role in the overall project management and coordination mechanism of
MAP. It will be responsible for the daily management of project activities, coordination among the implementing agencies, and
provide and technical and policy advice for project implementation. It will be established in the Planning and Programme
Coordination Section of MOFMRA, and physically located within or in proximity of MOFMRA. As the Secretariat for the PSC, the
PIU will organize the bi-annual and other PSC meetings as needed. A qualified Programme Director (PD) reporting to the
MOFMRA Permanent Secretary will be appointed to lead the PIU. Under the direction of the PD, the PIU will include a
management team of Government-seconded officers and support staff, and supported by a programme management agency,
which will form a technical team in support of the PIU. The qualifications and experience requirements, and the appointment
criteria, for selection of programme management and staff will be defined in the PIM.
162.
The PIU will be responsible for: (i) ensuring that the programme strategy is properly applied throughout implementation; (ii)
coordinating the programming of planned activities; (iii) preparing AWPBs and procurement plans; (iv) coordinating the timely
implementation of approved AWPBs by each implementing partner or line agency; (v) ensuring timely M&E, progress reporting,
and knowledge management; (vi) administering all aspects of financial management and procurement; (vii) serving as PSC
Secretariat; and, (viii) developing synergies and partnerships with relevant development programmes.
163.
PIU staffing. The PIU will be composed of: Programme Director; three Component Coordinators (Policy/Institutions Specialist,
Agriculture Specialist, Agribusiness Specialist), Planning/Administrative Officer, Financial Management Officer, Accountant,
Assistant Accountant, M&E/KM Officer, Procurement Officer, Targeting/Gender Officer, and at least five support staff. These
Government-seconded staff should have relevant qualifications and experience as a condition of their appointment. PIU staff
salaries and associated benefit packages and allowances will be financed by the Government as part of its contribution; a
performance incentive package will be financed by the IFAD grant to stimulate performance-based management efficiency.
164.
Technical assistance. A qualified programme management agency will be contracted to provide managerial and technical support
for the implementation of the programme. UNOPS has been pre-selected for this purpose, subject to conclusion of a suitable
agreement between MOFMRA and UNOPS. UNOPS will provide a qualified and experienced Chief Technical Advisor on long-
term basis, and short-term technical specialists as required. The duration of this support will be two years, and will have the
broader objective of strengthening programme management and capacities within MOFMRA.
165.
Specifically, the UNOPS team will provide specialised managerial and technical guidance to the PIU, and support MOFMRA and
the PIU to develop programme management systems and capacities as part of its institutional capacity building agenda. It will
build a strong team of management professionals in the PIU to ensure high quality outputs and achievement of goals and targets.
It will support MAP implementation progress and performance towards the achievement of expected targets at output, outcome
and objective levels. UNOPS will define and implement a clear roadmap of managerial and technical skill-building for MOFMRA
and relevant agencies.
24/26
166.
Implementation partnerships. Implementation agencies and partners such as MACO, SDFC, MFLC and possibly MGFSS will
enter into agreements or MoUs with MOFMRA which stipulate the respective roles and responsibilities of the parties. Similarly,
agreements will be signed between MOFMRA and commercial islands governing roles and responsibilities.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
167.
Accounting and reporting. All programme accounting and financial reporting will be in line with IFAD guidelines as published on
IFAD’s website and reflected in the LTB/R. MOFMRA follows the accounting system prescribed by MoF which uses a SAP
system for bookkeeping; MAP will also use SAP to ensure integration with MoF’s records. The accounting and financial reporting
of the programme will apply the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) on cash basis. The PIU will be
responsible to consolidate financial information received from implementing partners and to prepare annual financial statements
of the programme. Annual financial statements shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of IPSAS-Cash and
provided to IFAD within three months of the end of each fiscal year.
168.
Internal controls. There is an effective internal control system in place within MOFMRA. However, the internal control
arrangements at the PIU will need to be strengthened to include: (i) operations are conducted effectively and efficiently; (ii)
financial and operational reporting is reliable; (iii) applicable laws and regulations are complied with; and (iv) assets and records
are safeguarded. MOFMRA’s internal control procedures will be applied, unless otherwise specified in the PIM. MAP’s internal
control arrangements will ensure operational efficiency, reliability of reporting and compliance with requirements. They will
consider: (i) appointment of competent personnel with clear responsibilities and adequate segregation of duties; (ii) establishment
of an adequate financial record management system which has a complete audit trail; (iii) set up of physical safeguards; and, (iv)
independent check, with procedures subject to random independent reviews.
169.
Internal audit. Currently there is no system of internal audit within MOFMRA. For MAP, the PIU will appoint an independent firm
of Chartered Accountants to undertake internal audit functions from the first year of operation. Besides the financial audit, the
internal auditors will review the systems of internal control and suggest improvements if required. The internal audit should also
include statutory FM and procurement compliances. Internal audit reports will be submitted to the PSC on six-monthly basis.
170.
External audit. MAP accounts will be audited annually by the Auditor General of the Republic of the Maldives, which is the
supreme audit institution. The external audit will be carried out in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISA) and
in compliance with IFAD's Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing published on IFAD’s website. The audited project
financial statements together with the auditor’s opinion will be submitted to IFAD in English within 6 months of the end of each
fiscal year.
171.
Procurement. Procurement under MAP will be undertaken by the PIU in accordance with the National Procurement Regulations
(Chapter 10 of the Public Financial Regulations) to the extent that they do not contradict IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and
Procurement Handbook; where there are contradictions, IFAD’s Guidelines and Handbook will prevail. Specific procurement
arrangements, procedures and thresholds will be elaborated in detail in the PIM and the LTB/R.
172.
To ensure that procurement is carried out as per the National Procurement Regulations and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines
and Handbook, the PIU will have a full time Procurement Officer whose responsibilities are defined in line with the National
Procurement Regulations. They will include preparation of procurement plans; procurement of goods, works and services;
maintenance of procurement documentation; and contract monitoring.
173.
The thresholds defined in the National Procurement Regulation will be followed for the definition of applicable procurement
methods. The following minimum time limits for bid submission will apply: four weeks for open tenders and requests for proposals;
two weeks for restricted tenders and expressions of interest; and one week for quotations.
174.
Tender documents will be prepared using the standard bidding documents issued by MoF. Where standard documents are not
available, the PIU will prepare customized documents in line with Module H of the IFAD Procurement Handbook. The first set of
tender documents prepared by the PIU for each type of procurement will be submitted for IFAD clearance.
175.
Procurement activities with an estimated cost of USD 50,000 or more for goods and works, and USD 30,000 or more for
services, will be subject to prior review by IFAD. Procurement activities below these thresholds shall be subject to post review by
IFAD. For all programme procurement, records will be filed by the PIU in accordance with Module C of the IFAD Procurement
Handbook.
176.
Governance. Programme implementation will comply with the provisions of IFAD’s Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption,
published on IFAD’s website. Good governance under MAP aims to ensure transparency, accountability in use of resources, and
participation of stakeholders in planning and delivery of investments and services. Key aspects of good governance identified for
MAP include the following: (i) inclusive targeting of small farmers, women and the youth; (ii) participation of stakeholders in
planning and execution; (iii) transparent establishment of Island Farmer Forums, consultative election of their leaders, and
participatory appointment of ELFs; (iv) compliant FM, accounting, procurement and recruitment systems, and rigorous internal
and external audit; (v) intensive IFAD supervision and compliance control, including spot checks by regular supervision missions,
review of FM and procurement, and technical audits if needed; (vi) regular outcome surveys that provide information on how well
programme outputs are being delivered, in terms of coverage and quality; and, (vii) reporting of results to Government and
stakeholders, with key information and reports published as part of the knowledge management agenda.
177.
The programme’s transparency framework will include the following measures: (i) wide publication of tenders; (ii) FM and
procurement compliance; (iii) code of conduct signed by all PIU staff; (iv) code of business ethics to be included in all contracts,
agreements and MoUs; (v) annual assessments of the performance of implementing agencies, commercial islands, Island
Farmer Forums and ELFs; (vi) IFAD supervision to assess compliance; (vii) participation of stakeholders in planning, execution
and M&E; and (viii) impact assessments and evaluation outsourced to independent institutions.
25/26
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
178.
Planning. MAP will apply a results-based management approach, which establishes a solid linkage between planning (including
resource allocation), implementation, monitoring and expected results. The annual work plan and budget (AWPB) will constitute
the annual basis for implementation and should clearly describe the strategic direction of the programme, the expected results
under each component, and associated risk mitigation measures. The PIU will be responsible for preparing AWPBs, in
consultation with all stakeholders (MACO, ARC, Island Farmer Forums, commercial islands, wholesale markets, etc). A
participatory annual planning process will be set up with Island Farmer Forums to ensure bottom-up feedback on community
needs, priorities, contextual opportunities and limitations. The PIU will seek PSC and IFAD approval for each AWPB in advance
of the national annual budgeting process in order to ensure sufficient counterpart funding. IFAD supervision missions will offer
opportunities to review implementation progress against annual targets.
179.
Integrated M&E and KM system. An integrated Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Knowledge Management (KM) system will
be developed in accordance with IFAD guidelines and Government frameworks. It will be utilized as a management tool and
knowledge platform, and will include assessment of progress and compliance, identification of constraints and proposed remedial
actions. The system will have with three main objectives: (i) to monitor physical and financial progress on outputs, outcomes and
results, in line with the logframe, disaggregated by gender, age group, island, and socio-economic classification; (ii) to guide
implementation and policy dialogue on agricultural commercialisation in the country, based on the analysis of emerging data and
information; and (iii) to capture lessons, risks, innovations and technology options for guiding knowledge sharing and scaling up
of good practices. Participatory M&E including qualitative surveys will be undertaken on a regular basis. A baseline survey will be
undertaken at start up, and outcome surveys, along the lines of the new IFAD Core Outcome Indicator Survey, will be carried out
annually. A simplified pro-WEAI survey will be undertaken at baseline and completion to assess improvement in women’s
agency. An indicative budget of USD 50,000 (within M&E allocation) could be foreseen for this survey. However, the real cost will
be based on the outcome of procurement process. The key production and financial indicators will be monitored annually to
assess the emerging results of the programme. Progress reports will be published semi-annually and annually, supplemented by
periodical thematic studies as required.
180.
A practical M&E manual detailing clear objectives, scope, reporting structure, staffing, roles and responsibilities, budget and
activities will be prepared by the PIU at programme start-up. Annual M&E plans will be established, including a semi-annual
logframe reporting schedule. The system will inform the IFAD Operational Results Measurement System (ORMS) which offers an
online platform linking targets (defined in the logframe) through progress toward results (as documented in supervision reports)
to final results actually achieved (as reported in PCR). This will serve as an instrument allowing IFAD to publicly report on MAP’s
contribution to broader country results and the SDGs.
181.
As part of the commitment to being gender transformative, a Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI) survey will be
undertaken at baseline and completion. It will assess the increase in participating women’s agency and empowerment. Aspects
of this Index will be included in the outcome surveys, particularly with regard to asset management and productivity. Similarly, in
its commitment to mainstreaming nutrition, surveys to assess the minimum dietary diversity for women will be conducted at
baseline and completion.
182.
Learning, knowledge management and learning: Output, outcome and impact data generated by the M&E system will inform
case studies, briefs and reports. These will be used for policy dialogue, peer-learning, and potential scaling-up..
183.
Learning, knowledge management and communication. MAP represents a good platform for learning about the inter-relationships
of the enabling environment, enhanced climate-smart production, and agricultural commercialisation in the Maldives. MAP’s KM
activities will support the effective flow of relevant learning and information among relevant agencies, programme staff,
beneficiaries and other stakeholders. A comprehensive KM action plan will be developed in the early stages of implementation in
line with IFAD and Government policies on KM to ensure that knowledge, technologies and innovations generated are
systematically identified, analysed, documented, shared and eventually scaled up. KM products will be communicated through
multiple sources including blogs, written publications, video and social media.
184.
Website. The programme will establish and maintain a website to share reports, impact studies, case studies, training materials,
videos and ICT technologies. It will discourage printing of reports and other documents.
b. Innovation and scaling up
185.
MAP will introduce a series of technologies which are innovative in the Maldivian context: (i) self-ventilated greenhouses for the
hot humid tropics; (ii) hydroponic irrigation, increasing production area while minimising water use; (iii) closed vertical hydroponic
production systems minimising water use and land requirements; (iv) rainwater harvesting and storage reducing pressure on
groundwater; (v) commercially sustainable ELF extension system in conjunction with input supply; (vi) marketing arrangements
with unbroken transport cold chain; (vii) propagation of the most climate resilient coconut varieties; (viii) holistic coconut based
agroforestry cropping systems including fruits, nuts for processing and legumes for compost making; (ix) introduction of MGAP
and Codex Alimentarius on a large scale. Scaling up of successful innovations will be driven by the underlying business drivers.
MOFMRA is ready to scale up emerging MAP innovations in the northern regions across the country.
M. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
26/26
186.
MOFMRA is gearing up to undertake key preparatory actions aimed at implementation readiness for MAP. Prior to programme
start-up it will confirm the establishment of both the PSC and PIU through official decree. It is organising office space and
preparing to appoint programme staff in advance of effectiveness, based on the terms of reference provided in the PIM. Financial
management systems, particularly the deployment of SAP, will be completed prior to start-up. Upon PIU establishment and staff
appointment, the PIU will refine and finalise the first-year AWPB, the procurement plan, the PIM and the Financial Management
Manual, for final review by the PSC and IFAD.
187.
As mentioned in Section G, MOFMRA has the option to proceed with retroactive financing for important start up actions and
eligible expenditures related to MACO set up, PIU staff appointment and salaries, purchase of equipment and materials, and the
baseline survey.
188.
A start up workshop will be conducted upon entry into force of the Financing Agreement. The workshop will take stock of
preparatory activities undertaken, introduce the programme to all stakeholders, deliberate on and refine implementation
procedures, and discuss financial management, procurement, M&E and KM systems and procedures. It will also prepare a
system for integrating gender awareness training systematically for the PIU, MOFRMA and implementing agencies.
189.
Supervision. IFAD will administer the loan and grant, and supervise the programme. Supervision will be annual and will focus on
the overall progress and performance of the programme, looking into physical and financial progress, outputs and outcomes,
outreach and targeting, gender and youth empowerment, implementation performance and efficiency, risks and opportunities,
innovations and KM, sustainability, and FM and procurement compliance.
190.
Mid-term review. A MTR will be conducted by IFAD and the Government at the mid-point of the implementation period. It will
review the overall likelihood of achieving the goals and development objectives, in addition to supervision-type functions. It will
provide opportunity for IFAD and Government to make substantial changes to the programme, if required.
191.
Implementation support. IS missions will be undertaken by IFAD as follow-ups of the supervision process, and as response to
any support required by the PIU or MOFMRA. They will be conducted on a demand-driven basis and in line with needs identified.
192.
Programme completion review. At the end of the implementation cycle, a PCR will be undertaken by the PIU as a self-
assessment of the programme’s performance. On this basis, IFAD will conduct a PCR mission in close coordination with the
Government to report on the results achieved. The main purposes will be to promote accountability, reflect on performance and
elicit lessons learned to inform Government initiatives and new programme design, to identify opportunities for scaling-up, and to
define an appropriate post-programme strategy. The learning dimension of the completion process will be regarded by both IFAD
and the Government as a foundation for improvements in policy-making and programming.
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Logical Framework
1/8
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of
households members
implementing
partners' records and
PIU records
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
Household
members
31800
1.a Corresponding number of households
reached
Women-headed
households
Non-women-
headed
households
Households
400
3180
1600
2820
2000
6000
implementing
partners' records and
PIU records
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU
PIU
The programme
achieves its
geographic and HH
outreach targets
and small farmers
participate in
programme
activities
1 Persons receiving services promoted or
supported by the project
implementing
partners' records and
PIU records
implementing
partners' records
and PIU records
PIU
Females
Males
Young
Male
Female
Young
1060
3180
940
2820
400
1200
47
53
20
47
53
20
Project Goal 
Sustainably increased incomes, food security and nutrition status
of small farmer households
70% of project supported HHs reporting a
20% increase in their income
70% of project
supported HHs
reporting a 20%
increase in their
income
at baseline, mid-
term and
completion
PIU
Small farmer HHs
undergo the process
of behavior change
in agriculture and
livelihoods
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Development Objective 
Strengthened enabling environment for sustainable and climate-
resilient agriculture
Households
30
80
% of HH reporting improved food security
Households
400
4200
No. of small farmers reporting access to
improved agricultural support services
Males
Females
Young
940
2820
1060
3180
120
960
surveys of
households,
qualitative
assessment of
participating HH
Survey of households,
qualitative
assessment of
participating HH,
technical studies
at baseline, mid-
term and
completion
PIU
at baseline, mid-
term and
completion
PIU
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary
diversity (MDDW)
Outcome survey
Baseline and
Completion
Women (%)
0
18
60
% of targeted women reporting increase
score on WEAI survey
Outcome Survey
Baseline and
Completion
Females
0
18
60
PIU
PIU
Gov. consistent
policies, strategies
and interventions for
sustainable and
climate-resilient
agriculture
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
Outcome 1:Institutional capacity is strengthened by upgrading
ARC in Hanimadhoo and training MACO staff, enabling quality
services to be developed and disseminated for adoption by small
farmers
3/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
# of new and improved services in the
agricultural institutional support system
No. of services
4
10
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Sector studies,
evaluations,
programme M&E
system, progress
report, periodic
surveys
At baseline, mid-
term and
completion.
Annual records
and reports
MOFMRA,
MACO, all
implementing
parties
Effective
interventions in
conducive policy
framework,
institutions,
technical support
systems,
strengthened
introduction and
adoption of new and
better technologies,
knowledge and
inputs
Output 
Output 1.1.1: Policy knowledge products on sustainable and
climate-resilient agriculture
Number of policy-relevant knowledge
products completed (research, study,
strategy, bylaw)
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Programme
M&E system,
periodic reports
PIU and
participating
agencies
No of Policy
products
1
3
Output 
Output 1.1.2 Upgraded capacity of generating knowledge and
technologies
Types of facilities and equipment for
generating knowledge and technologies
(ARC in North)
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU, ARC and
participating
agencies
Output 
1.1.3 Packages of recommendations developed for enhancing
financial returns for small farmers
Output 
Output 1.2.1 New technologies, quality inputs transferred to
small farmers
No. of facilities
and equipment
5
9
No of new production techniques beneficial to
smallholder producers developed and tested
Production
techniques
35
75
No. of extension linkage farmers trained in
production practices and/or technologies
Extension
linkage farmers
trained
8
26
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU, ARC and
participating
agencies
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU, ARC and
participating
agencies
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
No. of farmers receiving high quality inputs
and technologies
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU, MACO,
participating
agencies
Males
Females
Young
940
2820
1060
3180
Output 
Output 1.2.2 AICT service Established
Service platform on agricultural information
and communication technology established
Platform
1
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU, MACO,
participating
agencies
Outcome 
Outcome 2 Better/new technologies, inputs adopted and
productivity improved
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of
new/improved inputs, technologies or
practices
Households
20
70
Total number of
household
members
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Indigenous
people
Non-Indigenous
people
Women-headed
households
Annual
PIU
Sector studies,
evaluations,
programme M&E
system, progress
report, periodic
surveys
Effective training of
small farmers on
enhanced and
organized
production,
production forums
formed and working
with adopted
technologies and
GAPs, and
increased access to
agriculture financing
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
5/8
Name
Non-women-
headed
households
Households
Output 
Output 2.1 Beneficiaries trained and adopting improved
production practices and/or technologies
No. of farmers trained on production
practices and/or technologies including
MGAP/ HACCP
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
RIMS
PIU
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
RIMS
PIU
Males
Females
Young
940
2820
1060
3180
400
1200
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted
support to improve their nutrition
Total persons
participating
Households
Females
1060
3180
940
3180
3.1.2 Persons provided with climate
information services
1060
3180
940
2820
400
1200
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Indigenous
people
Non-Indigenous
people
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
6/8
Name
Persons
provided with
climate
information
services
Output 
Output 2.2 Island Farmer Forums organized
No. of Island Farmer Forums organized and
supported
Forums
established and
supported
50
75
No. of farmers participating in Island Farmer
Forums
Females
Males
Young
Women in
cluster
leadership
position
980
1470
420
280
10
630
420
15
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU
PIU
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably
manage natural resources and climate-
related risks
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU
50
75
Groups
supported
Total size of
groups
Males
Females
Young
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
7/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Not Young
Indigenous
people
Non-Indigenous
people
Women in
leadership
position
Output 
Output 2.3 : Increased access to agriculture financing for small
farmers
No. of farmers accessing agriculture
financing
Females
Males
Young
245
1176
105
70
504
336
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU
Outcome 
Outcome 3 Production decisions respond to market
opportunities
No. of supported agribusiness enterprises
reporting increase in profit
Evaluation studies
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
Agribusiness
enterprises
5
15
Output 
Output 3.1 Supply contracts established between producers and
private companies incl. commercial islands
No. of supply contracts increased
Supply
contracts
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
5
15
No. of farmers engaged in supply contract or
contract farming
Males
Females
Young
490
210
140
735
315
210
Programme M&E
system, periodic
reports
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PPP operational and
supply contracts or
contract farming
established with
effective marketing
support
PIU
PIU
PIU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 3.2 Improved storage and transport facilities for marketing
of agri produce
8/8
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
No. cold storage facilities on cargo vessels
or on project hubs established/promoted
Cold Storage
facilities
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Programme M&E
system, periodic
report
Semi-annual
and annual
reports
PIU
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2. Theory of change 
  More than 10,000 small farm households practising agriculture as registered or non-
registered farmers face continued challenges in terms of limited cultivable land areas, lack 
of access to modern technologies and knowledge to enhance productivity and production, 
and costly logistics for market connection. This is particularly severe for the 2,870 farming 
households  in  the  northern  atolls  in  regions  1  –3,  where  MAP  will  directly  invest  in 
agricultural  production  and  market  linkages.  Farming  in  the  programme  area  is  mostly 
practiced in an unorganized manner and at limited scale. Small farmers in the outer atolls 
suffer the most in terms of periodic food insecurity and poverty. The absence of organized 
agriculture data also hinders the orientation of public and private investments in the sector. 
As result, the country has relied heavily on imported agricultural produce and foods. 
  The  challenges  outlined  above  have  affected  the  agricultural  development  in  the 
Maldives, leading to a number of risks such as: (i) declining performance of the agricultural 
sector  that  could  disappear  if  the  trend  is  not  reversed;  (ii)  reduced  national  food 
sovereignty  due  to  extreme  reliance  on  imports;  (iii)  lack  of  well-oriented  strategic 
investments from the public and private sector; (iv) reduced quality and quantity of natural 
resources  for  agriculture;  and  (v)  crowding  out  of  local  producers  due  to  low  cost-
effectiveness of agribusiness logistics. 
  Furthermore,  despite  the  increasing  feminization  of  post-harvest  activities,  there  is 
little  evidence  of  an  increase  in  women’s  incomes,  participation  in  training,  or  decision 
making  roles  in  community  organisations.  Women  are  affected  by  lack  of  access  to 
technology, finance and leadership roles, with a disproportionate impact on their economic 
empowerment. Lack of access to productive assets and knowledge also translates into low 
productivity. This challenge is compounded by  the lack  of nutrition security, particularly 
among  women  and  children.  The  detrimental  impact  of  micronutrients  insufficiency  on 
women’s productivity is well established. 
  Despite  these  challenges,  there  is  robust  potential  for  agriculture  growth.  National 
efforts  are  underway  to  develop  a  comprehensive  and  structured  policy  and  incentive 
framework for the sector. In addition, the Government is considering related investments 
and  activities.  Internationally  tested  and  practised  climate  change  mitigation  and 
adaptation technologies and solutions that are suitable for the Maldivian context can be 
introduced to overcome soil and water management issues. With the steady growth of the 
economy,  the  demand  and  the  size  of  the  local  market  for  agricultural  output  is  rising 
rapidly.  With  enhanced  incomes,  consumers  are  becoming  increasingly  more  aware  of 
nutrition  and  food  safety  issues.  Furthermore,  the  tourism  sector  imports  substantial 
volumes  of  agricultural  commodities  per  year  that  could  be  supplied  by  the  domestic 
producers. 
  The  MAP  theory  of  change  is  premised  on  a  proactive  approach  to  synergistic 
investments that build and strengthen the responsiveness and competitiveness of small 
farm  households  in  organized  production,  processing,  preserving  and  marketing, 
supported by the adoption of sustainable and climate-smart technologies and practices. It 
is based on the assumptions that: (i) small farmers involved in enhanced crop production, 
post-production management and marketing would benefit from inclusion in a sustainable 
and  business-oriented  model;  (ii)  selection  of  high  value  commodities,  supported  by 
demand-driven research and improved technical services, would offer small farmers the 
opportunity to enhance production and meet market demand; (iii) improved management 
of natural, physical and financial resources would allow small farmers to strengthen climate 
resilience  of  production  and  reduce  vulnerability  to  climate  change;  (iv)  enhanced 
nutritional  status  and  gender  relations  at  household  and  community  levels,  as  well  as 
policy  engagement  on  equal  opportunities  for  women,  will  improve  agricultural  growth; 
and,  (iv)  strategic  investments  in  these  areas  would  contribute  to  achieving  the 
Agricultural Development Master Plan and generate sustainable increase in the incomes, 
food security and nutrition of small farmer households. 
  MAP will therefore invest in a number of strategically interlinked priorities – developing 
the enabling environment of policy, institutions and services, enhancing the climate-smart 
production  of  high  value  commodities,  and  upgrading  market  connections  between 
producers  and a range  of markets. The  expected  outcomes are an improved policy and 
incentive framework for the sector, increased productivity and production of agricultural 
commodities demanded by the market, and development of market linkages and upgraded 
transportation logistics among organised producers and buyers. 
Challenges 
Main risks 
Process/responses 
Key results indicators 
Outcomes 
- Small farm and 
backyard ag. 
practices 
- Lack of technology 
to enhance 
production and 
productivity 
- Lack of 
systematically 
organized data and 
access to 
information 
- Fragile ecology 
and climate change 
vulnerability 
- Agricultural 
produce import and 
periods of food 
insecurity 
- Ineffective 
transport system and 
market access 
- Severer poverty for 
farming HHs in 
outer islands 
- Inequal access to 
opportunities and 
resources for women 
and youth 
- Declining and 
disappearing ag. 
sector 
- Loss of 
national food 
sovereignty 
- Investments 
not always 
grounded on 
informed 
decisions 
- Reduced 
cultivable land 
and declining 
soil quality 
affecting growth 
and yield 
- Crowding out 
of domestic 
production 
- High local 
production cost 
driving to 
increased import 
- Increased 
socio-economic 
inequality 
- Conducive policy 
framework to 
support govt  
develop strategies 
(C1) 
- Institutional 
support to build 
technical capacities 
for extension 
services(C1) 
- E-service platform 
of AICT (C1) 
- Test, select and 
introduce climate-
resilient varieties 
and technologies 
(C1, C2) 
- Promote national 
quality standards 
(C1, C2, C3) 
- PPP in storage and 
transport capacities 
(C2, C3) 
- Post harvest, 
produce aggregation 
and market linkages 
- Gender and youth 
inclusive and 
sensitive 
(crosscutting) 
Policy knowledge 
products, innovative 
technologies & practices, 
input supply, database for 
sustainable and climate-
resilient agriculture 
Strengthened policy 
framework and 
capacity of 
agricultural 
institutional service 
support system  
Training on enhanced 
production and 
technologies, production 
forums, access to 
financing 
Improved and new 
technologies and 
good practices 
adopted 
Contract farming, public-
private partnership, 
storage and transport, 
marketing support 
Production 
responding to market 
demands 
Goal & 
objective 
Objective: 
Strengthened 
enabling 
environment 
for sustainable 
and climate-
resilient 
agriculture 
Goal: 
Sustainably 
increase the 
incomes, food 
security and 
nutrition status 
of small 
farmers 
MAP logic model 
   SERVICES Research Centre - North  Adaptive research o Seed testing o Nursery/planting material o Tissue culture  Coconut Systems  Extension  Equipment testing Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMA)  Extension  Supervision  Project management  Food safety and standard guidelines  Quality and branding  IPM Maldives Agricultural Company Limited (MACO)  Input supply  Technical assistance  Safety/quality standards  Marketing support  Training and technology transfer e.g.: o Hydroponic systems o Greenhouses o Grafting equipment o Drip Irrigation SDFC  Agricultural financing for home-based farmers, non-registered business individuals and companies Research Centre - South  Adaptive research o Seed testing o Nursery/planting material o Tissue culture  Coconut Systems  Extension  Equipment testing PRODUCTION Farmers/Groups: Island 1  Rainwater harvesting  Production  Sorting/grading/branding  Quality control  Aggregation  Value addition/processing Farmers/Groups: Island 2  Rainwater harvesting  Production  Sorting/grading/branding  Quality control  Aggr egation  Value addition/processing Farmers/Groups: Island 3  Rainwater harvesting  Production  Sorting/grading/branding  Quality control  Aggregation  Value addition/processing MARKET Regional/Cluster Wholesale Market:  Collection  Local Sale Commercial Agriculture Islands:  Purchase from farmers  Contract farming  Purchasing logistics  Selling logistics  Refrigerated vessels Male’ Wholesale Buyers:  Aggregation  Sale to resorts  Sale to Male’ consumers Resorts:  Purchase of agricultural output  Forward contracting  Payments POLICY SUPPORT: (i) structured holistic agricultural policy framework; (ii) promotion of domestic markets; (iii) incentive framework for resort market to source local production PARTNERSHIPS: (i) knowledge partnerships for the two research centres; (ii) implementation partnerships for MOFMA/PIU  
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3:  Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
a.  Programme costs 
The  key  assumptions  underlying  the  derivation  of  programme  costs  are:  (i) 
programme  costing  is  based  on  November  2019  prices;  (ii)  consumer  price  inflation  is 
projected at 1%, as calculated by the Economist Intelligence Unit; (iii) the official exchange 
rate of MVR 15.35 to USD 1 prevailing in November-December 2019 is the base exchange 
rate applied; (iv) there are no taxes on agricultural goods nor inputs; any future taxes on 
goods  and  services  procured  under  MAP  will  be  financed  by  the  Government;  and,  (v) 
physical and price contingencies are estimated at 2% of base costs. 
The total programme cost amounts to USD 12.9 million (MVR 195.8 billion) over a 
five-year  implementation  period.  All  costs  and  exchange  rates  are  based  on  currently 
prevailing  prices/rates  in  the  Maldives.  Management  amounts  to  15%  of  total  costs. 
Programme costs by component, by expenditure category, and by year are presented in 
Tables 1-3. 
Table 1: Programme costs by component (and sub-components) and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Table 2: Programme costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Enabling Policy, Institutions and ServicesKnowledge and Technology73653.657842.1------584.21,37210.6Input Supply1,55886.8--1216.8----1176.51,79513.9Subtotal Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services2,29472.457818.31213.8----1745.53,16724.6B. Climate Smart Production6099.92454.0330.5--5,00081.32614.26,14847.7C. Market Connection38223.31006.1--1,14069.7--150.91,63712.7D. Programme Management--29315.1------1,64684.91,93815.0Total PROJECT COSTS3,28525.51,2159.41541.21,1408.85,00038.82,09616.312,890100.0IFAD LOANTotalGovt BudgetSDFCPrivate InvestMACOIFAD GrantAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment CostsA. Goods, Equipment and MaterialsGoods, Equipment and Materials1,70588.8--------21511.21,91914.9B. Technical Assistance and StudiesInternational TA6713.045287.0--------5194.0National TA54676.6131.812117.0----324.57125.5Studies--210100.0--------2101.6Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies61342.567546.81218.4----322.21,44111.2C. Training and WorkshopsTraining and workshops32775.6163.7337.6----5713.14323.4D. Innovation Investments /a64030.134516.2--1,14053.6----2,12516.5E. SDFC Financing--------5,00095.02615.05,26140.8Total Investment Costs3,28529.41,0359.31541.41,14010.25,00044.75655.111,17986.7II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and Allowances--18011.1------1,44888.91,62812.6B. Operational Expenses----------84100.0840.7Total Recurrent Costs--18010.5------1,53189.51,71113.3Total PROJECT COSTS3,28525.51,2159.41541.21,1408.85,00038.82,09616.312,890100.0IFAD LOANTotalGovt BudgetSDFCPrivate InvestMACOIFAD Grant 
Table 3: Programme costs by component and year 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
b.  Programme financing/ co-financing strategy and plan 
IFAD financing is provided as a 73% highly concessional loan and a 27% DSF grant. 
The programme will be financed by an IFAD loan of USD 3.3 million, an IFAD grant of USD 
1.2 million, MACO contribution of USD 0.2 million, private investment (commercial islands, 
MFLC,  beneficiaries)  of  USD  1.1  million,  SDFC  cofinancing  of  USD  5.0  million,  and 
Government contribution in cash of USD 2.1 million. Opportunities to leverage cofinancing 
from external partners will be sought during implementation. 
Climate finance. The calculated IFAD climate finance for the programme amounts to 
USD  1,845,026,  which  represents  41%  of  the  total  IFAD  financing  envelope.  This 
calculated amount represents climate change adaptation finance. 
c.  Disbursement 
  Withdrawal of funds and use of loan and grant proceeds is governed by IFAD’s Loan 
Disbursement Handbook (LDH) and the Financing Agreement. Applicable procedures  for 
disbursement, financial reporting and maintenance of programme records will be detailed 
in a Letter to the Borrower/Recipient (LTB/R) upon signature of the Financing Agreement. 
Three standard disbursement procedures are available for withdrawal of financing: 
(i) advance withdrawal; (ii) direct payment; and (iii) reimbursement. These are detailed 
in the LDH and will be outlined in the LTB/R. 
Flow of funds. MAP will open, maintain and operate two Designated Accounts (DAs) 
denominated in USD in the central bank (Maldives Monetary Authority) to receive the loan 
and  grant  proceeds  respectively.  The  DAs  will  be  administered  on  the  basis  of  imprest 
arrangements,  in  which  an  initial  amount  of  the  loan  and  grant  is  advanced  and  then 
replenished periodically based on justified expenditures. The maximum advances provided 
by IFAD to the DAs will be established as an authorized allocation in the LTB/R. 
For  all  programme  expenditure,  a  payment  request  will  be  prepared  by  the 
accountant  and  approved  by  the  finance  executive  (budget  section)  and  programme 
director. It will then be submitted to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) based on which funds 
will be disbursed by the MMA directly to the bank account of the vendor or other payee as 
required. Expenditure incurred by MACO will follow a similar pattern; the accounts team 
at MACO will send a payment request to the MoF for which funds will be disbursed by the 
MMA  on  approval  to  the  vendor.  Except  petty  cash,  no  other  cash  transactions  will  be 
permitted by the programme. 
The counterpart funds from the Government will be recorded in the books of accounts 
of  the  PIU.  The  process  for  claiming  counterpart  funds  will  also  be  similar  to  IFAD 
expenditure, with a payment request being made by the PIU to MOFMRA which in turn will 
submit  it  to  MoF.  On  approval  by  MoF,  the  MMA  will  release  the  funds  to  the  payee  as 
requested. Thus, all funds for the programme implementation will be released by the MMA 
based on approved payment requests from the PIU, and the PIU will not have any other 
programme bank account. 
Totals Including ContingenciesPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalA. Enabling Policy, Institutions and ServicesKnowledge and Technology756.5392.0101.676.945.31,372.1Input Supply1,297.8135.7139.1109.9112.71,795.3Subtotal Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services2,054.3527.7240.7186.8157.93,167.4B. Climate Smart Production16.7659.32,056.41,710.01,705.66,147.9C. Market Connection213.0388.1601.8243.8190.01,636.6D. Programme Management414.4359.5386.8365.0412.41,938.1Total PROJECT COSTS2,698.41,934.63,285.62,505.62,465.812,890.0 
  Retro-active financing.  Upon Government  request, a portion of  IFAD  financing can 
be provided as retroactive financing, as an exception to the General Conditions and with 
Executive Board approval, to cover eligible expenditures between the date of approval of 
the design document by IFAD and the date of Entry into Force. Activities that can be funded 
under  retroactive  financing  may  be:  (i)  eligible  costs  related  to  MACO  set  up;  (ii)  staff 
recruitment  costs  and  salaries;  (iii)  purchase  of  a  minimum  set  of  equipment  and 
materials; and (vi) activities related to the baseline survey. To be eligible for retroactive 
financing, goods and services must have been procured according to IFAD procurement 
procedures. It is expected that the costs for such activities will not exceed USD 450,000 
and  will  be  charged  to  the  respective  loan  categories.  GoM  pre-finances  retroactive 
expenditures at its own risk. If the financing is not approved by the Executive Board, or 
does  not  enter  into  force,  expenditures  will  not  be  reimbursed.  The  date  after  which 
expenditures  become  eligible  for  retroactive  financing  should  not  be  earlier  than  the 
programme design date. 
  Taxes. All financing and programme expenditure shall be exempt from all taxes. Any 
applicable taxes will be covered by the GoM contribution to the programme. Social security 
benefits, if any, (employee’s portion) and income tax (employee deductions) are eligible 
for IFAD financing. 
d.  Summary of benefits and economic analysis  
  Beneficiaries.  The  programme  will  directly  benefit  6,000  households  consisting  of 
31,800  persons.  These  consist  of  1,720  households  benefitting  from  the  full  range  of 
investments (training, loans, matching grants, market infrastructure), 4,280 households 
benefiting from training and market access investments, and 2,460 incremental full time 
job equivalents created. It will indirectly benefit all small farmers in the Maldives. 
  Benefits.  The  programme  will  generate  a  range  of  social,  nutritional,  financial, 
economic and institutional benefits. Financial and economic benefits would accrue from: 
(i) increased farm productivity and reduced production costs due to the adoption of climate 
smart technologies; (ii) reduced post-harvest losses and consequent increased proportion 
of  marketed  output;  (iii)  improved  quality  and  safety  of  agricultural  and  food  products, 
attracting higher prices and increased sales and net margins; (iv) increased farm incomes 
through  diversification  to  high  value  commodities;  (v)  increased  employment  for  hired 
labour;  (vi)  reduced  imports  and  improved  balance  of  payments;  and,  (vii)  increased 
revenues for the Government as a result of increased volume of taxable production (GST). 
  Nutritional benefits will derive from the substantially greater production of high value 
commodities  which  are  nutrition-sensitive,  such  as  vegetables,  fruits,  nuts  (both 
indigenous  and  conventional)  and  root  crops.  Additional intake  of  vegetables,  fruit/nuts 
and  root  crops  will  reduce  micronutrient  deficiencies,  especially  among  children  and 
women.  Nutritionally  beneficial  incremental  vegetable  production  will  include  tomato, 
eggplants,  okra,  squash,  pumpkin,  lettuce,  cabbage,  chilli,  bell  pepper,  microgreens, 
cucumber,  herbs,  leeks,  onions,  watercress,  broccoli,  string  beans  and  chives,  while 
incremental  fruit  production  will  include  papaya,  banana,  citrus,  coconuts  and  mango. 
Incremental root crop production will focus on sweet potato, taro and yam. Production of 
nutrition-sensitive  crops  will  be  intensified  in  areas  with  substantial  micronutrient 
deficiencies, in consultation with Ministry of Health. Production of nutrition-sensitive crops 
will be accompanied by awareness-raising of nutrition issues. 
  Financial analysis. The main results of the financial analysis include: (i) a significant 
increase in gross and net returns from each model between the without and with project 
situation;  (ii)  positive  benefit/cost  ratios  illustrating  the  worthiness  of  the  investments; 
the  respective  NPVs  range  from  USD  3,812  to  USD  76,056,  while  the  IRRs  range  from 
12% to 50%, which are comparable to those of existing similar operations in the region. 
The analysis shows that the models are more sensitive to changes in productivity and price 
assumptions than they are to variations in investment and operating costs. 
  Economic analysis. The economic analysis hinges on the following assumptions: (i) 
programme life is assumed for 20 years in light of the investments lifecycle; (ii) inputs and 
outputs  are  valued  at  their  economic  parity  prices;  (iii)  a  7%  financial  discount  rate  is 
applied, which is the same as MMA’s refinancing rate (latest update 29 November 2019), 
and  the  same  rate  is  used  for  the  economic  discount;  (iv)  the  opportunity  cost  of  rural 
labour is estimated considering the official unemployment rate (6%); as such the shadow 
wage rate factor is equal to 0.94, or a daily wage of MVR 611 (USD 39.8); (v) the shadow 
exchange rate factor is 1.04 and the shadow exchange rate, estimated using international 
trade data, is equal to MVR 16.02 per USD 1.0; (vi) it is assumed that at least 80% of 
investments will achieve the estimated returns; and (vii) financing flows  are included in 
the calculations as they are already reflected in the production costs. 
  Based  on  the  above,  the  programme’s  economic  internal  rate  of  return  (EIRR)  is 
12.9%  and  the  economic  net  present  value  is  USD  9.1  million.  This  indicates  that  the 
programme  is  a  technically  and  economically  viable  investment  for  the  economy  as  a 
whole. 
  Sensitivity  analysis.  The  sensitivity  analysis  shows  that  the  programme  is 
economically  robust  in  light  of  potential  risks  in  terms  of  increased  costs,  decreased 
benefits or time overruns. Cost increases by 10%-20%, benefit decreases of 10%-20%, 
or time overruns of one or two years yield EIRRs that are higher than the opportunity cost 
of capital and therefore indicate that the proposed investments are indeed robust. 
Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis 
+10%+20%+50%+10%+20%-10%-20%- 30%1 year2 yearsERR12.9%12.4%11.8%10.4%13.5%14.0%12.3%11.6%10.7%11.9%10.8%ENPV (USD mln)9.18.57.85.810.712.27.66.04.47.15.3Sensitivity Analysis( 20-year period)Base caseCosts IncreaseIncrease of BenefitsDecrease of BenefitsDelay of Benefits 
Table 1. Knowledge and Technology 
Table 2. Input Supply 
Table 3. Climate Smart Production 
Detailed Costs(USD)QuantitiesBase Cost ('000)Totals Including Contingencies ('000)Other AccountsUnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalDisb. Acct.Fin. RuleProc. Method I. Investment CostsA. Training of farmersIPM training and use&handling of chemical crop protection agentscourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )MGAP and group certificationcourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Management of fertilizer usecourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Pruningcourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Compost makingcourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Rain harvestingcourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Use and management of field drip irrigationcourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Use and management of field hydroponiccourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Graftingcourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Nutritional awarenesscourse-122020-52250-355-13-355-14TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Refresher trainingcourse--12202052250--35513--35614TRW_DAIFAD_L ( 100%, 100%, 100%, 50% ), MACO ( 0%, 0%, 0%, 50% )OTHER_PM ( 100% )Subtotal Training of farmers-3053555143-3156606153B. Financial productsDevelopment of financial productspers-month0.50.5---111.00066---1166---11TA_DAIFAD_L ( 100% )CON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Use of financial productspers-month0.50.5---111.00066---1166---11TA_DAIFAD_L ( 100% )CON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Understanding and interpretation of agriculture business planspers-month0.50.5---111.00066---1166---11TA_DAIFAD_L ( 100% )CON_SRVCS_PM ( 100% )Subtotal Financial products1717---331717---34C. Production investmentsMatching grants /a /blumpsum-11--2350.000-350350--700-350350--700GRANTS_DAIFAD_L ( 65% ), IFAD_G (35% )SHOPPING_PM ( 100% )SDFC financinglumpsum-2611 6501 6501 7005 261-2611 6501 6501 7005 261CR_DAGOVT_BUD ( 0%, 100%, 0% ), SDFC ( 0%, 0%, 100% )NBF_PM ( 100% )Subtotal Production investments-6112 0001 6501 7005 961-6112 0001 6501 7005 961Total176582 0531 7051 7056 137176592 0561 7101 7066 148_________________________________\a Up to 20% of the investment value. To substitute farmers equity for investments if deem necessary. The project will provide matching grants amounting to about USD 700K or approx 500 investment proposals in the first 2 years of the MAP to promote energy saving and climate change adaptation technologies.\b Includes smaller matching grants for homestead vegetable gardening for improved nutritional outcomes 
Table 4. Market Connection 
Table 5. Programme Management 
Table 6. Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
Table 7. Components by Financiers 
Table 8. Expenditure Accounts by Financiers 
Table 9. Components Project Cost Summary 
Table 10. Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
Repubic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme 
Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
 I. Investment Costs 
A. Goods, Equipment and Materials 
  Goods, Equipment and Materials 
B. Technical Assistance and Studies 
International TA 
National TA 
Studies 
Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies 
C. Training and Workshops 
Training and workshops 
D. Innovation Investments /a 
E. SDFC Financing 
  Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
A. Salaries and Allowances 
B. Operational Expenses 
  Total Recurrent Costs 
Total BASELINE COSTS 
Physical Contingencies 
Price Contingencies 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
_________________________________ 
(MVR Million) 
(USD '000) 
% 
% Total 
Foreign 
Base 
% 
% Total 
Foreign 
Base 
Local 
Foreign 
Total 
Exchange 
Costs 
Local 
Foreign 
Total 
Exchange 
Costs 
- 
- 
10.3 
1.5 
11.9 
6.3 
- 
- 
28.8 
7.8 
- 
1.5 
9.3 
- 
32.6 
80.8 
18.2 
151.5 
23.6 
0.8 
24.4 
42.6 
0.0 
0.9 
43.5 
- 
0.4 
0.4 
151.9 
0.0 
0.4 
152.3 
28.8 
7.8 
10.3 
3.1 
21.2 
6.3 
32.6 
80.8 
169.6 
23.6 
1.2 
24.8 
194.4 
0.1 
1.3 
195.8 
100 
100 
- 
50 
44 
- 
100 
100 
89 
- 
33 
2 
78 
33 
29 
78 
15 
4 
5 
2 
11 
3 
17 
42 
87 
12 
1 
13 
100 
- 
1 
- 
- 
673.0 
99.5 
772.5 
410.3 
- 
- 
1 182.8 
1 540.0 
50.0 
1 590.0 
2 772.8 
2.5 
157.2 
1 876.3 
1 876.3 
507.0 
- 
99.5 
606.5 
- 
2 125.0 
5 261.0 
9 868.8 
- 
25.0 
25.0 
507.0 
673.0 
199.0 
1 379.0 
410.3 
2 125.0 
5 261.0 
11 051.5 
1 540.0 
75.0 
1 615.0 
9 893.8 
12 666.5 
1.3 
62.6 
3.8 
219.8 
101 
2 932.4 
9 957.6 
12 890.0 
100 
100 
- 
50 
44 
- 
100 
100 
89 
- 
33 
2 
78 
33 
28 
77 
15 
4 
5 
2 
11 
3 
17 
42 
87 
12 
1 
13 
100 
- 
2 
102 
\a MAP (IFAD financing) will provide matching grants up to 20% of the investment cost. 
Table 11. Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies 
Repubic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme 
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies 
(USD '000) 
Enabling Policy, 
Institutions and 
Services 
 I. Investment Costs 
  A. Goods, Equipment and Materials 
  Goods, Equipment and Materials 
  B. Technical Assistance and Studies 
International TA 
  National TA 
  Studies 
  Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies 
  C. Training and Workshops 
  Training and workshops 
  D. Innovation Investments /a 
  E. SDFC Financing 
  Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
  A. Salaries and Allowances 
  B. Operational Expenses 
  Total Recurrent Costs 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
  Taxes 
  Foreign Exchange 
_________________________________ 
\a MAP (IFAD financing) will provide matching grants up to 20% of the investment cost. 
Knowledge 
Climate 
and 
Input 
Smart 
Market 
Programme 
Technology 
Supply 
Production 
Connection 
Management 
Total 
577.8 
1 165.4 
- 
150.8 
25.3 
1 919.4 
474.4 
126.1 
126.1 
726.6 
- 
536.5 
- 
536.5 
67.7 
93.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 372.1 
1 795.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
33.8 
- 
- 
33.8 
153.1 
700.0 
5 261.0 
6 147.9 
- 
- 
- 
11.3 
4.2 
- 
15.4 
45.4 
1 425.0 
- 
- 
45.3 
83.6 
519.5 
712.0 
209.7 
128.9 
1 441.2 
72.5 
432.1 
- 
- 
2 125.0 
5 261.0 
1 636.6 
226.7 
11 178.6 
- 
- 
- 
1 627.6 
1 627.6 
83.8 
83.8 
1 711.4 
1 711.4 
1 372.1 
1 795.3 
6 147.9 
1 636.6 
1 938.1 
12 890.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 115.2 
1 165.4 
5 994.8 
1 587.1 
95.1 
9 957.6 
Table 12. Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme 
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies 
(USD '000) 
  A. Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services 
  Knowledge and Technology 
Input Supply 
  Subtotal Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services 
  B. Climate Smart Production 
  C. Market Connection 
  D. Programme Management 
  Total PROJECT COSTS 
Totals Including Contingencies 
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
Total 
756.5 
1 297.8 
2 054.3 
16.7 
213.0 
414.4 
392.0 
135.7 
527.7 
659.3 
388.1 
359.5 
101.6 
139.1 
240.7 
76.9 
109.9 
186.8 
45.3 
112.7 
157.9 
1 372.1 
1 795.3 
3 167.4 
2 056.4 
1 710.0 
1 705.6 
6 147.9 
601.8 
386.8 
243.8 
365.0 
190.0 
412.4 
1 636.6 
1 938.1 
2 698.4 
1 934.6 
3 285.6 
2 505.6 
2 465.8 
12 890.0 
Table 13. Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies 
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
I. 
Introduction 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The  goal  of  the  MAP  is  to  sustainably  increase  the  incomes,  food  security  and 
nutrition status of small farmer households. The programme’s development objective 
to support an  enabling environment for sustainable and climate-smart agricultural 
development  through  strengthened  institutional  support,  improved  agricultural 
productivity and better access to markets and financing resources for small farmer 
households. 
The  programme  will  be  nationwide  in  scope  covering  all  19  atolls,  21  regions 
comprising  188  inhabited  islands  of  these  98  are  inhabited  where  agriculture  is 
practised  on  around  800  registered  hectares,  by  approximately  7,800  registered 
farmers of whom 53% are female and 47% male farmers. In addition, there is around 
30% (2,370) non registered farmers, cultivating an estimated 240 hectares. Out of 
the  total  10,170  farmers  the  programme’s  target  is  6,000  of  whom  at  least  53% 
should be women, and totalling to 31,800 household members. Also belonging to the 
programme area is 50 uninhabited islands leased for commercial agriculture, with a 
total  of  956  hectares  of  land  of  which  24 islands  are  actively  doing  agriculture  on 
582 hectares of land. The quantifiable tangible benefits will be mainly derived from 
Component  2:  Climate  Smart  Production,  which  will  initially  focus  on  region  1-3, 
covering  3  atolls  and  40  inhabited  islands.  Of  these,  26  are  inhabited  agriculture 
islands with 280 hectares registered land, cultivated by 1,825 registered farmers of 
whom 56% are women and 44% men. In addition, there is around 30% (545) non 
registered farmers, cultivating an estimated 85 hectares. Within this production area 
there  are  6  active  commercial  islands  cultivating  a  total  of  250  hectares.  The 
programme’s  target  for  Component  2  are  2,150  farming  households  totalling  to 
13,975 persons. 
The  programme  will  have  a  three-pronged  approach  to  reach  its  development 
objective.  On  one  side,  the  programme,  through  Component  1,  will  enhance  the 
capacities of service providers (public and private institutions) in order to strengthen 
their performance and their interactions. Main benefits will include an increase and 
strengthening  of  the  commercial  agreements  between  supported  smallholder 
household farmers and MACO, as well as generation and transfer of new/ improved 
technologies or practices.1 This group of interventions is expected to cost about 25 
per  cent  of  the  programme’s  investment.  With  almost  half  of  contribution  (48  per 
cent  of  programme’s  investment),  the  MAP  will  aim  to  enhance  productivity  and 
efficiency of targeted farming households through their increased access to financial 
services  and  adoption  of  new/improved  technologies/practices,  with  particular 
attention to women and youth. The MAP will provide stimulus in the form of matching 
grants to leverage financing from the SDFC and the private sector towards energy 
efficient and climate change adaptation technologies (about 1,720 loans).2 Finally, 
through the promotion of market infrastructure, including refrigerated cargo vessels 
(about 13 per cent of the investment), the programme will contribute to products’ 
transportation and handling efficiency. The models presented in the economic and 
financial analysis are aiming to demonstrate how the programme interventions will 
1 The outreach is mostly determined by Component 2’s interventions. Beneficiaries 
include 2,150 farming households investing in improved and diversified production 
through loans from the SDFC and matching grants provided by the programme, and 
3,850 farming households benefitting from inclusive workshops/ trainings and demo 
plots. Adoption rate is about 80%.  
2 Under the assumption that an weighted average loan size is about USD 6,870, the 
financing from the SDFC (min USD 5 million) revolved 2-3 times will be able to generate 
about 1,720 loans (at an adoption factor of 80% of targeted 2,150 farming households).  
1 
generate benefits to the target group, and the potential in employment generation, 
as well as to assess opportunities for and constraints to economic development and 
associated risks. They are for demonstration purposes only and are used as building 
blocks for the MAP approach.  
II.  Programme Benefits 
4. 
5. 
The programme is expected to lead to increased income of farming households and 
commercial agricultural islands (CAI). Benefits would accrue from: (i) increased farm 
productivity and reduction of production costs due to the adoption of climate smart 
technologies;  (ii)  reduced  losses  during  harvesting;  (iii)  a  subsequent  increased 
proportion of marketed farm produce; (iv) improved quality and safety of agricultural 
and food products, thus attracting higher prices as a result of the demand by buyers 
for more reliable outputs and in increased sales and net margins; (v) increased farm 
income through diversification from sweet potato/banana production to higher value 
crops;  (vi)  increased  employment  opportunities  for  hired  labour;  (vii)  reduced 
imports  and  improved  balance  of  payments;  and  (viii)  increased  revenues  for  the 
government as a result of increased volume of taxable production (GST). Principal 
increases  in  incomes  would  be  largely  dependent  on  farmers  accessing  dedicated 
credit lines from the SDFC and benefiting of capacity development interventions from 
the programme (including technology and knowledge generation and transfer). This 
will  generally  contribute  to  create  a  favourable  economic  environment  in  the 
programme  area,  encouraging  farmers  to  produce  more  competitive  products  and 
establish stronger commercial linkages.  
This  Annex  presents  the  Economic  and  Financial  Analysis  (EFA)  of  MAP’s 
interventions through the use of indicative activity models. The analysis builds upon 
the  precautionary  principle,  accounting  for  programme  benefits  in  a  realistic  and 
conservative manner. A financial analysis is carried out to present the scenarios with 
and  without  programme  interventions.  The  key-indicators  used  to  carry  out  the 
analysis are the Net Present Values (NPVs), Financial and Economic Internal Rate of 
Return (FIRR – EIRR), benefit-cost ratios (B/C), switching values for both benefits 
and  costs  and  the  financial  return  on  labour.  The  aggregation  of  the  models  at 
programme level will allow also estimating the potential for incremental employment 
generation.  
III.  Financial Analysis 
6. 
7. 
The primary objective of the financial analysis is to determine the financial viability 
and incentives for the programme’s target group as a result of their engagement in 
programme activities, and hence to examine programme’s impacts on family labour, 
financial flow and household incomes.  
The economic activities selected for the analysis correspond to the ones with good 
adoption  potential  by  farming  households  in  the  programme  area.  The  analysis 
presents two sets of models:  
(i) 
A first set represents the crop production (100m2) and includes: an open 
field  sweet  potato  with  drip  fertigation,  an  open  field  banana  with  drip 
fertigation,  an  open  field  papaya  with  hydroponic,  a  greenhouse  with 
hydroponic  for  cucumber  and  a  closed  vertical  system  for  lettuce.  All 
incremental benefits have been estimated in comparison with open field 
sweet potato and banana production with some supplementary irrigation.  
(ii)  A  second  set  represents  four  farm  models  based  on  the  above  crop 
production models by applying the related cropping pattern based on a 
typical size and structure existing in the programme area (500m2). 
2 
8. 
9. 
The above sets of models were used as building blocks for the economic evaluation 
of the entire programme once aggregated for the phasing of target beneficiaries. All 
the technical assumptions within the models have been elaborated jointly with the 
design  team  members  and  on  the  basis  of  field  surveys,  national  statistics, 
international and national expert consultation. 
It is expected that the programme will directly reach around 6,000 households, for 
an  estimated  total  of  31,800  individual  household  members.  These  include  1,720 
HHs  benefitting  of  the  full  range  of  programme’s  interventions  (loans/matching 
grants,  training,  market  infrastructure)  plus  about  4,280  HHs  benefiting  of  only 
programme’s capacity building and market access interventions, and some 2,460 full 
time  equivalent  incremental  jobs  created  by  the  farmers’  incremental  economic 
activities3.  Overall,  the  analysis  illustrates  the  consolidated  benefits  generated  by 
the  programme’s  three  investment  components  and  corresponding  four  sub-
components. 
Key Assumptions 
10.  The parameters for the models are based on information gathered during the design 
mission: interactions  with  farmers  and  managers  of  CAIs,  information  from  donor 
agencies  and  development  partners,  the  MOFMRA,  the  ongoing  IFAD-funded 
projects, other IFI funded projects and mission’s estimates. In particular, information 
on  labour  and  input  requirements  for  various  operations,  capital  costs,  prevailing 
wages,  yields,  farm  gate  and  market  prices  of  commodities,  input  and  farm-to-
market  transportation  costs  were  collected.  Conservative  assumptions  were  made 
both for inputs and outputs, and to take into account possible risks. 
11.  Prices. The adopted numerate for the EFA is the domestic price level expressed in 
local currency unit. The financial prices for programme inputs and products represent 
average  market  prices  and  were  collected  in  the  field  during  the  design  mission 
(November  2019).  Information  on  labour  requirements  for  various  production 
models, prevailing wage rates, yields, input use, farm gate and market prices of the 
products, input prices were collected. Prices used represent estimates of the average 
seasonal prices, and the analysis was carried out using nominal constant prices. A 
list of prices used in the analysis is available in the EFA excel files (Working Paper 
on EFA in Project File).4  
12.  Exchange  rate.  The  exchange  rate  was  used  in  the  analysis  is  set  at  the  rate 
prevailing at the end of the design mission or USD 1 = MVR 15.35.5 
13. 
Internal rate of return. An internal rate of return (IRR) of 7%6 has been used as 
a discount rate for the financial analysis to assess the viability and robustness of the 
investments at farm level. The selection criterion for the IRR is to accept all projects 
for  which  the  IRR  is  above  the  opportunity  cost  of  capital.  Using  the  IRR  as  the 
measure, the models’ sensitivity to the changes in parameters can be assessed by 
3 Actually, these numbers are higher but a conservative approach for outreach indicators 
has been adopted by applying an 80% adoption factor. 
4 “MAP Fin Analysis” and “MAP-Econ Analysis” for the financial and economic analyses 
respectively.  
5 Maldives Monetary Authority (MMA), 29 November 2019.  
6 The IRR is a measure of the project’s worth that in this case compares the return on 
the investment with the best alternative use of the funds, i.e. current long-term deposits of 5%. 
However, a more conservative approach has been applied, and a refinancing rate of the MMA (latest 
update as of 29 November 2019) was used for the financial analysis. 
3 
varying the costs and revenues. The same rate was applied for the social opportunity 
costs of capital7.   
14.  Labour. Family labour has been valued only in economic analysis. An average hired 
unskilled labour market price of MVR 650 adjusted by local unemployment rate of 
6% was applied to calculate its economic value8. 
15.  Land Taxes. There is no land tax in Maldives. 
16. 
Investment and seasonal loans. All farm models used in the EFA include the use 
of  a  loan  at  prevailing  conditions  in  the  programme  area  from  the  SDFC,  with  a 
6 per cent interest rate and a two- to three-year duration (in some cases with one-
year grace period). It was also assumed that farmers would borrow for agricultural 
inputs equal to a 3-month provision of operating costs for 6 months at 6 per cent. 
These are prevailing conditions in the programme area.     
17.  More details on production and financial parameters for the models are found in the 
analysis excel tables in the EFA Project files. 
Crop production models 
18.  All models presented below are calculated under the assumption of a trend towards 
diversification  from  sweet  potato/banana  production  in  open  field  with  some 
supplementary  irrigation.  Main  investments  are  represented  by  drip  fertigation, 
green houses with hydroponic systems, closed vertical systems, grafted trees for the 
establishment of orchards and other closed facilities. All crop models are based on a 
100m2  production  plot.  The  main  benefits  and  outcomes  of  the  investments  are 
presented below in Table 1, while the aggregation for the entire programme is based 
on  a  potential  demand  for  loans  (summarized  later,  in  Section IV  of  this  Annex 
(IV. Aggregation of MAP benefit streams)). 
Table 1. Summary of Financial Crop Production Models (100m2) 
Item 
Returns to labour, MVR 
Returns  to  HH  labour, 
MVR 
NPV @7%, MVR 
IRR, % 
NPVb, MVR 
NPVc, MVR 
B/C ratio 
Switching 
Benefits, % 
Switching  values  Costs, 
% 
values 
Sweet 
potato 
469 
Banan
a 
501 
Papay
a 
875 
Cucumbe
r 
540 
Letter 
554 
1,875  
1,170  
2,333  
23,039  
20,851  
14,948  
13% 
4,360  
9% 
38,672  
16% 
1,112,267  
64% 
984,043  
73% 
323,923  
202,14
7  
303,22
1  
7,942,332  
204,748  
1.6 
132,14
1  
1.5 
161,78
4  
1.9 
6,477,868  
1.2 
5,995,68
2  
4,670,30
8  
1.3 
-37% 
-35% 
-47% 
-18% 
-22% 
58% 
53% 
87% 
23% 
28% 
7 Inflation was 0.1% in 2019, while it was negative in the previous year, so no adjustment was made to account 
for this, and the refinancing rate of the MMA was applied for the social cost of capital.  
8 Current market price for unskilled labour is between MVR 500 to MVR 750, with average of MVR 650 
4 
19.  Open field sweet potato – upgrading from some supplementary irrigation to 
drip fertigation. The main increase in costs is due to the investment in water tank 
collection, drip irrigation, photovoltaic system and to raised operating costs, such as 
improved  seeds,  organic  fertilizers,  water  Ph  control  and  bio  control  agents.  The 
prevailing yield of sweet potato in the Without Project (WOP) scenario corresponds 
to the lower middle productivity of 3kg/m2 per cycle, 3 cycles per year, out of which 
70%  as  1st  grade.  For  the  With  Project  (WP)  scenario  the  sweet  potato  yield 
corresponds  to  the  upper  middle  average  yield  -  4kg/m2  per  cycle,  3  cycles  per 
annum, 90% of produce as 1st grade. Operating costs amount MVR 19,327 (about 
USD 1,259),  and  net  incremental  benefits  compared  to  the  WOP  scenario  are 
MVR 4,668 (USD 304)  at  full  implementation,  from  the  second  year  onwards.  The 
model  presents  positive  returns.  The  cash-flow  over  the  period  of  twenty  years, 
discounted at 7%, produces an NPV of MVR 14,948 (USD 974) with a FIRR of 13% 
and B/C ratio equal to 1.6.  
20.  Open field banana – upgrading from some supplementary irrigation to drip 
fertigation. This model is a slight variation of the previous, with banana production 
instead  of  sweet  potato.  The  prevailing  yield  of  banana  in  the  WOP  scenario  is 
3kg/m2 per cycle, 1 cycle per year, out of which 70% as 1st grade. For WP scenario 
the banana yield corresponds to 8kg/m2 per cycle, 1 cycle per annum with 90% of 
produce  as  1st  grade.  Operating  costs  amount  MVR 12,581  (about  USD 820),  and 
net incremental benefits compared to the WOP scenario are MVR 4,079 (USD 266) 
at  full  implementation,  from  the  second  year  onwards.  The  model  shows  positive 
returns. The cash-flow over the period of twenty years, discounted at 7%, produces 
an NPV of MVR 4,360 (USD 284) with a FIRR of 9% and B/C ratio equal to 1.5.  
21.  Open  field  papaya  –  upgrading  from  some  supplementary  irrigation  to 
hydroponic system. The main increase in costs is due to the investment in water 
tank  collection,  hydroponic  system,  photovoltaic  system  and  to  raised  operating 
costs,  such  as  improved  seedlings,  organic  fertilizers,  water  Ph  control  and  bio 
control agents. The yield of papaya in the WOP scenario is 7.5 kg/m2 per cycle, 1 
cycle per year, out of which 70% as 1st grade. For the WP scenario the papaya yield 
is 20kg/m2 per cycle, 1 cycle per annum, 90% of produce as 1st grade. Operating 
costs  amount  MVR 15,401  (about  USD 1,003),  and  net  incremental  benefits 
compared to the WOP scenario are MVR 9,546 (USD 1,784) at full implementation, 
from the second year onwards. The model presents positive returns. The cash-flow 
over the period of twenty years, discounted at 7%, produces an NPV of MVR 38,672 
(USD 2,519) with a FIRR of 16% and B/C ratio equal to 1.9.  
22.  Open field cucumber – upgrading from some supplementary irrigation to a 
green house with hydroponic system. The main increase in costs is due to the 
investment  in  water  tank  collection,  movable  planting  trays,  hydroponic  system, 
photovoltaic  system,  ventilation  totalling  to  about  MVR 348,445  (USD 22,700)  as 
well  as  to  the  raised  operating  costs,  such  as  improved  seeds,  organic  fertilizers, 
water Ph control and bio control agents. The yield of cucumber in the WOP scenario 
is 6 kg/m2 per cycle, 5 cycles per year, out of which 70% as 1st grade. For the WP 
scenario, the cucumber yield is 30kg/m2 per cycle, 8.5 cycles per annum, 90% of 
produce  as  1st  grade.  Operating  costs  amount  MVR 611,465  (about  USD 39,835), 
and  net 
scenario  are 
MVR 135,729 (USD 8,842)  at  full  implementation,  from  the  second  year  onwards. 
The model shows positive returns. The cash-flow over the period of twenty years, 
discounted at 7%, produces an NPV of MVR 1,112,267 (USD 72,460) with a FIRR of 
64% and B/C ratio equal to 1.2. 
incremental  benefits 
the  WOP 
compared 
to 
23.  Open  field  lettuce  –  upgrading  to  closed  vertical  with  hydroponic  system. 
This  model  is  a  slight  variation  of  the  previous,  with lettuce  production  instead  of 
cucumber, which also has a significant potential for sale. The main investment is a 
5 
complete closed vertical hydroponic system (25m2 translate to 100 m2 production 
area) plus 10 m2 packaging, for a total amount of MVR 277,221 (USD 18,060). The 
yield of lettuce in the WOP scenario is 1.5 kg/m2 per cycle, 6 cycles per year, out of 
which 70% as 1st grade. For the WP scenario the cucumber yield is 3.75 kg/m2 per 
cycle, 22 cycles per annum, 90% of produce as 1st grade. Operating costs amount 
MVR 440,844  (about  USD 28,719),  and  net  incremental  benefits  compared  to  the 
WOP scenario are MVR 117,343 (USD 7,645) at full implementation, from the second 
year onwards. The model presents positive returns. The cash-flow over the period of 
twenty  years,  discounted  at  7%,  produces  an  NPV  of  MVR 984,043  (USD 64,107) 
with a FIRR of 73% and B/C ratio equal to 1.3.  
Farm Models 
24.  Key features of the farm models are presented in Table 2. The above crop production 
models were scaled up to match the size of land of the potential beneficiaries.  
Table 2. Summary of Financial Farm Models 
Parameter/Indicator 
Key  assets  (production 
base) 
Key 
investment/improvement 
Farm Models 
Improved 
sweet  potato 
and 
banana 
production 
500m2  (WP  -
for 
300m2 
and 
potato 
for 
200m2 
banana) 
Transfer 
from 
open  field  with 
some  irrigation 
to  open  field 
with 
drip 
fertigation 
system 
(investment  in 
water 
tank 
collection,  drip 
irrigation, 
photovoltaic 
system) 
Improved 
sweet  potato 
and 
diversification 
to papaya 
500m2  (WP  -
for 
300m2 
and 
potato 
for 
200m2 
papaya) 
Transfer 
from 
open  field  with 
some  irrigation 
to  open  field 
with 
hydroponic 
system 
(investment  in 
water 
tank 
collection,  drip 
and hydroponic 
systems, 
photovoltaic 
system) 
Improved sweet 
potato 
and 
diversification 
to cucumber 
Improved 
potato 
diversification 
lettuce 
sweet 
and 
to 
500m2  (WP  - 
for 
400m2 
and 
potato 
for 
100m2 
cucumber) 
Transfer 
from 
open  field  with 
some  irrigation 
to  green  house 
with  hydroponic 
system 
(investment 
water 
collection, 
moveable 
plating 
trays 
and  hydroponic 
irrigation 
system, 
photovoltaic 
systems, 
ventilation) 
in 
tank 
(WP 
500m2 
- 
400m2  for  potato 
and  100m2 
for 
lettuce) 
in 
closed 
from 
Transfer 
open 
field  with 
some  irrigation  to 
closed 
vertical 
system 
(investment 
complete 
vertical 
hydroponic 
system 
(multistore,  25m2 
translate  to  100 
production 
m2 
in  water 
area), 
tank 
collection, 
hydroponic 
irrigation  system, 
photovoltaic 
systems, 
ventilation) 
3.6t  of  sw  potato 
of 
and 
0.3t 
banana/4.8t 
of 
potato  and  8.25t 
of cucumber 
Productivity/production 
(WOP/WP) 
incremental 
Total 
investments (US$) 
of which: 
 - Loan 
sw 
of 
2.7t 
potato and 0.6t 
of  banana/3.6t 
of  potato  and 
1.6t of banana 
sw 
of 
2.7t 
potato and 0.6t 
of  banana/3.6t 
of  potato  and 
4t of papaya 
sw 
of 
3.6t 
potato  and  0.3t 
of  banana/4.8t 
of  potato  and 
25.5t 
of 
cucumber 
12,025  
14,965  
32,320  
27,680  
 - Beneficiary 
contribution 
4,810  
6,013  
12,928  
11,072  
16,160  
13,840  
5,986  
7,483  
6 
 - Matching grant 
On-farm 
Use of labour (WOP/WP), 
pd 
Total  number  of  direct 
beneficiaries 
of whom: 
 - 
labour/labourers 
Return 
US$/day 
Incremental 
benefits 
development (US$) 
NPV (US$) 
annual 
full 
labour, 
hired 
to 
at 
1,203  
66/100 
1,497  
66/104 
3,232  
78/352 
2,768  
78/322 
2 HH 
2 HH 
4 HH 
4 HH 
1 person 
1 person 
3 persons 
3 persons 
30.1 
37.6 
33.9 
34.4 
1,421  
2,327  
10,030  
9,175  
IRR 
B/C ratio 
Switching values Benefits  -36% 
57% 
Switching values Costs 
3,819  
11.8% 
1.6 
10,667  
17.6% 
1.7 
-41% 
69% 
76,056  
45.0% 
1.3 
-21% 
27% 
71,331  
49.6% 
1.3 
-25% 
33% 
25.  Summary.  The  main  results  of  the  financial  analysis  include:  (i) a  significant 
increase  in  gross  and  net  returns  from  each  model  compared  with  and  without-
project situation: (ii) sufficient benefit/cost ratios illustrating the worthiness of the 
investments. The respective NPVs range from USD 3,812 to USD 76,056, while the 
IRRs  from  12%  to  50%,  which  are  comparable  to  those  estimated  for  similar 
operations in the region. The analysis shows that the models are more sensitive to 
changes  in  both  productivity  and  price  assumptions  than  they  are  to  variations  in 
investment and operating costs.  
26.  Sensitivity. While the official rate of inflation is rather stable, the sensitivity analysis 
shows that all models would remain attractive even if costs increase up to 20%. With 
regard to delays in implementation, the models show a more limited profitability. 
It is equally important to dedicate sufficient attention to the capacity development 
interventions,  as  a  way  to  support  the  farmers’  decisions  to  diversify  to  more 
innovative and higher value crops.  
27.  The  indicative  models  show  a  positive  return  on  labour  (both,  hired  and  family 
labour). Favourable cash flows from the possible programme financed investments 
indicated that the improvements in incomes at the farm level would be sufficient to 
ensure uptake of the proposed activities. Also, a beneficiary’s contribution is likely 
to translate into a high degree of economic attractiveness. 
IV.  Economic Analysis 
ENPV = USD 9.1 million; ERR = 12.9% (base-case scenario) 
28.  The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to examine the overall programme 
viability;  (ii)  to  assess  the  programme’s  impact  and  the  overall  economic  rate  of 
return;  and  (iii)  to  perform  sensitivity  analyses  upon  risks  and  variables  affecting 
programme’s results.  
29.  Key Assumptions. Production models considered in the financial analysis are used 
as  building  blocks  for  determining  the  viability  of  the  whole  programme,  once 
addressing for market distortion and opportunity costs for inputs and outputs. The 
analysis  identifies  the  quantifiable  benefits  that  relate  directly  to  the  activities 
undertaken following implementation of the programme components, or that can be 
justifiable attributed to the programme’s implementation.  
7 
30.  The economic analysis of the programme hinges on the following assumptions: (i) 
programme life has been assumed for 20 years in light of investments lifecycle; (ii) 
programme inputs and outputs are valued at their economic parity prices; (iii) the 
financial discount rate used for the analysis is 7%, the same as the refinancing rate 
of the MMA (latest update 29 November 2019), and the same rate is used for the 
economic  discount;  (iv)  the  opportunity  cost  of  rural  labour  was  estimated 
considering  the  official  unemployment  rate  (6%),  as  such  the  shadow  wage  rate 
factor  is  equal  to  0.94,  or  a  daily  wage  of  MVR 611  (US$ 39.8);  (v)  the  shadow 
exchange rate factor (SERF) is 1.04 and the shadow exchange rate (SER), estimated 
upon  international  trade  data,  is  equal  to  MVR 16.02  per  USD 1.0;  (vi)  it  was 
assumed that at least 80 percent of the investments would achieve the estimated 
returns, i.e. an 80% success rate was applied to the models; and (vii) financing flows 
have  not  been  undertaken  in  the  calculations  as  they  are  already  reflected  in  the 
production costs.  
23.  Programme Economic Costs. The incremental costs in economic prices have been 
calculated  by  the  removal  of  price  contingencies  and  taxes/duties.  There  are  no 
replacement costs after the MAP completion, however USD 100 thousand have been 
allocated  for  support  to  the  ARC  to  continue  research  activities  started  under  the 
MAP. O&M costs have been counted in the calculation of the net incremental benefits 
of  the  production  models.  The  total  economic  cost  of  the  programme  amounts  to 
about USD 6.87 million (equivalent to approximately MVR 110 million).  
24.  Benefits Estimation. The illustrative models described above have been used for 
the calculation of the overall benefit stream of the various investment models above, 
on the basis of economic prices. The models’ specific benefits are then aggregated 
following the inclusion phasing foreseen for targeted farming households presented 
in Table 3 below. 
Table 3. Phasing of participating beneficiary farming households 
PY1 
PY2 
PY4 
PY3 
PY5 
Total 
field  with  hydroponic 
Model 
Improved  sweet  potato  and 
banana model 
Open 
papaya model 
Green  house  with  hydroponic 
cucumber model 
Closed vertical with hydroponic 
lettuce model 
Total* 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
50 
50 
30 
200 
250 
150 
650 
200 
250 
200 
700 
60 
90 
40 
220 
25 
155 
50 
510 
50 
640 
25 
415 
150 
1720 
 *1,720 is 80% of targeted 2,150 farming households 
Results of the Analysis 
25.  Overall  Estimated  Return  of  the  Proposed  Programme.  The  programme  is  a 
technically  and  economically  viable  investment  to  the  economy  as  a  whole.  The 
programme’s economic NPV of the net benefit stream, discounted at 7%, is USD 9.1 
million producing an economic rate of return of 13%, for the base case scenario. The 
summary of economic analysis is presented in Table 6. The overview of the economic 
and financial analysis is presented in Figure 1 and Figure 2.  
26.  Sensitivity  Analysis.  Sensitivity  analysis  assessed  the  effect  of  variations  in 
benefits and costs and for various lags in the realisation of benefits. The results are 
presented in Table 4. A fall in total programme benefits by 10% would not affect the 
profitability of the operation. A fall by 20% would reduce the EIRR to 11.6% (10.7% 
in case of 30% drop in benefits). An increase in total costs does not seem to affect 
8 
much  the  profitability  of  the  programme.  Under  the  assumption  of  no  increase  of 
programme  costs,  the  operation  is  profitable  even  with  a  two-year  delay  in 
implementation and realization of benefits (ERR equals 10.8%).  
Table 4. Sensitivity Analysis 
27.  Risk  Analysis.  The  main  risk  of  the  programme  is  associated  with  the  delayed 
adoption of proposed technologies and subsequent disbursement of the loans, which 
represent 70% of the programme’s investment. The quality of production will have 
to  increase  in  order  to  gain  place  in  diverse  local  markets.  Investing  in  capacity 
development and technical assistance is strategic for the region, and it is important 
that the programme takes serious monitoring over MACO supposed to deliver inputs 
and  capacity  building  to  suppliers.  The  programme  has  a  tremendous  opportunity 
also  for  the  environmental  sustainability  of  water  through  more  efficient  irrigation 
systems,  accompanying  the  farming  households  in  selecting  crops  with  high 
comparative advantages. Other risks of the programme include lack of capacity in 
implementing agencies and beneficiaries to effectively participate in the programme 
may result in the delay of realization of benefits. Despite various benefits were not 
accounted for in the analysis (such as part of the investment in cold storages and 
transportation means), the programme has a tiny margin of error and requires an 
attentive implementation.  
Table 5. Risk Analysis 
∆% 
Link with the risk matrix 
Base scenario 
Programme benefits 
Programme 
benefits 
-10% 
-30% 
of 
Combination 
risks 
affecting  output  prices, 
productivity  and  adoption 
rates 
Programme costs 
10% 
Increase of goods costs 
Programme costs 
20% 
1 year lag in ben. 
2 years lag in ben. 
Risks  affecting  adoption 
rates 
low 
and 
implementation capacity 
EIR
R 
12.9
% 
12.3
% 
10.7
% 
12.4
% 
11.8
% 
11.9
% 
10.8
% 
9 
+10%+20%+50%+10%+20%-10%-20%- 30%1 year2 yearsERR12.9%12.4%11.8%10.4%13.5%14.0%12.3%11.6%10.7%11.9%10.8%ENPV (USD mln)9.18.57.85.810.712.27.66.04.47.15.3Sensitivity Analysis( 20-year period)Base caseCosts IncreaseIncrease of BenefitsDecrease of BenefitsDelay of Benefits 
Table 6. MAP - ECONOMIC Net Benefit stream  
*to avoid double counting 
after the MAP completion, USD100 thousand have been allocated to support the ARC to continue work started under the MAP. 
10 
Programme YearsMillion USD1234567891011121314151617181920Benefit Streams:Production benefits-      1.8-   4.8-   5.0-   1.0-   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   3.9   Total Benefits0.0-1.8-4.8-5.0-1.03.93.93.93.93.93.93.93.93.93.93.93.93.93.93.9InvestmentsProjgramme Economic Cost (excluding loans*)2.81.31.30.80.70.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.1Total Investments2.81.31.30.80.70.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.10.1Incremental Net Benefits-2.8-3.1-6.1-5.8-1.73.83.83.83.83.83.83.83.83.83.83.83.83.83.83.8NPV @7% (USD mln)9.1       ERR12.9% 
Figure 1. Overview of MAP’s Financial and Economic Analysis 
11 
MAP (loans&grants)Beneficiary Contrib. TotalWithout ProjectW. Project -Full DvtIncrementalImproved sweet potato and banana model6,0136,01312,0251,6703,0911,4210.112%3,81930.11,581Open field with hydroponic papaya model7,4837,48314,9651,6703,9972,3270.218%10,66737.62,045Green house with hydroponic cucumber model16,16016,16032,3201,90711,93710,0300.345%76,05633.96,108Closed vertical with hydroponic lettuce model13,84013,84027,6801,90711,0829,1750.350%71,33134.45,670TOTAL Costs12.89m US$Project Management1.94m US$Base Costs12.67m US$Beneficiaries (direct)390006000HHsBeneficiaries (including indirect)39000people6000HHsCost per beneficiary                    331 US$/person                 2,148 US$/HHsm USD3.17m USD6.15m USD1.6480%Components and Cost (USD million)Outcomes and IndicatorsRepublic of Maldives: Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP)  CATEGORYEstimated Investment Costs (US$)Annual Net Benefits (US$)Annual Inc. net benefits per 1US$ of Inv.IRR (%)NPV (US$)Return to labour, US$/dayReturn to family labour, US$/dayFINANCIAL ANALYSISComponent 3. Market ConnectionProduction decisions respond to market opportunities1) At least 4 cold storages established under MACO management; 2) demonstration plots established for at least 4 technologies (at least 10 crops) in MACO; 3) at least 5 cold  storages installed on transportation vessels; 4) at least 15 new long-term supply contracts operational.Component 1.  Enabling Policy, Institutions and ServicesStrengthened institutional capacity of service providers1) laboratory upgraded in ARDC; 2) demonstration plots established for at least new and improved 75 technologies  in ARC;  3) at least 10 researches conducted; 3) AICT platform established and functioning; 4) MGAP protocols developed; 5) 52 linkage farmers trained for provision of extension services; 6) MACO is funcltioning and providing inputs to at least 6,000 farming households.Component 2. Climate Smart ProductionBetter/New technologies, inputs adopted and productivity improved1) At least 2,150 farming households will be trained in modern technologies; 2) at least 2,150 farming households will at least double their production  and incomes through  SDFC's loans and matching grants provided by the MAP; 3) at least 5 financial products will be developed; PROJECT COSTS AND INDICATORS FOR LOGFRAMEAdoption rates 
12 
Values in '000 USDNet Inc. Benefits Incr. CostsNet Cash Flow PY102751-2751PY2-17551316-3071PY3-47801270-6050PY4-5007815-5822PY5-1029715-1743PY639491003849PY739491003849PY839491003849PY939491003849PY1039491003849PY1139491003849PY1239491003849PY1339491003849PY1439491003849PY1539491003849PY1639491003849PY1739491003849PY1839491003849PY1939491003849PY2039491003849NPV ('000 USD)9,118EIRR12.9%ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
Figure 2. MAP projected costs and benefits flows  
13 
NPV @ 7%9.1 m USD01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,0007,0008,0009,00010,000-20000-15000-10000-50000500010000150002000025000PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Net Inc. BenefitsIncr. CostsCash FlowNPV ('000 USD)Poly. (Cash Flow ) 
List of Appendices 
Table 1: Pricing of Commodities 
Table 2: Shadow Exchange Rate 
Table 3: Economic and Financial Prices 
Table 4: Summary of Farm Models 
Table 5: Staple production (sweet potato, WP open field with drip fertigation) - 100 m2 
Table 6: Banana production (WP open field with drip fertigation system) - 100 m2 
Table 7: Papaya production (WP greenhouse with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
Table 8: Cucumber production (WP greenhouse with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
Table 9: Lettuce production (WP closed vertical with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
Table 10: Farm Model (WP improved sweet potato and banana) - 500 m2 
Table 11: Farm Model (WP improved sw potato and diversification to papaya) - 500 m2 
Table 12: Farm Model (WP improved sweet potato and diversification to cucumber) - 500 m2 
Table 13. Farm Model (WP improved sw potato and diversification to lettuce) - 500 m2 
Table 14. Phasing of farming households 
Table 15. Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies 
Table 16. Project Economic Return 
Table 17. Sensitivity 
Table 18. Summary 
Table 19: Pricing of Commodities 
Table 20: Shadow Exchange Rate 
Table 21: Economic and Financial Prices 
Table 22: Summary of Farm Models 
Table 23: Staple production (sweet potato, WP open field with drip fertigation) - 100 m2 
Table 24: Banana production (WP open field with drip fertigation system) - 100 m2 
Table 25: Papaya production (WP greenhouse with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
Table 26: Cucumber production (WP greenhouse with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
Table 27: Lettuce production (WP closed vertical with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
Table 28: Farm Model (WP improved sweet potato and banana) - 500 m2 
Table 29: Farm Model (WP improved sw potato and diversification to papaya) - 500 m2 
Table 30: Farm Model (WP improved sweet potato and diversification to cucumber) - 500 m2 
Table 31. Farm Model (WP improved sw potato and diversification to lettuce) - 500 m2 
14 
Table 1: Economic Pricing of Commodities 
15 
Table 2: Shadow Exchange rate factor 
Total Imports USD 
Total Exports USD 
OER MVR/USD 
Import duties 
Export taxes 
SER 
SERF 
         2 551.6  
            359.6  
              15.4  
                 -    
              16.0  
              1.04  
5.0% 
16 
Table 3: Economic and Financial Prices 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Economic and Financial Prices 
MVR:US$   ###  ### 
 SCF   ### 
Inputs CF 
Outputs 
CF 
0.96  
0.89  
Item 
Unit  Financial 
Economic   Financial 
 MVR  
 MVR  
US$ 
Economic  
 US$  
15.00 
15.00 
25.00 
30.00 
70.00 
26.00 
    13.41  
    13.41  
    22.35  
    26.82  
    62.58  
    23.24  
28.00 
4.76 
6.14 
4.60 
0.46 
0.31 
9.96 
23.25 
6.23 
22.02 
3.84 
2.01 
383.75 
383.75 
844.25 
76.75 
76.75 
12.27 
10.94 
6.00 
3.00 
2.00 
3.00 
40.00 
    26.82  
      4.56  
      5.88  
      4.41  
      0.44  
      0.30  
      9.54  
    22.27  
      5.97  
    21.09  
      3.68  
      1.93  
          -    
  367.54  
  367.54  
  808.58  
    73.51  
    73.51  
    11.75  
    10.47  
      5.75  
      2.87  
      1.92  
      2.87  
    38.31  
0.98 
0.98 
1.63 
1.95 
4.56 
1.69 
      0.84  
      0.84  
      1.39  
      1.67  
      3.91  
      1.45  
1.82 
0.31 
0.40 
0.30 
0.03 
0.02 
0.65 
1.51 
0.41 
      1.67  
      0.28  
      0.37  
      0.27  
      0.03  
      0.02  
      0.60  
      1.39  
      0.37  
1.43 
0.25 
0.13 
0.00 
25.00 
25.00 
55.00 
5.00 
5.00 
0.80 
0.71 
0.39 
0.20 
0.13 
0.20 
2.61 
      1.32  
      0.23  
      0.12  
          -    
    22.94  
    22.94  
    50.46  
      4.59  
      4.59  
      0.73  
      0.65  
      0.36  
      0.18  
      0.12  
      0.18  
      2.39  
2.60 
      2.49  
0.17 
      0.16  
4.60 
      4.41  
0.30 
      0.27  
8.60 
      8.24  
0.56 
      0.51  
Outputs 
  Coconut fresh 
Papaya 
  Banana 
  Cucumber 
Lettuce 
  Sweet potato 
Inputs 
  Hybrid coconut seedling 
  Hybrid papaya seedling 
  Hybrid banana seedling 
  Cucumber seeds 
Lettuce seeds 
  Sweet potato seeds 
  Nitrogenous fertilizer 
Potassic fertilizer 
  Urea 
Mix fertilizer (nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potasssium) 
  Organic fertilizer 
  Cow dung 
  Nutrients 
  Herbicides 
Pesticides 
  Biological pest control 
  Water Ph control 
  Detergent 
Petrol 
  Diesel 
Electricity 
Packing bag (0.5 kg) 
  Bag (50kg) 
  Carton box (7kg) 
Plastic crate (15kg) 
Transportation (low value crop) 
Transportation (medium value 
crop) 
Transportation (high value crop) 
nut 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
unit 
unit 
unit 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
lt 
lt 
c 
lt 
kg 
lt 
lt 
lt 
KWh 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
ton-
km 
ton-
km 
ton-
km 
17 
Labour 
  Family labour 
  Hired labour 
  Hired labour 
Land lease 
  Cost of hired labour 
  Salary per month, $ 
  Medical, $ 
  Food and lodging, $ 
  Air ticket per year, $ 
pd 
pd 
pm 
year-
100m2 
0.00 
728.95 
0.00 
47.49 
15000.00  #####  977.20 
611 
728.95 
    38.13    
    45.49    
  936.17  
10.00 
10.00 
0.65 
      0.62    
250 
1000 
100 
300 
25  days 
30  days 
30  days 
365  days 
10 
33.33 
3.33 
0.82 
47.49  $/day 
728.95  MVR/day 
18 
Table 4: Summary of Farm Models 
Farm Models 
Parameter/Indicator 
Key assets (production base) 
Key investment/improvement 
Improved 
sweet potato 
and banana 
production 
500m2 
Transfer from 
open field with 
some irrigation 
to open field 
with drip 
fertigation 
system 
(investment in 
water tank 
collection, drip 
irrigation, 
photovoltic 
system) 
Improved 
sweet potato 
and 
diversification 
to papaya 
500m2 
Transfer from 
open field with 
some irrigation 
to open field 
with 
hydroponic 
system 
(investment in 
water tank 
collection, drip 
and 
hydroponic 
systems, 
photovoltic 
system) 
Improved sweet 
potato and 
diversification to 
cucumber 
Improved sweet 
potato and 
diversification to 
lettuce 
500m2 
Transfer from 
open field with 
some irrigation 
to green house 
with hydroponic 
system 
(investment in 
water tank 
collection, 
moveable 
plating trays 
and hydroponic 
irrigation 
system, 
photovoltic 
systems, 
ventilation) 
500m2 
Transfer from open 
field with some 
irrigation to closed 
vertical system 
(investment in 
complete closed 
vertical hydroponic 
system (multistore, 
25m2 translate to 
100 m2 production 
area), in water tank 
collection, 
hydroponic 
irrigation system, 
photovoltic 
systems, 
ventilation) 
3.6t of sw potato 
and 0.3t of 
banana/4.8t of 
potato and 8.25t of 
cucumber 
Productivity/production 
(WOP/WP) 
Total incremental investments 
(000'US$) 
of which: 
 - Loan 
 - Beneficiary contribution 
 - Matching grant 
Use of labour (WOP/WP), pd 
of 
direct 
number 
Total 
beneficiaries 
of whom: 
 - On-farm hired 
labour/labourers 
Return to labour, US$/day 
Incremental annual benefits at 
full development (000'US$) 
NPV (000'US$) 
IRR 
2.7t of sw 
potato and 
0.6t of 
banana/3.6t of 
potato and 
1.6t of banana 
             11 
517  
2.7t of sw 
potato and 
0.6t of 
banana/3.6t of 
potato and 4t 
of papaya 
3.6t of sw 
potato and 0.3t 
of banana/4.8t 
of potato and 
25.5t of 
cucumber 
             14 
333  
               30 
955  
                     26 
511  
               6 
910  
               2 
303  
               2 
303  
               8 
600  
               2 
867  
               2 
867  
               18 
573  
                 6 
191  
                 6 
191  
78/352 
                     15 
906  
                       5 
302  
                       5 
302  
66/100 
66/104 
2 HH 
2 HH 
4 HH 
78/322 
4 HH 
1 person 
15.3 
               1 
270  
               2 
688  
10.5% 
1 person 
22.4 
               2 
080  
               8 
635  
16.0% 
3 persons 
24.0 
                 7 
853  
               54 
260  
33.9% 
3 persons 
25.5 
                       7 
626  
                     56 
018  
40.3% 
19 
Table 5: Staple production (sweet potato, WP open field with drip fertigation) - 100 m2 
20 
21 
22 
Table 6: Banana production (WP open field with drip fertigation system) - 100 m2 
23 
24 
25 
Table 7: Papaya production (WP open field with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
26 
27 
28 
Table 8: Cucumber production (WP greenhouse with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
29 
30 
31 
Table 9: Lettuce production (WP closed vertical with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
32 
33 
34 
Table 10: Farm Model (WP improved sweet potato and banana) - 500 m2 
35 
36 
37 
Table 11: Farm Model (WP improved sw potato and diversification to papaya) - 500 m2 
38 
39 
40 
41 
Table 12: Farm Model (WP improved sweet potato and diversification to cucumber) - 500 m2 
42 
43 
44 
Table 13. Farm Model (WP improved sw potato and diversification to lettuce) - 500 m2 
45 
46 
47 
Table 14. Phasing of farming households 
48 
49 
50 
Table 15. Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies 
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
Economic 
Costs 
PY4 
PY5 
Total 
A. Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services 
  Knowledge and Technology 
Input Supply 
Subtotal Enabling Services 
B. Climate Smart Production* 
C. Market Connection 
D. Project Management 
773.3 
1 327.8 
2 101.2 
17.2 
220.8 
411.6 
2 750.8 
388.7 
130.8 
519.5 
47.2 
400.8 
348.0 
1 315.5 
97.7 
130.8 
228.5 
53.0 
622.6 
366.3 
1 270.4 
72.7 
100.8 
173.5 
55.0 
249.0 
338.0 
815.4 
42.1 
100.8 
142.9 
5.0 
193.2 
373.5 
714.5 
1 374.6 
1 791.0 
3 165.7 
177.3 
1 686.3 
1 837.4 
6 866.7 
* excludes loans from the SDFC and project-financed matching grants to avoid double counting 
51 
Table 16. Project Economic Return 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
(constant 2019 year values) 
Programme Years 
Million USD 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Benefit Streams: 
Production benefits 
Total Benefits 
Investments 
Projgramme Economic Cost (excluding loans*) 
Total Investments 
Incremental Net Benefits 
       -    
0.0 
2.8 
2.8 
-2.8 
- 
1.8  
-
1.8 
- 
4.8  
-
4.8 
- 
5.0  
-
5.0 
- 
1.0  
-
1.0 
1.3 
1.3 
-
3.1 
1.3 
1.3 
-
6.1 
0.8 
0.8 
-
5.8 
0.7 
0.7 
-
1.7 
NPV @7% (USD mln) 
9.1  
ERR  12.9% 
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9  
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
*to avoid double counting 
after the MAP completion, USD100 thousand have been allocated to support the ARC to continue work started under the project 
52 
Table 17. Sensitivity 
53 
Table 18. Summary 
54 
Table 19: Pricing of Commodities 
Banana  Economic Price 
CIF, USD/KG 
SER 
CIF, MVR/KG 
Custom duty 15% 
Transportation cost from the port to the collection point 
Handling and marketing charges 
Grade adjustment 
Economic Price 
Financial Price 
CF 
CIF USD/KG 
SER 
CIF, MVR/KG 
Custom duty 15% 
Papaya  Economic Price 
Transportation cost from the port to the collection point 
Handling and marketing charges 
Grade adjustment 
Economic Price 
Financial Price 
CF 
CIF, USD/KG 
SER 
CIF, MVR /KG 
Custom duty, 0% 
Lettuce Economic Price 
Transportation cost from the port to the collection point 
Handling and marketing charges 
Grade adjustment 
Economic Price 
Financial Price 
CF 
CIF, USD/KG 
SER 
CIF, MVR /KG 
Custom duty, 0% 
Urea Economic Price 
Transportation cost from the port to the collection point 
Marketing charges 
Economic Price 
Financial Price 
CF 
55 
0.78 
16.0 
12.5 
1.87 
1.38 
3.75 
1.00 
20 
25.00 
0.78 
2.4 
16.0 
38 
5.77 
1.38 
11.54 
0.80 
16 
15 
1.1 
6.0 
16.0 
96.1 
0.00 
1.38 
28.84 
0.90 
59 
70 
0.85 
0.29 
16.0 
4.6 
0.0 
0.8 
0.5 
5.9 
6.2 
0.95 
Potassium Sulphate Economic Price 
CIF, USD/KG 
SER 
CIF, MVR/KG 
Custom duty, 0% 
Transportation cost from the port to the collection point 
Marketing charges 
Economic Price 
Financial Price 
CF 
Stanadrd CF to be used in the analysis 
Shadow wage rate (unemployment rate in 2019 at 6%)  
0.44 
16.0 
7.0 
0.0 
0.8 
0.7 
8.5 
8.8 
0.97 
0.92 
94% 
56 
Table 20: Shadow Exchange Rate 
Total Imports USD 
         2 
551.6  
Total Exports USD 
359.6  
OER MVR/USD 
15.4  
Import duties 
Export taxes 
5.0% 
                 -    
SER 
SERF 
16.0  
1.04  
57 
Table 21: Economic and Financial Prices 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Economic and Financial Prices 
 MVR:US$   15.35  16.02  SER 
 SCF  
0.92  
Inputs CF 
Outputs 
CF 
0.96  
0.89  
Item 
Unit 
Financial 
 MVR  
Economic   Financial 
 MVR  
USD 
Economic  
 USD  
Outputs 
  Coconut fresh 
  Papaya 
  Banana 
  Cucumber 
Lettuce 
  Sweet potato 
Inputs 
  Hybrid coconut seedling 
  Hybrid papaya seedling 
  Hybrid banana seedling 
  Cucumber seeds 
Lettuce seeds 
  Sweet potato seeds 
  Nitrogenous fertilizer 
  Potassic fertilizer 
  Urea 
Mix fertilizer (nitrogen, phosphorus and 
potasssium) 
  Organic fertilizer 
  Cow dung 
  Nutrients 
  Herbicides 
  Pesticides 
  Biological pest control 
  Water Ph control 
  Detergent 
  Petrol 
  Diesel 
  Electricity 
  Packing bag (0.5 kg) 
  Bag (50kg) 
  Carton box (7kg) 
  Plastic crate (15kg) 
Transportation (low value crop) 
Transportation (medium value crop) 
Transportation (high value crop) 
Labour 
Family labour 
  Hired labour 
  Hired labour 
Land lease 
  Cost of hired labour 
  Salary per month, $ 
  Medical, $ 
nut 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
unit 
unit 
unit 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
kg 
lt 
lt 
c 
lt 
kg 
lt 
lt 
lt 
KWh 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
ton-km 
ton-km 
ton-km 
pd 
pd 
pm 
year-
100m2 
15.00 
15.00 
25.00 
30.00 
70.00 
26.00 
      13.41  
      13.41  
      22.35  
      26.82  
      62.58  
      23.24  
28.00 
4.76 
6.14 
4.60 
0.46 
0.31 
9.96 
23.25 
6.23 
22.02 
3.84 
2.01 
383.75 
383.75 
844.25 
76.75 
76.75 
12.27 
10.94 
6.00 
3.00 
2.00 
3.00 
40.00 
2.60 
4.60 
8.60 
      26.82  
        4.56  
        5.88  
        4.41  
        0.44  
        0.30  
        9.54  
      22.27  
        5.97  
      21.09  
        3.68  
        1.93  
            -    
    367.54  
    367.54  
    808.58  
      73.51  
      73.51  
      11.75  
      10.47  
        5.75  
        2.87  
        1.92  
        2.87  
      38.31  
        2.49  
        4.41  
        8.24  
0.98 
0.98 
1.63 
1.95 
4.56 
1.69 
1.82 
0.31 
0.40 
0.30 
0.03 
0.02 
0.65 
1.51 
0.41 
1.43 
0.25 
0.13 
0.00 
25.00 
25.00 
55.00 
5.00 
5.00 
0.80 
0.71 
0.39 
0.20 
0.13 
0.20 
2.61 
0.17 
0.30 
0.56 
        0.87  
        0.87  
        1.46  
        1.75  
        4.08  
        1.51  
        1.75  
        0.30  
        0.38  
        0.29  
        0.03  
        0.02  
        0.62  
        1.45  
        0.39  
        1.37  
        0.24  
        0.13  
            -    
      23.94  
      23.94  
      52.68  
        4.79  
        4.79  
        0.77  
        0.68  
        0.37  
        0.19  
        0.12  
        0.19  
        2.50  
        0.16  
        0.29  
        0.54  
0.00 
728.95 
15000.00 
611 
728.95 
15000.00 
0.00 
47.49 
977.20 
      39.80  
      47.49  
    977.20  
10.00 
10.00 
0.65 
        0.65  
250 
1000 
25  days 
30  days 
10 
33.33 
58 
Food and lodging, $ 
  Air ticket per year, $ 
100 
300 
30  days 
365  days 
3.33 
0.82 
47.49  $/day 
728.95  MVR/day 
  Current market price for unskilled labour is between MVR 500 to MVR 750, with average of MVR 650 
59 
Table 4: Summary of Farm Models 
Parameter/Indicator 
Key  assets  (production 
base) 
Key 
investment/improvement 
Improved 
sweet potato 
and banana 
production 
500m2 
Transfer from 
open field with 
some 
irrigation to 
open field with 
drip fertigation 
system 
(investment in 
water tank 
collection, drip 
irrigation, 
photovoltaic 
system) 
Improved 
sweet potato 
and 
diversification 
to papaya 
Farm Models 
Improved 
sweet potato 
and 
diversification 
to cucumber 
Improved sweet 
potato and 
diversification to 
lettuce 
500m2 
Transfer from 
open field 
with some 
irrigation to 
open field 
with 
hydroponic 
system 
(investment 
in water tank 
collection, 
drip and 
hydroponic 
systems, 
photovoltaic 
system) 
500m2 
Transfer from 
open field 
with some 
irrigation to 
green house 
with 
hydroponic 
system 
(investment 
in water tank 
collection, 
moveable 
plating trays 
and 
hydroponic 
irrigation 
system, 
photovoltaic 
systems, 
ventilation) 
3.6t of sw 
potato and 
0.3t of 
banana/4.8t 
of potato and 
25.5t of 
cucumber 
500m2 
Transfer from open 
field with some 
irrigation to closed 
vertical system 
(investment in 
complete closed 
vertical hydroponic 
system (multistore, 
25m2 translate to 
100 m2 production 
area), in water tank 
collection, 
hydroponic 
irrigation system, 
photovoltaic 
systems, 
ventilation) 
3.6t of sw potato 
and 0.3t of 
banana/4.8t of 
potato and 8.25t of 
cucumber 
Productivity/production 
(WOP/WP) 
2.7t of sw 
potato and 
0.6t of 
banana/3.6t of 
potato and 
1.6t of banana 
2.7t of sw 
potato and 
0.6t of 
banana/3.6t 
of potato and 
4t of papaya 
Total 
investments (US$) 
incremental 
              12 
025  
        14 965  
        32 320  
           27 680  
of which: 
 - Loan 
 - Beneficiary 
contribution 
 - Matching grant 
of 
labour 
Use 
(WOP/WP), pd 
Total  number  of  direct 
beneficiaries 
of whom: 
 - 
labour/labourers 
On-farm 
hired 
to 
Return 
US$/day 
Incremental 
benefits 
development (US$) 
at 
labour, 
annual 
full 
NPV (US$) 
IRR 
B/C ratio 
Switching values 
Benefits 
Switching values Costs 
                4 
810  
                6 
013  
                1 
203  
66/100 
          5 986  
        12 928  
           11 072  
          7 483  
        16 160  
           13 840  
          1 497  
          3 232  
             2 768  
66/104 
78/352 
78/322 
2 HH 
2 HH 
4 HH 
4 HH 
1 person 
1 person 
3 persons 
3 persons 
30.1 
37.6 
33.9 
34.4 
                1 
421  
                3 
819  
11.8% 
1.6 
          2 327  
        10 030  
             9 175  
        10 667  
17.6% 
1.7 
        76 056  
45.0% 
1.3 
           71 331  
49.6% 
1.3 
-36% 
57% 
-41% 
69% 
-21% 
27% 
-25% 
33% 
60 
Item 
Returns to labour 
Returns to HH labour 
Discount rate 
NPV @ 0.07 
IRR 
NPVb 
NPVc 
B/C ratio 
Switching values 
Benefits 
Switching values Costs 
Sweet potato 
469 
                1 
875  
7% 
              14 
948  
13% 
            323 
923  
            204 
748  
1.6 
-37% 
58% 
Banana 
Papaya 
Cucumber 
501 
875 
          1 170  
7% 
          2 333  
7% 
           23 039  
Lettuce 
554 
540 
20 851  
7% 
7% 
          4 360  
9% 
        38 672  
16% 
      1 112 267  
984 
043  
64% 
73% 
      202 147  
      303 221  
      7 942 332  
      6 477 868  
    5 
995 
682  
    4 
670 
308  
1.2 
1.3 
-18% 
23% 
-22% 
28% 
      132 141  
1.5 
      161 784  
1.9 
-35% 
53% 
-47% 
87% 
61 
Table 23: Staple production (sweet potato, WP open field with drip fertigation) - 100 m2 
62 
63 
64 
Table 24: Banana production (WP open field with drip fertigation system) - 100 m2 
65 
66 
67 
Table 25: Papaya production (WP greenhouse with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
68 
69 
70 
71 
Table 26: Cucumber production (WP greenhouse with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
72 
73 
74 
75 
Table 27: Lettuce production (WP closed vertical with hydroponic system) - 100 m2 
76 
77 
78 
79 
Table 28: Farm Model (WP improved sweet potato and banana) - 500 m2 
80 
81 
82 
83 
Table 29: Farm Model (WP improved sw potato and diversification to papaya) - 500 m2 
84 
85 
86 
87 
Table 30: Farm Model (WP improved sweet potato and diversification to cucumber) - 500 m2 
88 
89 
90 
Table 31. Farm Model (WP improved sw potato and diversification to lettuce) - 500 m2 
91 
92 
93 
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Maldives Agriculture programme (MAP) 
Annex 5.  Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review 
Note 
I. 
Introduction 
1. 
  The goal of the Maldives Agriculture programme is to sustainably increase the incomes, 
food security and nutritional status of smallholder farmers. MAP’s development objective is to 
strengthen  the  enabling  environment  for  sustainable  and  climate-resilient  agriculture.  This 
objective  will  be  achieved  through  policy  refinement,  strengthened  services  and  institutions, 
enhanced agricultural technologies and better access to financing and markets for smallholder 
farmers.   
2. 
The programme will support the agribusiness development in Maldives by investing in the 
generation and transfer of climate-smart technologies of modern agriculture, which are tailored 
to respond to the needs of agricultural production enhanced to meet with the identified market 
opportunities.  This  will  be  achieved  through  activities  supported  under  three  technical 
components:  (i)  enabling  policy,  institutions  and  services  (component  1);  (ii)  climate-smart 
production (component 2); and (iii) market connection (component 3).  MAP will be supported 
by a 4th programme management component. 
3. 
Activities  supported  under  Component  1  include:  (i)  providing  support  to  establish 
policies (research, studies, strategies and bylaws); (ii) strengthening institutional capacity of the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMRA) and its Agriculture Research 
Centre  (ARC)  located  in  Hanimadhoo  Island.    In  the  latter  case  this includes  support  for  new 
facilities  (e.g.,  laboratory,  greenhouses),  systems  (vertical  production,  hydroponic,  drip 
fertigation)  and  related  equipment  (e.g.,  water  quality  and  tissue  sampling  equipment  and 
reagents,  grafting  and  photovoltaic);  and  (iii)  support  to  MOFMRA/MED  for  the  soon  to  be 
established Maldives Agriculture Corporation (MACO) in  the form  of training the Corporation’s  
staff and subsequent provision of agricultural inputs and equipment to promote the adoption of 
new  production  systems  among  the  smallholder  farmers,  and  disseminating  Maldives  Good 
Agricultural  Practices  (MGAP)  in  conjunction  with  sustainable,  climate-smart  informed  input 
management.  Main  expected  outputs  are:  (i)  policy  knowledge  products  on  sustainable  and 
climate-resilient agriculture; (ii) upgraded capability to generate knowledge and technology; (iii) 
packages  of  recommendations  developed  for  enhancing  economic  return  for  small  holder 
farmers; (iv) new technologies and improved inputs transferred to smallholder farmers; and (v) 
establishment of an Agriculture Information and Communication Technology (AICT) Service. 
4. 
Following the training and transfer activities supported under component 1, MAP’s second 
component will support the rolling out of services in support of climate-smart production of high 
value  commodities  for  farmers  using  inputs  supplied  by  MACO  based  on  the  seeds  and 
technologies/production  packages  developed  and  validated  by  ARC  with  agricultural  financing 
provided from Small and Medium Enterprise Development Finance Corporation (SDFC) and the 
Maldives Finance Leasing Company (MFLC).  The main outputs will be: (i) beneficiaries trained 
on production practices and technologies; (ii) farmer production forums organized in order to 
provide required quantity and quality of products in response to the market opportunities; and 
(iii) improved access to agriculture financing. 
Activities  supported  under  the  programme’s  3rd  component  will  invest  in  supporting 
5. 
market  connections  through  providing  support  for  market  linkage  arrangements,  matching 
grants to help establish cold storage facilities in the three programme island hubs, regional hubs 
and sub-regional hubs, support to cargo vessels for upgrading cold storage in exchange of agreed 
transport services, and possibly for purchase of refrigerated cargo vessels on a Hire-Purchase 
1 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
basis.  The main output will be the establishment of  supply contracts  between producers and 
private companies. 
The MAP is a  national  programme and will cover all regional and sub-regional hubs, 
6. 
clusters  and  islands  where  agriculture  is  undertaken  by  small  farmers.  The  main  programme 
hubs for programme activities are in regions 1-3 are Haa Alif Hoarafushi (region 1), Haa Dhaalu 
Vaikaradhoo (region 2) and Shaviyani Milandhoo (region 3). These hubs will serve 8, 9 and 9 
inhabited agriculture islands respectively.  MAP’s component 1 will cover all 19 atolls, 21 regions 
covering 188 inhabited islands of these 98 are inhabited where agriculture is practised on around 
800 registered hectares. There are also 50 uninhabited islands leased for commercial agriculture 
in the programme are representing 956 hectares of land of which 24 islands are actively doing 
agriculture on 582 hectares of land.  Component 2 will initially focus on regions 1-3, covering 3 
atolls and 40 inhabited islands. Of these, 26 are inhabited agriculture islands with 280 hectares 
registered land cultivated by registered farmers, and 85 hectares cultivated by non-registered 
farmers. Within this production area there are six active commercial islands cultivating a total 
of 250 hectares. Finally, component 3 will initially focus on regions 1-3 during the first two years 
and then expand to 4-7 and eventually cover the whole country. 
7. 
 The  MAP’s  target  groups  are  small  farmers  consisting  of  men,  women  and  youth 
belonging  to  households  of  different  socio-economic  categories.  Small  farmers  who  depend 
mainly on agriculture for their livelihood are economically one of the most vulnerable groups in 
the country. Women and youth continue to be important proportions of the active labour force 
in agriculture; they are also important actors in achieving food security and improved nutrition.  
8. 
The overall responsibility for the MAP implementation will be assumed by the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMRA), which is the Lead programme Agency. 
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) will be responsible for ensuring timely flow of funds to MOFMRA 
for  programme  implementation.  A  programme  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  chaired  by  the 
Permanent Secretary of MOFMRA and encompassing representatives from the related ministries 
such  as  MOF,  Ministry  of  Economic  Development  (MED),  Ministry  of  National  Planning  and 
Infrastructure  (MONPI),  MOE  and  other  stakeholders  that  are  related  and  relevant  to  the 
programme.  A  programme  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  will  be  established  in  the  Planning  and 
programme Coordination Section of MOFMRA and located within or in proximity of MOFMRA. The 
PIU  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  operational  management  and  coordination  of  the 
programme implementation. 
9. 
The  total  investment  and  incremental  recurrent  programme  costs  for  this  5  year 
progamme is an  estimated USD 12.9 million. This consists of an: (i) IFAD loan of USD 3.285 
million (25.5% of the total programme costs); (ii) an IFAD grant of USD 1.215 million (9.4%); 
(iii) SDFC loans of USD 5.0 million (38.8 %); (iv) private sector investments (USD 1.14 million 
(8.8 %) and (v) a government cash contribution of USD 2.25 million (17.4 %). 
10. 
The main objective of this SECAP Review Note is to provide information in a short, precise 
document, on the social, environmental and climate change issues relevant to the design of  a 
specific  project  or  programme.    During  the  RN  preparation  process,  the  team  assessed  how 
these  issues  might  affect  IFAD’s  mainstreaming  themes  (gender,  youth,  nutrition, indigenous 
peoples, climate and environment) and made specific recommendations on how the project can 
mitigate risks and better include social and environmental concerns in its design.1   
1 The existing document revised and updated the earlier draft RN prepared in November 2019 following the preparation 
of the draft PDR in December 2019. 
2 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
II. 
Situational Analysis and Potential Project Impacts 
12. 
 The  Republic  of  the  Maldives  consists  of  a  double  chain  of  26  atolls  that  in  toto  are 
composed of 1,192 small coral islands.2  Of these, 188 are inhabited.  The inhabited islands are 
classified  into  categories  defined  by  their  predominant  use.    These  are:  tourism  (200), 
commercial agriculture (75), multiple use such as industrial and waste deposit (20) and inhabited 
characterized by small farmers and fishermen (197).  It is these latter 197 islands where the 
main direct beneficiaries of the project will be targeted. 
13. 
Specific socio-economic data for the small farmers on these islands are limited.  The last 
national census was conducted in 2014.  Data collected in that census consists of farmers and 
fishers and are not disaggregated.  Data from the registration of farmers (see below) with the 
village councils are limited to names, gender and area of the farm.  These data are transferred 
to  MFMRA  in  Malé.    Based  on  this  latter  data  source  there  is  an  estimated  7,500  and  2,500 
registered and unregistered farmers, respectively.  Total arable land is approximately 3,000 ha 
of which 1,800 ha is in production (including coconut lands). 
Socio-economic Assessment 
Overall poverty situation. 
14. 
According to the national poverty line (MVR 74 per person per day)  8.2 percent of the 
Maldivian people are poor (HIES  2016). In terms of inequality, although Gini’s Coefficient shows 
a  decline  over  the  years  from  0.41  in  2003  0.31  in  2016,  inequality  persists  with  a  rising 
incidence of poverty and a steady flow of migrants from atolls to Malé in search of jobs and basic 
services.  Regional  disparities  are  significant  with  12.8  percent  of  the  people  living  below  the 
poverty line in the rural islands compared to 1.7 percent in Malé. The HIES survey reveals that 
38 percent of the Maldivians fall between the 25th and 50th percentile indicating that a significant 
portion  of  the  population  remains  vulnerable  to  falling  back  into  poverty  if  their  household 
situation changes for the worse. 
15.  With  a  significant  socio-economic  and  socio-cultural  divide  between  rural  and  urban 
population, as well as large differences in gender and age, the small rural farmers who depend 
on agriculture as a livelihood activity are economically one of the most vulnerable groups within 
the  country.  Poverty  when  correlated  with  economic  sector  (defined  by  head  of  household) 
indicates that those working in the agriculture and fisheries sectors are found to be poorer than 
those  in  industry  or  services.  The  situation  is  worse  for  women  with  a  high  rate  of  divorce 
combined  with  limited  employment  opportunities  contributing  further  to  their  level  of 
impoverishment. These figures indicate the importance of the programme in alleviating poverty 
within the rural agriculture sector. 
Gender.   
 The  Maldives  ranks  101st  of  164  countries  rated  by  the  Gender  Development  Index 
16. 
(2017), 106th of 144 countries rated by the Gender Gap Index (2017) and 76th of 160 countries 
rated by the  Gender  Inequality Index (2017).  These  rankings confirm that much needs to be 
done to improve women's empowerment and access to services and opportunities. 
17. 
 Literacy and education. Figures from the 2014 census reveal that the sex ratio is 103 
males per 100  females. Nor is there  much difference in literacy  in the mother tongue  is 97.4 
percent  and  98  percent  for  males  and  females,  respectively.    A  gender  gap  however  can  be 
clearly seen in level of education. Up to the diploma level not much difference is observed but 
2 The definition of island in the Maldives is any exposed feature that is vegetated. 
3 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
from  there  on  there  is  a  significant  gender  gap  in  favour  of  males  in  Bachelor,  Masters  and 
Doctoral degrees accounting for 71 %, 75 % and 70 %, respectively. Women's participation in 
the labour force, is only 48 percent in 2014. The main reasons for female unemployment are 
identified as lack of job opportunities (35 %), followed by the inability to find a suitable job (28 
%), caring for the family and home (13 %) and lack of adequate education (6 %).  
18. 
 Decision making. The Country Gender Assessment of the Agriculture and Rural sector of 
Maldives  (2018)  states  that  the  gender  gap  in  decision-making  and  the  lack  of  livelihood 
activities  for  women  at  the  island  level  is  a  challenge  to  women’s  empowerment  in  the  rural 
sector. Society and cultural norms place men in the lead, particularly in the rural areas. Rural 
women often lack the capacity to plan and implement activities, as they lack proper training in 
technical skills required for jobs which the project directly addresses. 
19. 
Poverty  and  inequality.  Poverty  indicators  for  Maldives  show  a  decline  in  income 
inequality and an overall improvement in the living standard of the population, mainly attributed 
to the booming tourism industry. Inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient, declined from 
0.41  in  2003  to  0.37  in  2010.  Poverty,  based  on  the  Millennium  Development  Goal  (MDG) 
indicator of the percentage of the population living on less than USD 1 per day, declined from 9 
percent in 2003 to 8 percent in 2010. Despite these achievements, inequities persist, with rising 
poverty  incidence  in  the  capital  due  to  the  steady  flow  of  migrants  from  the  atolls  to  Malé  in 
search  of  jobs  and  basic  services  (May  2016;  NBS,  2018b).  There  are  considerable  socio-
economic and sociocultural divides between urban and rural populations, as well as by gender 
and  age  group  (Shafeega  and  Shakir,  2016).  A  high  rate  of  divorce  combined  with  limited 
employment opportunities for women in the Maldives gives rise to additional poverty for women 
as single parents in FHHs. Women in such positions are more susceptible to health risks due to 
the stress of the multiple burdens placed upon them, as breadwinners and caretakers who are 
responsible for all domestic chores. In poorer households, where overcrowding results from more 
people living in less space, the health of women is placed at even greater risk (Shafeega and 
Shakir,  2016).  Women  continue  to  be  discriminated  against  in  health  care  and  in  the  labour 
market. This is illustrated by the Gender Inequality Index (GII), which reflects a disadvantage 
in three dimensions – reproductive health, empowerment and the labour market. In addition, 
Maldivian  women  experience  specific  reproductive  health  issues,  with  access  to  sexual  and 
reproductive health services being limited. In many cases they also face domestic violence (May, 
2016). 
20. 
Agriculture sector. In the agriculture sector, gender division and roles and responsibility 
exist  with  women  contributing  to  crop  production,  value  addition  and  natural  resource 
management. Often women assist their male counterparts in farming activities while they are 
also fully engaged in related value-added activities. Generally, selling produce is considered the 
man’s  responsibility.  Although  gender  roles  are  largely  fixed  in  agriculture  and  fisheries,  as 
modernization  brings  changes  to  the  island  way  of  life,  some  women  are  taking  up  roles 
traditionally performed by men as the need arises. Women in rural areas however, continue to 
dominate traditionally less rewarding roles in such as home gardening, taro farming and coconut 
collection. This includes growing different types of fruits and vegetables in the front/backyards 
of  their  home  as  well  as  in  small  isolated  plots.  This  produce  is  often  used  for  household 
consumption  or  sold  on  the  island  or  to  neighbouring  islands.  Women,  particularly  elderly 
women,  collect  coconuts  from  the  forest  areas  on  islands  where  land  is  abundant.  With  an 
existing  and  growing  market  for  products  such  as  taro,  coconut  and  processed  agricultural 
produce,  women  in  rural  islands  earn  a  significant  income.  This  reflects  the  importance  of 
informal home-based work in women’s livelihoods, which national statistics do not recognise. 
21.  Women  play  a  significant  role  in  the  processing  and  manufacturing  subsector  under 
fisheries  and  agriculture.  Rope  weaving  (roanuveshun),  preparing  thatch  from  dried  coconut 
4 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
leaves (fangivinun), processing of fruits and vegetables, and making spice products (havaadhu) 
and  other  food  products  have  a  much  higher  female  participation  rate  than  male.  Women’s 
occupations that fall under manufacturing are mostly small-scale, self-employed and undertaken 
at  home  rather  than  in  organized  formal  workplaces.  Such  small-scale  manufacture,  like 
processing of agricultural products and the preparation of food products, is mostly in the informal 
sector and women often carry out this type of work in their living quarters. These self-employed 
women earn a remuneration that is not a fixed monthly income, and is subject to demand and 
market  dynamics  at  any  given  time.  The  distribution  of  the  employed  population  by  place  of 
work  gives  further  insight  into  the  gender  dynamics  of  employment.  A  greater  proportion  of 
employed  women  (32  percent)  work  in  their  homes  or  living  quarters  than  the  proportion  of 
employed men who do so. Overall, women account for 84 percent of home-based workers. For 
those involved in the processing of agricultural products (fruits, vegetables and spices), the level 
of vulnerability is greater, as severe weather conditions such as flooding can destroy the harvest. 
Other factors such as expatriate labour also have an impact on the roles of women in fisheries 
and agriculture. Women are disadvantaged when land and other assets are not registered under 
their  name.  According  to  observations  in  the  field,  women  who  are  divorced,  widowed  or  for 
other reasons have to support themselves and their family often undertake backyard gardening, 
taro  farming  or  coconut  collection  as  livelihood  activities.  Time-consuming  responsibilities  at 
home  and  limited  opportunities  hinder  them  from  being  involved  in  activities  that  are  more 
lucrative. 
22. 
  In the household level women make decisions pertaining to the day-to-day running of 
the  household,  however  other  decisions  such  as  purchase  of  assets  and  construction  of  the 
house, are dominated by men often with limited consultation with women. The aforementioned 
assessment report also highlights that ownership of assets are mostly in the name of the man. 
Data on home ownership from the 2006 census indicates that 65.5  percent are owned by men. 
23. 
 While the women play a significant role in the processing and manufacturing subsector 
under fisheries and agriculture, their contribution appears to be limited to  labour without any 
significant role in the management and financing of the farms.  Women represent an asset for 
the Maldives if they can be turned into a dynamic force by effective organisation. The programme 
will directly address the constraints of the farmers, focusing on facilitating their access to inputs 
and markets and the participation in training. With 52 percent registered farmers being female, 
MAP  will  build  up  their  skills  through  training,  awareness  and  advisory  services  to  plan  and 
implement activities. Much needed training in financial literacy, business management and farm 
financial analysis, basic and specialised agriculture will be provided  to the farmers to build up 
their capacity. National policies, strategies and actors. At the global level, Maldives is a signatory 
to a range of international laws and regulations on gender equality, including the Beijing Platform 
for  Action  for  Women’s  Rights  of  1995,  the  Cairo  Plan  of  Action  for  Reproduction  and  Sexual 
Rights  of  1994,  and  the  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Form  of  Discrimination  Against 
Women (CEDAW) of 1979. The Constitution of Maldives guarantees equal access for women and 
men to human rights and freedom, and the government is tasked with ensuring this equality. 
Women gained the right to vote in the country’s first Constitution in 1965, but it was prohibited 
for a woman to become a president of the country until the new Constitution came into effect in 
2008.  The  new  Constitution  guarantees  the  same  rights  and  freedoms,  and  upholds  the 
principles of non-discrimination and equality of men and women.  
24. 
The main administrative arm of the  government responsible for gender  equality is the 
Minister  of  Gender,  Family  and  Social  Services  (MoGFSS).  Planning,  implementation  and 
coordination  of  the  legal  frameworks  and  policies  to  improve  women’s  status  through  the 
enhancement  of  women’s  rights,  economic  empowerment,  welfare  support  and  protection  of 
women,  including  prevention  of  violence  against  women  and  girls,  are  fundamental  to  the 
mandate of the institution. The legal architecture for gender equality in Maldives continues to be 
5 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
inadequate, although a number of recently ratified acts address the gender gap. The Maldives 
Gender Equality Act 2016–2021, published in 2015, has four main policy goals. The first policy 
goal is to develop and activate the necessary policy, legislative and institutional frameworks for 
gender  equality,  so  that  women  and  men  enjoy  fundamental  human  rights  and  rewards  of 
democracy  equal  to  those  of  men.  The  second  goal  emphasises  women’s  empowerment  to 
facilitate their equal access to available opportunities, as well as equal outcomes/results. The 
third policy goal is to cultivate a culture of non-discrimination and respect for women’s human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil and all other 
fields on a basis of equality between men and women. The fourth goal aims at eliminating all 
forms of discrimination against women. The President ratified the Gender Equality Act in August 
2017.  
25. 
In addition, a number of other pieces of legislation address gender equality, including the 
Penal  Code  of  2015,  which  was  amended  to  define  rape;  the  Sexual  Harassment  and  Abuse 
Prevention Act of 2015; and the Domestic Violence Prevention Act of 2012, which opened up a 
supportive platform for reporting cases of abuse, the majority faced by women. The impact of 
these laws on women’s progress has not yet been reviewed and so is unclear, and CEDAW in 
2015 has  reiterated its concerns  regarding the  persistent barriers faced by  women in gaining 
access to justice. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, the body 
that oversees CEDAW has further highlighted issues of judiciary bias and gender stereotyping, 
the  absence  of  gender-sensitive  procedures  and  the  limited  capacity  of  law  enforcement 
institutions, including Maldives Police Services, to deal with women’s complaints about violations 
of their rights. 
At the Project level, a Grievance Redress Mechanism will be established in line with IFAD 
26. 
policies and procedures and national laws. The GRM will include the following steps: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Step 1: Submission of grievances either orally, in writing, or through telephone 
hotlines/toll free numbers, SMS, to the Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and 
Agriculture (MOFMRA) 
Step 2: Recording of grievances, classifying the grievances based on the typology of 
complaints and the complainants in order to provide more efficient response, and 
providing the initial response within 24 hours. The typology will be based on the 
characteristics of the complainant (e.g., vulnerable groups, persons with disabilities, 
people with language barriers, etc.) and also the nature of the complaint  
Step 3: Investigating the grievance and Communication of the Response within 7 days 
Step 4: Complainant Response: either grievance closure or taking further steps if the 
grievance remains open. If grievance remains open, complainant will be given 
opportunity to appeal to the MOFMRA.  
Once all possible avenues of redress received grievances have been proposed and if the 
complainant  is  still  not  satisfied  then  s/he  would  be  advised  of  their  right  to  legal 
recourse.  In  addition,  the  existing  GRM  will  also  be  used  for  addressing  Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse in line with IFAD’s no tolerance for Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
(SEA) policy. 
Youth.   
27. 
 In the Maldives youth is defined as young men and women aged between 18 - 34.  In 
the 2014 Population and Housing Census it was established that the population below the age 
of 25 represents 47.5 percent of the resident population.  Maldivian youth remain in school until 
6 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
ages  17  or  18  achieve  close  to  100  per  cent  and  90  percent  literacy  in  Dhivehi  and  English, 
respectively. 
 The proportion of men and women 15 to 34 not in education, employment or training 
28. 
(NEET)  shows  a  steady,  steep  rise  from  ages  15  to  19  when  about  27  per  cent  of  men  and 
women are not in NEET. Then beginning at age 19, the NEET rate  falls continuously for men, 
stabilizing at 6 per cent for ages 30 and older. While the NEET rate is similar for men and women 
15 to 20, it is higher for women 20 and older. The NEET rate is significantly higher for women 
than men in the atolls. 
29. 
 Young people make up a significant proportion of the labour force. More than half (54 
per cent) of the labour force is aged 18 to 34 while 23 per cent is 15 to 24. Most young people 
join the labour force by the time they are in their early twenties.  Unemployment rates among 
youth (18-34) is 8 percent (HIES, 2016). 
 Most natives of the capital Malé seek opportunities in that area. However only about one 
30. 
third of young Malé residents are actually from the island as many migrate from the other islands 
(the atolls) in search of employment opportunities.  
Indigenous peoples.  NA. 
People living with disabilities. NA 
Migrant workers. 
31. 
 Due to the influx of migrants into the labour force worker profiles are changing in many 
economic sectors including agriculture in the Maldives. The 2014 census reports that of the total 
population employed in the fisheries and agriculture sectors, 8 percent are foreign residents, of 
whom the majority are men. However, migrant workers also contribute informally to the sector 
which is not reflected in the data. Traditionally agricultural practices on the islands have defined 
gender roles, with men generally doing the heavy work, such as transporting and clearing, while 
women are involved in work such as watering and harvesting. Today often male migrant workers 
have largely taken over the agriculture sector and are often found in production and marketing 
networks  as  resident  Maldivian  men  seek  employment  opportunities  in  the  more  lucrative 
tourism sector, away from their island homes. To some extent, migrant workers are increasingly 
taking  over  the  work  of  women  in  subsistence  agriculture,  as  their  full-time  commitment  to 
agricultural activities affords them greater productivity. In some islands it is also common for 
migrant workers to informally rent agricultural fields from locals, paying them a monthly rent. 
32. 
 With this changing labour role within the agriculture sector, MFMRA faces challenges in 
providing its services to the farming community as training, and extension and other support 
services  are  provided  only  to  local  Maldivians.  The  migrant  workers  who  are  engaged  in 
agriculture often do not have access to this information on good practices and misuse chemical 
pesticides. It is reported that there have been a number of cases of misuse of chemical pesticides 
due to lack of knowledge on the products and their uses.  Taking into consideration this aspect 
the project will target all farmers good practices on farming and use of chemicals 
Nutrition.  
33. 
 The  demographic  and  health  survey  2017  -  2018  reveals  that  15  percent  of  children 
under 5 years are stunted (short for their age) 9 percent are wasted (thin for their height) and 
15  percent  are  underweight  (thin  for  their  age).  Stunting,  a  sign  of  chronic  under  nutrition 
reflects failure to receive adequate nutrition over a long period. Half of the children age 6 - 59 
months and 63 percent of the women aged 15 - 49 years are anaemic, a condition marked by 
7 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
low levels of haemoglobin in the blood. Weaning and feeding practices of infants and children 
are a major factor for the continued malnutrition problem; deficiencies in iron, zinc and vitamin 
A were found to be of significant concern, particularly among women and pregnant women. The 
underlying  causes  of  malnutrition  are  food  insecurity,  poor  dietary  diversity  child  feeding 
practices. The survey reports that feeding practices of only half of the children age 6 - 23 months 
in  the  Maldives  meet  the  minimum  standards.  In  terms  of  access  to  health  services  In  the 
Maldives, more than 7 in 10 women (72 %) stated that problems in accessing health care exists 
and the reasons include distance to health facility, difficulty in getting appointments among other 
reasons. 
34. 
 It  is  not  uncommon  for  rural  populations  to  experience  some  form  of  food  shortage, 
especially  for  nutritious  fresh  products  such  as  milk,  eggs,  vegetables  and  fruit  at  times. 
Additionally,  during  the  dry  season,  water  shortages  on  the  islands  are  a  common  concern.  
Maldives fulfils the bulk of its food and nutritional security through imports with 20 percent of 
total imports for food items including agricultural imports (including staple foods, such as rice, 
flour  and  sugar;  and  vegetables,  root  crops,  fruits,  nuts  and  seeds,  dairy  and  eggs).    Food 
imports are required to meet domestic food demands of the Maldivian people, as well as being 
essential in supplying the tourism industry. Import dependency, limited storage facilities and ad 
hoc distribution of food pose food insecurity risks, especially with more and more severe natural 
disaster events occurring due to climate change. 
35. 
 Food  trade,  storage  and  distribution  play  a  critical  role  in  the  access  and  availability 
dimensions of food security. With the ocean constituting 99 percent of the Maldives’ territorial 
area, and with distantly located small island populations scattered across the country, marine 
transport is the most important mode of travel. Due to the geographic dispersion of the islands, 
large stocks of food items and other  consumer durables, along with fuel and other necessary 
raw  materials,  have  to  be  transported  from  Malé  to  the  rural  areas  of  other  islands.  Food 
distribution from the greater Malé area to the islands is undertaken primarily by cargo boats and 
to a lesser extent by air. The quantity transported in a single trip is limited and delivery is often 
unscheduled and unreliable thus many islands experience occasional food and water shortages 
each year, with some reporting frequencies of as many as four times a year. 
36. 
Import dependency, limited storage facilities and ad hoc distribution of food pose food 
insecurity risks, especially with more and more severe natural disaster events occurring due to 
climate change. Risks, including natural hazards and financial and political crises (both internally 
and  externally),  can  affect  food  transportation  and  the  availability  of  important  goods.  The 
Government  of Maldives is working with international agencies and private-sector partners to 
develop the country’s capacity in fisheries and aquaculture, crop cultivation, poultry and animal 
husbandry. It developed a fisheries policy in 2017 and has formulated an agriculture policy to 
address  gaps  in  natural  resource  management.  Furthermore,  discussions  are  underway  with 
MoFA on diversifying fisheries and intensifying production of potential crops for self-sufficiency 
through the introduction of new technology and farming practices. 
37. 
Malnutrition among women of reproductive age also continues to be of concern. MDHS 
findings showed that 8 percent of women aged 15–49 years are too thin, with a body mass index 
less  than  18.5,  and  46  percent  are  overweight  or  obese.  While  overweight  and  obesity 
prevalence  is  high,  micronutrient  deficiencies  are  also  high  in  this  age  group.  According  to  a 
micronutrient  survey  conducted  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  in  2007,  15.4  percent  of  women  of 
reproductive age were found to be anaemic to some degree and 15.1 percent are moderately 
anaemic. Micronutrient deficiencies for women of reproductive age follow the same pattern as 
in children, with 38 percent being iron deficient, 44 percent vitamin A deficient, 27 percent zinc 
deficient and 27 percent iodine deficient (Ministry of Health, 2016).  
8 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
This aspect reflects the critical role the programme will play to improving food security 
38. 
and  nutrition  status  through  increase  quantity,  quality  and  diversity  of  food  within  the  rural 
islands.  
Environment and Climate Context, Trends and Implications 
Environmental Assessment.   
 Most of the environmental issues relevant to MAP are well known and are described in 
39. 
some detail in a number of sources (see Section 9 below)3.  These include: 
Water quantity.  The country has few surface water resources.  Most sources of freshwater exist 
in the form of shallow, groundwater aquifers with a depth averaging between 3 – 5 meters and 
located within one to two meters from the surface.  In most of the inhabited island these aquifers 
are  becoming  depleted  due  to  over-extraction  initially  for  potable  water  but  increasingly  for 
irrigation and other domestic uses.  Over-extraction in turn can contribute to seawater intrusion; 
a situation exacerbated by reduced recharge from rainfall due to the paving over of the islands’ 
porous  soils.    Saltwater  intrusion  is  likely  to  worsen  with  sea  level  rise  (SLR).    Many  islands 
suffer from deficit gaps  in potable water  during prolonged periods of  drought.   Increased use 
and efficiency in water harvesting may be the most economically viable option supplemented by 
desalinization plants in the more populated islands. For agriculture there is growing interest in 
hydroponics, drip irrigation and planting climate smart varieties in response to these issues; 
Water  quality.  In  addition  to  the  effects  of  saltwater  intrusion,  the  major  sources  of  aquifer 
contamination in the country’s non-urban islands are: (i) point source pollution from discharge 
of untreated wastewater, (ii) poorly planned disposal of solid waste and (iii) overuse of agro-
chemicals4  The amount of agro-chemicals consumed in the islands is not recorded and despite 
restrictions on the import of  certain pesticides based  on their toxicity there appear to be few 
controls on their presence or consumption in local markets (MEE, 2017). There exist however a 
number of national programs that to varying degrees are being implemented in the outer islands 
that are addressing this issue that have been described in more detail below (see section 3).  In 
the agricultural sector this includes:  Integrated Pest Management, training and certification in 
Maldives-Good Agricultural Practices (M-GAP), training in better use of compost and the use of 
small-scale hydroponic schemes.  These efforts are facilitated by a growing awareness among 
farmers  of  the  added  value  in  certain  sub-sectors  in  the  local  market  (e.g.,  tourist  islands) 
derived from high quality produce (re free of chemicals); 
Waste management. Solid waste management has grown to become one the country’s biggest 
environmental  threats.5    In  terms  of  total  waste  generation,  the  country’s  resort  islands  and 
international airport generate waste at nearly six times the rate of the resident local population. 
Waste management varies among islands depending on the availability of disposal facilities and 
local custom.  On rural islands, the common practice is to dispose of wastes in open sites followed 
by  burning  and/or  directly  thrown  into  the  ocean.6  The  government  has  undertaken  several 
initiatives to address the waste management issue but disposal and treatment capacity to date 
3 However, in some cases there are gaps in site-specific data and/or are in need of updating. 
4 There are few groundwater assessments from the Maldives however one was completed for four islands (B. Hithaadhoo, 
Hithadhoo, Gn. and Ga. Dhekanbaa) as part of the 2nd National Communications (SNC) of the Maldives to the UNFCCC.  
Samples indicated significant contamination in particular in fecal coliform counts (SOE, 2016). 
5 An estimated 365,000 tons of solid waste are generated annually. Most recent estimates indicate that solid waste is 
generated at a rate of 1.8 kg per person per day in Malé, 0.8 kg per person per day on the other inhabited islands, and 
3.5 kg per person per day in resort islands. (MTAC, 2015). 
6 Composition of waste streams from inhabited non-urban islands in the Maldives by percent is estimated to be: food, 
garden/yard  waste,  paper  (70  %),  metals  and  plastic  (3  %)  and  construction  debris,  organic  and  inorganic  waste, 
hazardous substances, etc. (27 %).  
9 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
remains insufficient.7  In the agricultural sector the main sources of solid waste include agro-
chemical containers, vegetative matter, discarded growing materials (associated with nurseries, 
greenhouses/hydroponic schemes) and packing materials.  There are several ongoing projects 
that are attempting to address this issue (see section 3 below); and 
Chemical  management.    While  there  is  currently  no  production  of  chemicals  in  Maldives,  the 
import  of  chemicals  has  increased  significantly  over  the  last  two  decades.  The  main  demand 
sectors are energy and transport (petroleum products), agriculture, construction, boat building, 
health and tourism. Demand is likely to grow with further diversification of the economy.  Despite 
a number of legal requirements, implementation and monitoring has been relatively ineffective 
due to the lack of a national chemicals database, coordination mechanisms and lack of trained 
personal at the island level.  There is no capacity to analyse for pesticides in the country and 
samples  have  to  be  sent  to  Sri  Lanka.    The  main  agricultural  sector  imports  are  chemical 
fertilizers (mostly from Sri Lanka) and pesticides dominated by insecticides (India, Singapore, 
Indonesia  and  Sri  Lanka).8  Some  of  the  main  challenges  in  the  agricultural    sector  are: 
insufficient control of cheap and low-quality inputs, low technical skills of farmers and insufficient 
access to extension services, particularly in the outer islands.9   
Climate Trends and Impacts. 
40. 
  The  Maldives’  fragile  ecological  profile  and  low  elevation  combined  with  its  economic 
dependence on limited sectors combine to make the country highly vulnerable to the effects of 
climate change (CC).  A total of five assessment reports (ARs) have been completed  to date by 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).10  SIDS-related issues raised in the ARs 
particularly  relevant  to  the  Maldives  include:  (i)  vulnerability  and  impacts  would  be  highly 
variable but “likely to be greatest where local environments are already under stress as a result 
of  human  activities”  and  would  likely  affect  all  sectors  including  freshwater  resources  and 
agriculture  (1995  in  SAR);  (ii)  with  limited  resources  and  low  adaptive  capacity,  “low-lying 
islands  face  the  considerable  challenge  of  meeting  the  social  and  economic  needs  of  their 
populations in a manner that is sustainable” (2001, TAR); (iii); in addition to vulnerability and 
impact studies of SIDS, a broader range of climate change drivers and geographical spread of 
islands was identified but that the number of “independent scientific studies on climate change 
and  small islands  since  the  TAR”  had  been  quite  limited  (2007,  4AR);  and  more  recently  (iv) 
initiatives  have  been  identified  that  will  reduce  vulnerability  and  enhance  resilience  of  small 
islands  to  ongoing  global  change  including  improving  risk  knowledge  and  island  resource 
management while also strengthening socioeconomic systems and livelihoods (5AR, 2015). 
41. 
The main CC-related impacts in Maldives are associated with: 
Rainfall.  Based on Maldives’s station data for the period (1975-2010), observed annual rainfall 
ranged from 1,750 to 2,250 mm. Most of the global predictive models show warming over South 
Asia to be above the global mean and intense monsoon precipitation will likely to increase while 
the number of “wet days” is likely to decrease.  It is predicted that most of these changes will 
be  associated  with increased  frequency  and  intensity  of  precipitation  events,  flash-floods  and 
strong  winds  originating  with  tropical  cyclones.    Global  climate  models  (GCMs)  predict  an 
increased range in rainfall of 1,250 to 3,185mm.11  Nevertheless, given uncertainties associated 
7 The most recent development in the waste management sector is the development of a regional waste management 
facility on R. Vandhoo. This facility covers the four northern atolls and plans to process 52 tons of waste daily for 45 
inhabited islands, 15 operational resorts, 15 resorts in development, and nine industrial islands (IDA, 2017). 
8 A total of 48 tonnes and 81m3 of pesticides were imported in 2013 (MEE, 2015). 
9 MFMRA,2019. 
10 A 6th AR is currently in preparation. 
11 Global climate models (GCMs) are used to make projections for selected climate-change related parameters into the 
future.    There  exist  a  number  of  different  models  (e.g.,  HadCM3,  MPI  ECHAM  5,  MRI  CGCM  2.3.2a,  GFDL  CM2.1A).  
Projections using data taken for ranges of years from the recent past (e.g., 1961 – 1990) as baseline are typically made 
10 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
with  the  downscaling  of  these  models  to  the  national  level  definitive  conclusions  concerning 
future CC-related rainfall events cannot be made with the possible exception of enhanced rainfall 
during  the  monsoon  season.  While  there  are  positive  impacts  of  increasing  rainfall  on  food 
production, the heavy down pours can also adversely affect food production systems dependent 
on the commodity;  
Temperature.  Recent records for near surface temperature12 in the Maldives show that there is 
a steady year-to-year increase that may exhibit geographical variations.13 For the country as a 
whole, the projected range of surface air temperature show increases for each of the models’ 
three  time  slices;  i.e.,  for  2030s  (0.87°C  to  1.63°C),  2050’s  (1.19°C  to  2.25°C)  and  2080’s 
(1.67°C to 3.72°C).  While there may be some benefits on commodities production there are 
also  adverse  impacts  (e.g.,  increases  in  numbers  and  diversification  of  pests  and  increased 
evaporation rates);  
Sea level rise.  In 1990 a major point highlighted in the IPCC’s First Assessment Report (FAR) 
with respect to SIDS was that a 30- to 50-cm sea-level rise (SLR)14 projected by 2050 would 
threaten low islands and a 1-m rise by 2100 “would render some island countries uninhabitable.” 
Projected increases in sea surface height  for time slice 2080s  over averages  recorded for the 
period 1961 – 199015 range between 8.2 and 9.5 cm with an uncertainty range 4.6 to 11.6 cm 
(Rimes, 2012).  SLR can affect soils on which agriculture depends through direct salinization or 
indirectly through saltwater intrusion of ground water aquifers (MFMRA, 2019); and 
Natural  disasters  and  extreme  events.    A  review  of  past  historical  records,  reports  and 
publications indicates that the Maldives is regularly exposed to the effects of windstorms, heavy 
rainfall,  extreme  temperatures  and  drought,  sea  swells  and  storm  surges.    Model  outcomes 
project  increasing  risk  of  drought  and  floods  especially  during  El  Nino  events  (IPCC,  2001). 
Tropical cyclones are predicted to be enhanced in intensity by 10 to 20 % (Nurse and Sem 2001).  
Maximum  storm  surge  height  is  projected  to  be  1.32m  with  a  return  period  of  500  years.  If 
coupled  with  high  tides,  it  could  generate  a  storm  tide  of  2.30m  (UNDP,  2006).  The  IPPC 
assessment  also  reported  the  forecasted  maximum  storm  tides  for  different  regions  of  the 
Maldives based on medium and high sea level rise scenarios. Based on these assumptions and 
scenarios, and given that the average height of the Maldives is only 1.5m above mean sea level 
(MSL), sea level rise would cause regular tidal inundations in most islands even at the medium 
emission scenario. The high emission scenario could cause inundations recurrently in almost all 
islands.  Storm  surges  can  create  up  to  2.78  m  waves  under  medium  prediction,  enough  to 
completely  inundate  a  medium  to  small  sized  island  in  the  Maldives.  A  storm  surge  at  high 
scenario could cause a 3.18 m wave that could inundate even the largest of islands. These surges 
do  not  take  into  account  regular  monsoonal  wind  generated  flooding  which  is  considered  the 
most common in Maldives (Shaig, 2006; UNDP, 2006). 
Climate change adaptation and mitigation.   
 The following climate adaptation measures have been included in the project design, (i) 
42. 
shifting  to  thermophilic  and  drought  tolerant  crops,  (ii)  water  harvesting  combining  with 
for  three  different  “time-slices”    (2030,s,  2050s,  and  2080s).  Projections  are  also  based  on  different  emission  level 
scenarios ranging from low to high.  Regional and national projections are “downscaled” from GCM outcomes. In the 
case of Maldives, the downscaling was carried out by Regional Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warning System (RIMES).  
There  are  increases  in  uncertainty  as  GCM  outcomes  are  downscaled  and  projected  further  out  into  the  future,  in 
particular when there are few existing data sources and records as in the case of the Maldives. 
12 This is defined as the temperature 2 meters above ground level.   
13 For example, an assessment of maximum temperatures show an increasing trend in the northern part of the country but a trend 
in decreasing temperature (-.06oC in the south). 
14 SLR of 1.0 m by 2100 (Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) A1 scenario) 
15 There are only two reporting tide monitoring stations established in the Maldives (Malé and Gan) established in 1989 and 1992, 
respectively.   
11 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
increased irrigation efficiencies (e.g., hydroponic schemes and drip irrigation) and (iii) shifting 
to  covered  infrastructure  (this  includes  greenhouses  and  net  covered  growing  platforms  that 
support  hydroponic  and  fertigation  schemes  contributing  to  reduced  evapotranspiration  and 
increased water use efficiency). 
43. 
At the time of the SECAP RN, there were not sufficient data to be able to estimate the 
amount of carbon that the project might emit as calculated through the application of the ExAct 
tool.16    Nevertheless,  from  the  CN  together  with  the  unique  characteristics  of  Maldives  and 
existing agro-ecosystems, the programme is unlikely to result in any significant impacts to/on 
existing  land  use  (deforestation/re-  or  afforestation),  grassland/livestock  systems,  forest  and 
peat soil management, existing wetland systems and/or fisheries.  There however may be some 
increase  in  carbon  emissions  associated  with  possible  programme-supported  changes  to 
perennial  cropland  systems  and  increased  use  of  chemical  inputs.    This  may  be  offset  by 
promotion  of  more  efficient  farming  practices,  the  reduced  application  of  nitrogen-based 
fertilizers, a shift to a more highly productive agriculture (e.g., hydroponics) and promotion of 
increased use of solar energy systems.  It is suggested once programme design is completed a 
carbon assessment be conducted to assess net balance of carbon emissions.   
Target Group Profiles 
44. 
 The 2014 census estimates that over 15,000 people are employed in the fisheries and 
agriculture and sectors accounting for 10 percent of the country’s employed population.  Data 
from MFMRA shows that a total of 7,536 farmers are registered at present which represents 573 
hectares of farmland. Within the registered farmers 53% are females. 
45. 
  Among the registered farmers a typical farmer can be defined as an islander who grows 
fruits and vegetables in a plot of land allocated for agricultural purposes with the aim of earning 
income. In almost all islands where land is available plots of land are allocated for agricultural 
purposes by the Island Council. In some islands farmers grow specialised crops like watermelon 
in  Thoddoo  and  banana  plants  in  Hdh  Vaikaradhoo  and  Sh  Feevah,  but  in  general  the  small 
farmer grows multiple crops. Registered and non-registered farmers undertake field agriculture 
farming.  In  recent  times  farmers  employ  migrant  labours  to  farm  on  semi  commercial  or 
commercial agriculture farms.  
In addition to registered farmers many islanders, undertake agricultural activities without 
46. 
registering.  Taro  farming,  coconut  collecting,  and  backyard  gardening  and  processing  of 
agriculture products as fried taro, fried breadfruit and fried leaves are some of the other types 
of  agriculture  related  activities  undertaken.  Even  on  islands  where  other  occupations  are 
available, production of agricultural crops as supplementary sources of food and cash income is 
the norm. As such agriculture is still the principal preoccupation and source of livelihood for a 
large number of people, particularly on major agricultural islands. 
47. 
 With coconut grown extensively throughout the country in homesteads and well as semi 
commercially and commercially in inhabited islands and uninhabited islands coconut collection 
is a livelihood activity dominated by women. Coconut palms and all natural vegetation found in 
the islands can usually tolerate high salinity levels. Coconut are collected from the community 
forestlands and after collecting the husks are removed and the nut sold locally or sent to Malé. 
The husks sometimes are used to make rope or used as firewood. Often smaller coconuts are 
scraped  and  used  to  make  curry  powder  together  with  spices  and  packed  and  sold  as  value 
added products. By products of the coconut palm are used in a variety of ways in the Maldives 
such as weaving the leaves for the thatch producing and coconut oil. Coconut leaf thatch is still 
16 The EX-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT) can be found from the FAO website (http://www.fao.org/tc/exact/ex-act-
home/en/). 
12 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
used as roofing material on some of the resort islands and this contributes a substantial income 
for some of the farming islands.  
 In certain islands, especially those in the South where there are low lying swampy areas, 
48. 
the growing of root crops such as taro is important. The low-elevation areas of the island act as 
a “sink” to the surrounding area and forms a marsh. This area is designated for taro farming 
and  no  formal  registration  is  required  to  plant  crops.  According  to  the  Gan  Island  Council, 
residents  can  select  an  area  for  planting  and  continue  using  the  land  free  of  charge  for  any 
duration.  Taro  is  grown  year-round  and  taro  farmers  can  harvest  mature  crop  from  different 
areas of the field throughout the year. Taro is a local delicacy and always has a market. 
 The programme will directly target all small farmers in the country. These farmers will 
49. 
be  the  formally  registered  farmers,  non-registered  farmers  backyard  gardening  farmers, 
household-level  processors,  coconut  collectors  and  taro  farmers.    Priority  will  be  allocated  to 
women farmers (who constitute 53 percent of farmers) and young farmers. It is estimated that 
the project will reach the 7,500 registered farmers and another 2,500 unregistered farmers, for 
a total target population of 10,000 farmers. 17  
III. 
Institutional Analysis 
Enabling Environment 
 The Mission found that there was a highly enabling institutional environment that would 
50. 
likely provide substantial support for the project.  This includes: 
National Fisheries and Agricultural Policy (NFAP).  MFMRA in cooperation with FAO prepared the 
NFAP 2019 – 2029 policy document covering the next 10 years.  One of the three pillars of the 
new  policy  was  ecological  resilience,  which  includes  the  following  objectives:  (i)  prioritize 
activities that are environmentally sustainable (e.g., facilitate access to integrated production 
systems  and  agro-ecological  principles);  (ii)  increase  use  of  clean  energy  and  improve 
sustainable use of NR; promote and facilitate access to programs, tools and equipment in support 
of biodiversity protection and as well as effective control of plants, pests etc; and (iii) promote 
use of technologies and infrastucture that can increase access to clean water including efficient 
irrigation  systems;  and  promote  and  facilitate  implementation  of  ecologically  friendly  and 
resiliant  production  systems  (e.g,  on-site  compost  and  biofertilizers  and  equipment  and 
technologies  and  tools  that  manage  CC  effects  defined  by  increase  temperatures  and  greater 
frequency  of droughts).  At present there  are two separate bills on agriculture and pesticides 
that were submitted to the current Parliament session that are reflected in the CN; 
Strategic  Action  Plan  (SAP).    Under  Maldives  2019  SAP  for  the  period  2019  –  2023  the  Plan 
presents 5 priority sectors.  Under the Blue Economy sector  agriculture is identified as one of 
the subsectors. MAP is in conformity through supporting the following priorities: (i) to introduce 
M-GAP  certification  for  commercial  agricultural  producers  and  small-scale  farmers  to:  (ii) 
improve  stands  or  production  and  quality  (SAP  Strategy  1.4),  (iii)  enforce  IPM  practices  in 
agricultural  systems,  (iv)  develop  suitable  composting  systems  and  support  home-based 
hydroponic systems in selected islands and incorporate CC and sustainable agricultural principles 
17  The  SECAP  Mission  felt  these  may  be  over-estimates.    This  view  was  based  on  interviews  in  the  field  with  the 
commercial agricultural project manager and the agricultural research station director, respectively who suggested that 
only 2 to 3 atolls and their respective islands were realistic to be reached by collection boats for agricultural produce on 
a weekly basis and provision of support by a single extension officers, respectively.  Based on those suggestions and an 
assumption that the number of islands supported by the project would be 5 islands per atoll and 3 atolls in the north 
and south regions would result in a total of 30 islands (2 regions x 3 atolls x 5 islands) or 15 % of total small-farmer 
islands (197).  Either the target would have to be reduced or investment increased and/or the assumptions changed to 
meet CN targets. 
13 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
in all training and research activities (Strategies 4.4 and 4.5, respectively).   Relevant and targets 
to be achieved by 2023 are: (i) IPM guidlines to be fully implemented in at least 50 agricultural 
islands and at least 20 % of commercial areas are M-GAP certified.  Other sectoral strategies 
and plans that MAP is in conformity with include: (i) Climate Change Policy Framework (MEE, 
2015); (ii) Maldives National Chemical Profile (MEE, 2015); (iii) National Biodiversity Strategy 
and Action Plan 2016 – 2025 (MEE, 2015); and (iv) the  Adaptation Program of Action (MEEW, 
2007); 
National  Spatial  Plan  (NSP).    The  NSP  2020-2040  is  a  government  initiative  to  promote 
decentralized  development  through  connectivity  and  accessibility.  NSP  is  the  country’s  first 
strategic spatial development framework and will serve as a policy document for directing and 
informing  national  and  regional  resource  allocation  and  distribution.  This  Plan  will  serve  as  a 
framework to integrate service accessibility and resource efficiency with the establishment of a 
National  Transportation  Network  (NTN).    This  Plan  which  broadly  integrates  the  national  and 
international  commitments  of  the  country,  will  especially  support  the  timely  delivery  of  the 
Jazeera Raajje Manifesto, 8th National Development Plan (NDP) underway and the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) of Global Agenda 2030.  The varying orders of regions are distributed 
from  north  to  south  of  the  country  to  foster  a  more  equitable  distribution  of  socio-economic 
benefits  for  the  population.  The  Regions  are  mainly  classified  into  Urban  Regions,  Satellite 
Regions  and  Satellite  Island(s)  of  which  there  is  a  total  of  21.    An  integrated  transportation 
network coupled with strategic distribution of key services and infrastructure between the islands 
is intended to enable the collective functionality of the NSP regions.  NSP defines the national 
service allocations and the allocations made for each NSP Region.18 At this stage, national level 
services  and  those  allocated  for  the  Urban  Regions  PI,  PII  and  Satellite  Regions  have  been 
determined. with the level of service depending on the size of the target servicing population. 
While about 68 services have been allocated for Urban Regions, 24 services are  allocated  for 
Satellite Regions. Satellite Clusters are connected with the services of Urban Regions through 
direct  marine  transport  links.  Regional  agricultural  services  (agri-centers,  nurseries,  urban 
agricultural centers and uninhabited agricultural islands will be supported for Urban Regions I 
and II.  Service islands have already been identified to provide agricultural services for the other 
non-urban regions.  NSP will be implemented in four quarters with a 5 year timeframe, each.  
Priorities for the next three years are: (i) design of domestic maritime transport system (2019), 
(ii)  initiation of provision of maritime services  (2020) and  (iii) completion of airport transport 
infrastructure (2021); and 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF).  MAP also supports the UNDAF for 
the period  2016 -2020 that has two relevant strategic priorities, gender (priority area 2) and 
environment/climate  change  (priority  area  4)  icluding  promoting  increasing  resilience  to  CC 
(Outcome 4). 
Gender.   
The  Maldives  ranks  101st  of  164  countries  rated  by  the  Gender  Development  Index 
51. 
(2017), 106th of 144 countries rated by the Gender Gap Index (2017), and 76th of 160 countries 
rated by the Gender Inequality Index. These rankings confirm that much needs to be done to 
improve women's empowerment and  their access to  services and opportunities. Furthermore, 
women's participation in the labour force, at  only  48% in 2014, is very low. There are  3,992 
registered women farmers that accounts for 53% of all registered farmers, indicating that there 
is  no  gender  disparity  in  allocating  arable  land.  The  general  practise  is  for  Island  Councils  to 
allocate land to community members who apply for farming. In the agriculture sector, gender 
18 Examples of key service allocations at the national level include trans-shipment port, cruise terminal, arts and culture 
centre  and  national  data  centre.    Some  of  the  key  regional  level  service  allocations  include  international/domestic 
airports, waste management centres, central ferry terminal, reserves including that of water, fuel and food, etc. 
14 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
division across roles exists; generally women contribute to crop production, value addition and 
natural resource  management.  Women  often assist men in farming activities, while some  are 
also  fully  engaged  in  related  value-added  activities.  Selling  produce  is  considered  a  male 
responsibility.  Although  gender  roles  are  largely  fixed  in  agriculture  and  fisheries,  as 
modernisation  brings  changes  to  the  island  way  of  life  some  women  are  taking  up  the  tasks 
traditionally performed by men as the need arises. The Government has taken several measures 
to improve gender equality, most importantly through ratification of the Gender Equality Act in 
2017. This Act defines the role of the Government, political parties and businesses in bridging 
gender gaps in the political, economic and social aspects of life. Its enforcement is governed by 
a  set  of  regulations  to  eliminate  gender-based  violence,  combat  discrimination  and  sexual 
harassment, provide equal opportunity and equal pay, and enhance women’s participation in the 
labour force.  
EIA Requirements.   
 The Government of Maldives (GoM) has a number of environmental policies, regulations 
52. 
and standards of specific relevance to environmental protection.  The main legal instrument is 
the  Environmental  Protection  and  Preservation  Act  (Law  No.  4/93)  of  the  Maldives.  This  Act 
provides the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), an autonomous agency within the Ministry 
of  Environment  and  Energy  (MEE),  with  wide  statutory  powers  pertaining  to  environmental 
regulation  and  enforcement.  In  addition,  the  GoM  also  enforces  the  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment  (EIA)  Regulations,  which  came  into  force  in  May  2007,  as  per  the  statutory 
requirements of the EPA.  According to existing EIA guidelines all agricultural projects qualify for 
Schedule D which means that MFMRA will need to submit a project brief for consideration in a 
scoping meeting subsequent to which either an IEE or EIA report may be required. 19 
53. 
 Relevant on-going public programs and potential collaborative partners include: 
Waste Management and Pollution Control Department (MMD). The WMD in the MEE is mandated 
to ensure the proper implementation of the regulations. This regulation sets standards for the 
management of municipal, industrial and special waste, issuance of permissions in relation to 
waste management, transportation of  waste, information sharing/reporting and penalizing for 
non-compliance. The EPA has also developed Waste Incineration Guidelines (WIGs), published 
in  2016,  which  are  intended  to  facilitate  the  construction  and  operation  of  waste  incinerators 
safely and to mitigate the adverse environmental and health impacts that may arise during the 
set up and operational cycle.20  The National Solid Waste Management Policy was formulated in 
2008  and  a  Waste  Management  Regulation  was  enacted  in  2013.  National  Solid  Waste 
Management Policy was further revised in 2015. Under these policies waste management centers 
at islands, regional waste management facilities, systematic waste collection mechanisms and 
pilot waste to energy projects are being implemented.  This policy is currently being supported 
by  three  on-going  solid  waste  programs  supported  by  the  IDA  (Maldives  Clean  Environment 
Project), AsDB (Greater Malé Environmental Improvement and Waste Management Project) and 
Abu Dahbi Fund (Small Scale Waste to Energy for Addu, R. Vandhoo and H.Dh Clusters Project).  
Of particular interest is the IDA-supported project that will be establishing regional and island 
integrated waste management plans and systems in Zones II, IV and V; 
Water  and  Sanitation  Department  (WSD).    The  WSD  in  MEE  is  responsible  for  the  Ministry’s 
mandatory  function  to  provide  safe  water  and  sustainable,  affordable,  and  environmentally-
friendly sewerage systems in the Maldives.  The department is tasked with developing policies 
19 There is a registry of EPA-approved consultants to conduct the EIA.  The process averages a month.  EPA has suggested 
that this should be done only once the specific islands to receive project support are known.  It was also noted that if 
there will be significant changes in land use approval from the Planning Ministry may also be a requirement. 
20 The WIGs present the minimal standards to be maintained and precautions to be undertaken during waste incineration.  
The EPA is responsible to ensure sound adherence to the standards.    
15 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
and regulations, facilitating and coordinating the mobilization and use of resources for water and 
sewage systems. The department provides advice to both the government and the private sector 
in the planning and implementation of water and sanitation programs and in the provision and 
usage of such services.  These mandates are currently being supported by a GCF-funded, UNDP 
assisted  project  (Support  of  Vulnerable  Communities  in  Maldives  to  Manage  Climate 
Change-Induced Water Shortages) that will scale-up an integrated water supply system based 
on rainwater, groundwater and desalinated water into a low-cost delivery system for vulnerable 
households.  Originally targeting 49 islands (this has subsequently been reduced to 29 islands) 
that currently rely on emergency water deliveries for three months of each year.  Of particular 
interest  to  MAP  is  a  focus  on  groundwater  quality  improved  for  long-term  resilience.  
Groundwater  recharge  systems  and  improved  water  resource  management  capacity  will 
contribute to improved groundwater quality; 
Climate  Change  Department  (CCD).  The  CCD  in  MEE  is  in  charge  of  formulating  policies  and 
standards to address CC’s challenges in line with the legislative framework of the ROM as well 
as  international  practices  and  conventions.    Of  particular  relevance  to  MAP  are  the  following 
mandates:  (i)  bolstering  adaptation  actions  and  opportunities,  building  climate-resilient 
infrastructure  and  communities  and  (ii)  fostering  sustainable  development  while  ensuring 
security,  economic  sustainability  and  sovereignty  from  the  negative  consequences  of  the 
changing climate; 
Maldives Food and Drug Authority (MFDA)  The MFDA, together with the Agriculture Division of 
MOFA, has prepared Good Agriculture Practices (GAP) standards for fruits and vegetables, with 
the  technical  assistant  from  a  National  Food  Safety  Policy  2017-2026  consultant  under  FAO 
support,  by  adopting  those  of  SAARC-GAP  as  the  voluntary  standard  for  safe  agricultural 
production.  The  draft  is  currently  under  revision  according  to  the  country’s  context  by  the 
technical committee which includes key stakeholders.  GAP  certification is also proposed to be 
the responsibility of the MFDA. The MFDA, as well as other MOH agencies, has delegated food 
safety related tasks to the public health units at atoll and island levels; and 
Maldives  Meteorological  Service  (MMS).    There  are  5  meteorological  offices  under  MMS,  the 
station in Hulhule’ being the main office. Aviation and synoptic observations are  supported in 
the other four stations (Hanimaadhoo, Laamu Kadhdhoo, Gaaf Dhaal Kaadedhdhoo and Seenu 
Gan).  In addition to these stations, there are 20 automated weather stations and 3 tide gauges 
installed across the country which provide real time data to MMS.  
Potential Sources of Additional Funding. 
The  main  international  financing  institutions  in  the  2016  –  2017  period  in  order  of 
54. 
resources were: the AsDB (US $ 11.5), JICA (US $ 6.8 M) and the WB/IDA (US$ 6.2).  In terms 
of sectors infrastructure (60% of total assistance received) followed by other social infrastructure 
(21 %), multi-sector (9 %), production (6%). and education (5 %) were the most important.21  
In terms of environmental projects (including climate change activities) the main funding sources 
and on-going projects identified were: (i) the GEF-funded eliminating POPs and chemical waste 
(UNDP/MEEW) approved in 2017; (ii) the Maldives Clean Environment Project (IDA/MCEP); (iii) 
the Greater Malé Environmental Improvement and Waste Management Project (AsDB/MOEEW) 
and the Sustainable Fisheries Resource Development Project  (IDA/MFMRA).  There was also a 
recently  completed  policy-oriented  technical  assistance  project  (FAO)  in  support  of  MFMRA 
resulting in the National Fisheries and Agricultural Policy 2019 – 2029 .  Maldives is also receiving 
assistance through SAARC in support of sustainable agriculture.   
21 Source: OECD: Aid at a glance (http://www.oecd.org). 
16 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
 The  international  NGO  community  has  a  small  presence  and  only  IUCN  was  identified 
55. 
working in the fisheries sector. 
56. 
 Maldives has recently “graduated” from and is no longer qualified for LDCF/SCCF funding.   
57. 
 Under GEF 6 there is still unprogrammed residual funding of approximately US $ 2.4 M 
left  for  CC  and  LD  Focal  Areas  (FA)  as  the  BD  FA  was  heavily  oversubscribed  from  the  initial 
allocation  however  these  funds  while  not  formerly  committed,  appear  to  be  “earmarked”  for 
another GEF IA/EA.22   Similarly under GEF 7, despite the presence of at least 3 programs that 
appear to be of particular relevance to Maldives in support of sustainable agriculture, Maldives 
allocation appears to already be “ringfenced” and no longer available.23   
 FAO is currently working with MFMRA together with UNDP in the development of a GCF 
58. 
proposal targeting both agricultural and fisheries sectors.  
IV. 
Environmental and Social Category 
59. 
 The  Project  is  classified  as    environmental  and  social  Category  B  because  the  project 
activities  entail    (i)  development  of  agro-processing  facilities;  (ii)  agricultural  intensification 
and/or  expansion  of  cropping  area  in  non-sensitive  areas,  and  (iii)  credit  operations  through 
financial  service  providers  will  likely  have  adverse  environmental  impacts  on  habitats, 
ecosystems and/or livelihoods that are site-specific and can be mitigated by known measures 
included in the ESMP.   
60. 
 Similarly,  MAP  appears  to  meet  the  following  social  criteria  typical  of  a  category  B 
project: (i) agricultural intensification and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas 
that  may  have  adverse  impacts  on  habitats,  ecosystems  and/or  livelihoods;  (ii)  short-term 
public health and safety concerns and (iii) requiring a migrant workforce  or  seasonal workers 
(for construction, planting and/or harvesting). 
 The  SECAP  RN  confirms  this  risk  category  and  mitigation  measures  have  been 
61. 
recommended in the ESMP (Section VI). 
V. 
Climate Risk Category 
62. 
 At the time of the preparation of the CN the IFAD team, despite recognizing the Maldives 
high vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, rated the project risk as Moderate.  This was 
based on the view that the project is well-positioned to leverage ongoing climate change-related 
initiatives  in  the  area.  Following  IFAD’s  climate  risk  screening  criteria  the  November  SECAP 
mission  recommended  a  recategorized  as  High  risk  and  the  preparation  of  a  detailed  climate 
vulnerability  assessment  (CVA).    This  recommendation  did  not  conflict  with  the  earlier  CN 
mission’s proposal that given the multitude of existing studies the CVA could be prepared using 
existing  climate  risk  analyses.    A  Climate  Risk  Analysis  (CRA)  was  completed  and  has  been 
submitted to IFAD.  
22 Source: GEF website. 
23 These are: (i) Least Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States Program under the Chemicals and Waste 
FA  (Program  3)  that  will  seek  to  address  the  sound management  of chemicals  and  waste  through  strengthening  the 
capacity  of  sub-national,  national  and  regional  institutions  and  strengthening  the  enabling  policy  and  regulatory 
framework in these countries; (ii) Objective 1 under the IW FA, Strengthening Blue Economy concept, opportunities will 
be identified in coastal areas for potential sustainable development of existing and new sectors, including agriculture 
(e.g., run-off from agricultural lands); and (iii) GEF’s impact program 1, Food Systems, Land Use and Restoration in 
support of an integrated approach to implementing SLM to increase the prospects for food security for smallholders and 
communities that are dependent on farming for their livelihoods. 
17 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
VI. 
Recommendations for Project Design and Implementation 
63. 
 Seven recommendations for consideration in programme design are provided below: 
Data.  Lack of data is one of the major obstacles confronted by the agriculture sector. Currently 
statistics  on  production  of  agriculture  are  almost  non-existent.    Reliable  and  up  to  date 
information  are  basic  fundamentals  in  agriculture  development  from  the  design  and 
implementation stage and can impact the sustainability of the project.  Data presented in  the 
2014 Census is aggregated with the fisheries sector. Taking into consideration the agricultural 
sector’s  importance  there  is  a  need  to  disaggregate  both  sectors  to  support  evidence  based 
decisions. MFMRA needs to coordinate with National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) to disaggregate 
the sector specific data.  To support IFAD’s mainstreaming priorities agriculture data will need 
to be segregated by sector, sex youth and nutritional status.  Reliable and up-to-date information 
and data are basic and fundamental element in agricultural development as these can impact 
decisions taken and relates to the sustainability and the productivity of the  programme.  This 
should be reflected in a robust M&E sub-component supported under Component 4;  
Gender.  Women are important actors in achieving food security and improved nutrition.  As a 
result  increased  emphasis  should  be  given  to  focusing  on  women,  especially  disadvantaged 
women,  to  help  their  survival  and  efficiency  in  livelihood  activities.  The  low  participation  of 
women  in  the  labour  force  indicates  women  need  support  in  productive  economic  activities, 
including improved access to financing and investment, technology, infrastructure, training and 
diverse markets. In MAP’s design stage emphasis should be made to provide woman farmers, 
especially the disadvantaged women such as women in female-headed households,’ equal access 
to markets, along with supporting resources and capacity building; 
Farm Labour.  Due to the influx of migrants into the labour force, the changing makeup of the 
agriculture  sector  needs  to  be  taken  into  consideration  to  deal  with  challenges  related  to  it.  
Census  2014  reports  that  of  the  total  population  employed  in  the  fisheries  and  agriculture 
sectors,  8  percent  are  foreign  residents.  It  is  well  known  fact  that  migrant  workers  also 
contribute to the sectors informally, which is not reflected in the data. Today often Malé migrant 
workers are actively involved in production and in some islands it is common for migrant workers 
to informally rent agricultural fields from locals. In other cases the local owner owns the farm 
while  the  migrant  worker  manages  the  farming  activities  including  the  use  of  agrochemicals.  
The migrant workers lack information on good practices and misuse of chemical pesticides as no 
training is provided to migrant workers. This aspect needs to be discussed with MFMRA and at 
least for MAP, M-GAP training should target all farmers; 
M-GAP.  To integrate Good Agriculture Practices (GAP) standards, MFMRA is introducing M-GAP 
certification  for  commercial  agricultural  producers  and  small  scale  farmers  to  improve  the 
standards of the quality of the produce. Key Informant Interviews undertaken during the SECAP 
Mission indicate that it would be more realistic to implement M-GAP measures gradually through 
a series of phases based on the GAP’s 5 modules, in particular for the small farmer. It should 
also  be  noted  that  M-GAP  certification  remains  voluntary  and  lacks  a  supporting  regulatory 
framework as the supporting pesticides bill submitted to the Legal Office some three years ago 
has yet to move forward; 
Mitigation Measures. As noted above, lack of site-specificity and detailed project interventions 
has  constrained  the  SECAP  analysis.  Nevertheless,  the  listed  impacts  fall  mainly  under  MAP’s 
second  component  and  to  a  lesser  extent  under  components  one  and  two.    No  impacts  were 
identified  under  the  management  component  (component  4).    Information  was  provided  for 
reference  purposes  for  the  design  team  on  EIA  requirements  (Attachment  2).  In  addition 
18 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
information  has  been  provided  on  approved  and  banned  pesticides  in  the  Maldives,  list  of 
protected areas and selected criteria for M-GAP certification and can be found in the project file;  
Island-specific Integrative Frameworks.  The programme is likely to find in the island selection 
and  assessment  process  of  candidate  islands  that  each  are  unique.    Variables  include  for 
example:  (i)  degree  of  farming  as  economic  activity  and  presence  of  markets,  (ii)  inter-
relationships between farmers and coconut collectors and access to the latter, (iii) environmental 
constraints  (quality  of  groundwater  and  access  to  alternatives),  (iv)  distance  from  off-island 
markets, (v)  capacity of the island council, (v) availability and characteristics  of labor inputs, 
(vi) presence of other on-going projects that, due to the size and nature of these small islands, 
should  be  collaborative  activities  integrated  with  MAP-supported  activities.    Overlaying  this  is 
the  status  of  a  number  of  relevant  national  programs  described  in  section  3  above.    It  is 
suggested that island-specific diagnostic profiles24 be prepared to guide  interventions supported 
by the project in each island and identify where collaborative interventions can be supported in 
particular  with  the  solid  waste,  integrative  water  management  efforts  and  CC  adaptation 
interventions.25 Due to the stalled regulatory framework it would appear that M-GAP will remain 
a voluntary scheme for the present.  This has been discussed in further detail in the Environment 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for MAP; and  
Agro-chemical Analyses.  One of the project activities will be to support the rolling out of M-GAP 
practices  among  farmers  leading  to  certification  in  the  production  of  low-impact  and  health 
produce.  A critical factor will be mastering the use and application of approved agro-chemicals.  
Part  of  the  certification  process  involves  establishing  baseline  conditions  and  follow-up 
monitoring.    A  review  of  information  supported  with  interviews  would  seem  to  support  the 
conclusion  that  few  to  no  data  exist.  This  is  a  major  constraint  to  both  achieving  M-GAP 
objectives and implementing proposed SECAP mitigation measures. It is understood that MAP 
will support the purchase of and training in of a High Performance Liquid Chromatograph (HPLC) 
for use by ARC.  This will represent a significant step in addressing this important gap in water 
quality data.   
VII.  Further Studies Needed 
59.  Project-related  Carbon  Emission  Assessment.    It  is  suggested  that  once  project  design  is 
completed a carbon assessment be conducted through the application of the ExAct to assess net 
balance of carbon emissions per IFAD SECAP requirements. 
VIII.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
60.  Indicators suggested for  consideration for  inclusion in  MAP’s Results Framework and M&E 
system in line with the proposed project activities are presented below (Table 1).  
Table 1.  List of Recommended Monitoring Indicators for Maldives Agricultural 
programme (MAP) 
24 For purposes of the ESMF public consultation, environmental/social impact mitigation and M&E it is recommended that 
each island be “treated” as a “subproject.”  Based on initial consultations with the island chief, council and farmers there 
will be a better understanding of what will be the likely “package” of interventions proposed for MAP-support.  In parallel 
to this process and critical to informing the selection of activities to be included in the “package”, baseline conditions for 
each  island  should  be  established  and  presented  in  the  form  of  a  diagnostic  profile  (see  Attachment  5  of  the  ESMF 
Framework).  The  baseline,  results  of  public  consultation  and  proposed  MAP  activities  would  provide  the  basis  for 
screening,  and  if  needed,  flagging  follow-up  activities  to  address  data  gaps  and  the  identification  of  site-specific 
mitigation measures and in those rare instances, when a detailed EIA may be required. 
25 One example of the potential benefits derived from a collaborative activity would be between WMD (MEE) and DOA 
(MFMRA) where the former is working with farmers to dispose of their vegetative matter but don’t have the expertise of 
the latter to assist them in its use in making and applying compost. 
19 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
Activity 
Suggested Monitoring Indicators 
water-harvesting 
lining irrigation 
canals (TBD) 
agricultural 
inputs 
land-levelling 
(TBD)  
production 
facilities 
(construction and 
processes) 
promote adoption 
of sustainable 
certification 
schemes 
“bankable” 
business plans 
capacity building 
increasing public 
awareness (PA) 
- reductions in offtake from aquifer through bore holes (mt3) 
- increase in water use efficiency (%) 
- changes in aquifer levels (meters) and usage (mt3) 
- uptake of pest resistant seed varieties and use of  IPM practices(#/type of 
practices adopted) 
- reduction of use of agro-chemicals in programme areas(decrease in volume 
from baseline by class) 
- groundwater quality (presence and concentration of selected pesticides and 
fertilizers) 
- increase in water use efficiency (%) 
- for “greenfield” sites, inspection to ensure new facility is appropriate for 
designated land use (# and compliance with EIA requirements) 
- presence and concentrations of selected pollutants at “end of pipe” discharge of 
facilities/processes supported under the project 
- development and adoption of improved recycling and/or safe waste disposal 
technologies (#) 
- increase in recycling efficiency (%) 
- functioning pilot certification schemes (#) 
- premium paid for certified products over baseline (MDV) 
- development and application of environmental guidelines incorporated into the 
plans  
- events (#) people trained (per-time) in climate change and environmental 
impact mitigation 
- events (#) and people (#) participating in climate change oriented PA activities 
57.  For MAP, the PIU will be responsible for the establishment of the M&E system, organising 
the project baseline and undertaking activity monitoring and supervision.  At the atoll and island  
levels it will be responsible the for undertaking M&E and reporting.  Third party monitoring and 
evaluation will also be considered for MAP either at national or at local levels. 
20 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
IX. 
References 
ADB, 2017.A region at Risk.  The Human Dimensions of Climate Change in Asia and the Pacific.  
Asian Development Bank, Manila.   
Christensen,  J.H.,  et.  al.,  2007.    Regional  Climate  Projections.  In:  Climate  Change  2007:The 
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change.  Cambridge  University  Press, 
Cambridge, UK 
EPA, 2019.  Protected Areas of Maldives 2019.  Environmental Protection Agency.  Republic of 
the Maldives. 
FAO, 2019.  Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and Rural Sector in Maldives.  Food and 
Agriculture of the United Nations, Malé. 
GOM, 2019.  Strategic Action Plan: 2019 – 2023.  Government of Maldives.   
IDA,  2017.    Maldives  Clean  Environment  Project  (MCEP).    Project  Appraisal  Document.  
International Development Association, World Bank Group.  Washington, D.C.  
IPCC,  2014:  Climate  Change  2014:  Impacts,  Adaptation,  and  Vulnerability.  Part  B:  Regional 
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment.  Report of the IPPC. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
MEE, 2017.  State of the Environment 2016.  Ministry of Environment and Energy.  Republic of 
the Maldives. 
-----,  2016.  Second  National  Communication  of  Maldives  to  the  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention  on  Climate  Change.  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Energy.    Republic  of  the 
Maldives. 
-----,  2015.    Maldives’  Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (INDC).  Ministry  of 
Environment and Energy.  Republic of the Maldives. 
-----, 2015. National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2025.  Ministry of Environment 
and Energy.  Republic of the Maldives. 
-----, 2015. Fifth National Report of Maldives to the Convention on Biological Diversity. Maldives. 
Ministry of Environment and Energy. .  Republic of the Maldives. 
-----, 2015.  Maldives: Climate Change Policy Framework.  Ministry of Environment and Energy. 
Republic of the Maldives. 
-----, 2015.  Maldives National Chemical Profile.  Maldives. Ministry of Environment and Energy. 
.  Republic of the Maldives. 
-----, 2012.  Climate Change and Food Security.  Inception Report.   Ministry of Environment.  
Republic of the Maldives. 
MEEW, 2007.  National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA).  Ministry of Environment, Energy 
and Water.  Republic of the Maldives. 
MFDA,  2017.    National  Food  Safety  Policy  (2017  –  2026).    Maldives  Food  and  Drug  Agency, 
Ministry of Health.  Republic of Maldives. 
MFMRA,  2019.    National  Fisheries  and  Agricultural  Policy  2019  –  2029.    Ministry  of  Fisheries, 
Marine  Research  and  Agriculture  in  cooperation  with  the  Food  and  Agricultural 
Organization of the United Nations.  July, 2019.  The Republic of Maldives. 
-----, 2010.  Agricultural Developent Master Plan, 2010 – 2025.   
21 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
-----/MFDA,  2015.    Maldives  Standard  for  Good  Agriculture  Practices(GAP):  Fruits  and 
Vegetables.  Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture and Maldives Food 
and Drug Authority.  The Republic of the Maldives 
MNPI, 2019.  National Development Plan: Transforming Maldives to an Equitable, Prosperous, 
Inclusive,  Connected  Island  Nation.”  Ministry  of  National  Planning  and  Infrastructure.  
Republic of the Maldives. 
-----,  2019.    Maldives  National  Spatial  Plan:  2020  –  2040:  Final  Draft.    Ministry  of  National 
Planning and Infrastructure.  Republic of the Maldives. 
MOH, 2018. Maldives Demographic and Health Survey 2016-2017. Ministry of Health.  Republic 
of Maldives 
MTAC, 2015.  Assessment of Solid Waste Management Practices and its Vulnerability to Climate 
Risks in Maldives Tourism Sector.  Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation.  Republic of the 
Maldives. 
NBS, 2014a. Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES). Analytical Report IV: Poverty 
& Inequality. National Bureau of Statistics.  Republic of the Maldives.    
-----, 2014b. Population and Housing Census. Statistical Release 3- Education.  Republic of the 
Maldives. 
-----, 2014c.  Population and Housing Census. Statistical Release 1- Population and Household.  
Republic of the Maldives. 
-----, 2014d.  Population and Housing Census. Statistical Release 4-Employment.  Republic of 
the Maldives. 
Nurse L.A. and Sem, G. 2001.  Chapter 17 Small Island States. IPCC Third Assessment Report. 
Payet and S. Saedd, ed IPCC 
RIMES, 2012. Development of high resolutions regional climate change model : Report 4 Climate 
Change Scenario and their interpetations in Maldives.  Regional Integrated Multi-hazard 
Early Warning Sustem for Africa & Asia. Bangkok. 
ROM, 2015.  United Nations Development Assistance Framework: 2016 – 2020.  Republic of the 
Maldives and the United Nations in the Maldives. 
Shaig,  A.,  2006.    Climate  Change  Vulnerability  and  Adaptation  Assessment  of  the  Land  and 
Beaches of Maldives. Technical Papers to Maldives National Adaptation Plan of Action for 
Climate Change. Malé’, Ministry of Environment, Energy and Water. 
United Nations. 2013. Consideration of Reports submitted by States Parties under Article 18 of 
the  Convention  –  Maldives,  Committee  on  the  Elimination  of  Discrimination  against 
women. CEDAW/C/MDV/4-5 . 
UNDP,  2006.    Developing  a  Disaster  Risk  Profile  for  Maldives.  United  Nations  Development 
programme, Malé. 
UNFPA,  2017.  Thematic  Analysis  of  Youth  in  the  Maldives.  United  Nations  Population  Fund.  
Republic of Maldives 
WEF. 2017. The Global Gender Gap Report 2017. World Economic Forum.  Available at http:// 
www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2017.pdf. 
22 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
Attachment 1: ESMP Plan and Matrix1 
Environmental / 
Social and climate 
Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
Responsible 
Institution in 
Implementation 
Phase 
Means of 
Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
- incorporate migrant 
workers as one of target 
groups into project design  
- island 
council 
- farmers fora 
MFMRA/PIU 
- conduct water 
assessments in drought 
prone islands; 
- increase project 
supported water harvesting 
investments; 
- island 
council 
- island water 
users (if 
present) 
MFMRA/PIU 
MEE (WSD) 
- documentation 
of participation in 
relevant MAP 
supported training 
activities 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor 
monitoring reports 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
- by event 
and reported 
in MAP’s M&E 
system 
- bi-annual 
(wet & dry 
season) 
Cost Estimate 
- costed in existing 
project design 
71,6002 
- use of permeable 
construction slabs 
- identify/enlarge/protect 
recharge areas (catchment 
areas); and 
- if needed, offset reduced 
recharge rates with 
reductions in less 
important extraction 
activities. 
- establish baseline and 
periodic monitoring where 
MAP supports groundwater 
extraction  
- island 
council 
- island water 
users (if 
present) 
MFMRA/PIU 
ARC 
MEE (WSD) 
MEE (EPA) 
MOH MFDA) 
23 
M&E monitoring 
reports 
- bi-annual 
(wet & dry 
season) 
- costed in project design 
(infrastructure/equipment 
for ARC) 
- MAP training and 
capacity building 
activities fail to reach 
migrant workers in 
agricultural sector 
- groundwater 
extraction increased 
due to intensification 
of agricultural 
production through 
shift to HY varieties 
- reduction in aquifer 
recharge due to 
increased water 
harvesting, 
construction of non-
permeable slabs 
associated with 
project supported 
construction and lining 
of existing irrigation 
canals) 
- groundwater quality 
not suitable for 
agricultural use 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
- agro-chemical use 
and disposal 
(intensification of 
agricultural production 
through shift to HY 
varieties and rolling 
out of hydroponic 
schemes and 
application of drip 
fertigation) 
- application of existing 
policies on banned agro-
chemicals; 
- promote shift towards 
organic fertilizers using tax 
policies in compliance with 
draft agro-chemical bill and 
M-GAP certification criteria; 
 - provision of support for 
pest resistant seed 
varieties; and  
- island 
council 
- farmer fora 
MFMRA 
MEE (WSD) 
MEE (EPA) 
MOH MFDA) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor; 
monitoring 
reports; chemical 
analyses 
- costed in project design 
(infrastructure/equipment 
for ARC) 
Initially 
monthly 
(when 
cleaning 
closed 
systems and 
disposing 
residues on 
field crops) 
with reduced 
frequency 
when SOP In 
place 
- support for IPM 
- application of existing 
EPA/EIA environmental 
standards for land clearing; 
- island 
council 
MFMRA 
MEE (EPA) 
- limit construction to dry 
season; and 
- use of silt curtains. 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor 
monitoring reports 
3 visits per 
activity (pre, 
on-going and 
post project) 
- see FN 2 
-  temporary loss of 
vegetative cover and 
exposure of soils to 
precipitation and 
possible increase in 
coastal / nearshore  
sedimentation (land 
preparation including 
leveling, seeding and 
weeding; 
infrastructure 
construction including 
research facilities, 
hydroponic structures, 
greenhouses, storage 
/ processing / 
packaging and market 
facilities) 
- production of various 
by-products and 
organic pollution 
(associated with the 
respective processing 
of commodities such 
as coconut chips, and 
UHT coconut water, 
pickles, jam and juice) 
- incorporation of effluent 
treatment and disposal 
technology in process 
design 
-compliance with existing 
EPA/EIA WQ standards and 
regulations 
- island 
council 
MFMRA 
MEE (EPA) 
MEE (WSD) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor  
assessment 
reports 
Initial on-site 
assessment 
followed by 
ad hoc, 
unannounced 
site visits 
53,7607 
24 
Annex 5. Maldives Agribusiness programme:  
Social Environment and Climate Assessment  
Procedures (SECAP) and Review Note 
- increase in solid 
waste (packaging 
from inputs and for 
by-product 
production) 
- “bankable” business 
plans and loans 
support adverse 
activities not in 
compliance with 
GOM/IFAD policies 
(development of 
“bankable” business 
plans) 
- MAP supported 
infrastructure (new 
and reformed) and 
equipment at risk to 
the effects of  
storm/tidal surge and 
ensuing flooding from 
extreme events 
- adverse CC effects 
on agricultural 
production 
- provision of guidelines for 
borrower and financing 
institutions complemented 
by training ensuring loan 
resources support activities 
that are environmentally 
sustainable, climate 
change friendly and in 
compliance with 
government EPA EIA 
requirements   
- flood proofing 
- policy study on feasibility 
of offering indexed hazard 
insurance for small farmers 
- improved recycling 
and/or safe disposal of 
waste per existing policies 
on solid wastes 
- island 
council 
MFMRA 
MEE (EPA) 
MEE (WSD) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor; 
assessment 
reports 
Initial on-site 
assessment 
followed by 
ad hoc, 
unannounced 
site visits 
- on demand 
-  costed  under  M&E  sub-
component 
- costed in project under 
component 2 
- island 
council 
- SME 
- farmers fora 
- MFMRA 
- guidelines 
- bank approval 
documentation 
- MEE (EPA) 
- SDFC 
- MFLC 
- PIU business 
development 
specialist 
- island 
council 
- MFMRA 
- MHI 
- construction site 
inspection 
- insurance policy 
- periodicity 
define in 
insurance 
policy 
- costed in project design 
and covered in MAP 
construction costs 
- farmers fora  - MFMRA 
- policy study 
- NA 
- costed in project design 
1 The ESMP matrix must be integrated into the project’s implementation manual or developed as a stand-alone guidance document for the project management unit late in the 
design stage. The following templates must be attached to all SECAP review notes of Cat B projects. 
2 This consists of [one person day (technician) + 1 rt air trip (Malé – island A) + one boat rental covering 3 islands, ground transport] x 5 trips x 2 per season x 4 years 
Key (US$): 
Technician person-day: 
Place ticket (rt):   
1 day DSA: 
Boat rental (day:) 
Taxi (6 hours): 
200 
150 
  70 
670 
300 
25 
Attachment 2.  EIA Process for Schedule D Projects 
26 
Attachment 3.  List of Documents in the Project File* 
Approved and Banned Pesticides (2019).  Source: MFMRA 
Banned Pesticide List.  Source: MFMRA 
List of Protected Areas (2019). Source: EPA1 
Draft TORs for a Detailed Climate Risk Analysis for MAP 
Selected Criteria for M-GAP Certification. Source: MAMRF/MFSA, 2015. 
M-GAP Logo 
*submitted with the Draft SECAP & RN in November 2019. 
27 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
Maldives Agriculture Programme (MAP) 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
I. 
Introduction 
1. 
The  Government  of  the  Maldives  (GOM)  has  requested  the  International  Fund  for  Agriculture 
Development (IFAD) to provide financial assistance for the national Maldives Agriculture Programme (MAP). 
The MAP will include physical investments in infrastructure (new and rehabilitation of existing infrastructure 
including  research  facilities,  greenhouses  and  storage  facilities),  equipment,  chemical  inputs,  rain 
harvesting  and  storage  technology  and  small-scale  agriculture  processing  facilities).    Non-physical 
investments  will  contribute  to  policy  refinement,  strengthened  services  and  institutions,  enhanced 
agricultural  technologies  and  better  access  to  financing  and  markets  for  small  farmer  households.  The 
Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MFMRA) will be the Implementing Agency (IA) for 
MAP. 
2. 
 The main purpose of an ESMF is to: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
 Establish clear procedures and methodologies for the environmental and social assessment, 
review, approval and implementation of investments to be financed under the project 
 Specify appropriate roles and responsibilities, and outline the necessary reporting procedures, 
for managing and monitoring environmental and social concerns related to project investments 
 Determine the training, capacity building and technical assistance needed to successfully 
implement the provisions of the ESMF, and  
 Provide practical information resources for implementing the ESMF. 
This  Environmental  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF)  is  applicable  to  physical  interventions 
implemented in islands that have yet to be identified at the time of programme appraisal. The ESMF outlines 
the policy, procedures, and institutional requirements for preparing the island-specific interventions. These 
activities will be processed following IFAD’s SECAP procedures (IFAD, 2014), which is also incorporated in 
this document. MFMRA is responsible for preparing the required environmental assessments and obtaining 
IFAD concurrence.  
Policy and Legal Requirements 
II. 
General Provisions 
3. 
Government  of  Maldives.    The  Government  of  Maldives  (GoM)  has  a  number  of  environmental 
policies,  regulations  and  standards  of  specific  relevance  to  environmental  protection.    The  main  legal 
instrument is the Environmental Protection and Preservation Act (Law No. 4/93) of the Maldives. This Act 
provides  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA),  an  autonomous  agency  within  the  Ministry  of 
Environment and  Energy (MEE),  with wide statutory  powers pertaining to environmental regulation and 
enforcement. In addition, the GoM also enforces the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Regulations, 
which came into force in May 2007, as per the statutory requirements of the EPA (MEE, 2007). 
4. 
  The  existing  regulations  reflect  a  process  that  is  consistent  with  international  norms.    EIA 
requirements differ for proposed projects dependent on the characteristics of the location of the project 
interventions and nature and magnitude of proposed activities.  Initially, screening requires that proposed 
projects be classified based on whether they are found on Schedule D (see Attachment 1).26 In the case of 
not being found on the Schedule D list, a submission of a screening form is required subsequent to which 
a decision is issued either to proceed  with the project or in some cases require an  Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE). 
5. 
  Schedule D projects require the submission of an EIA/IEE application form (Schedule C2) together 
with a project brief not to exceed three pages requesting an environmental decision statement (Attachment 
2).  In the follow-up scoping meeting, a decision is taken whether an IEE or EIA report will be required.  
Other  options  include  rejecting  the  application  or  calling  for  more  information.    According  to  existing 
guidelines all agricultural projects qualify for Schedule D listing (Attachment 3). It appears likely that MAP 
would qualify for as a Schedule D project. 
26 These are similar to C type projects under the IFAD classification characterized by positive or no impact on the environment.     
28 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
6. 
Criteria  applied  to  assess  whether  an  IEE  or  an  EIA  is  required  depend  on  the  effects  of  the 
development  proposal  on  the  following  factors:  (i)  fauna  and  flora,  and  living  components  of  the 
environment;  (ii)  soil,  water,  air,  climate,  the  landscape,  and  the  non-living  components  of  the 
environment;  (iii)  the  interaction  between  these  factors;  (iv)  material  assets  and  cultural  heritage;  (v) 
impacts on the project from the environment; and (vi) human interactions and their interactions with the 
factors mentioned in paragraphs above.  
7. 
Finally, it should be noted that there is a registry of EPA-approved consultants to conduct the EIA.  
The process in general averages a month.  It was also noted that if there will be significant changes in land 
use approval from the Planning Ministry may also be a requirement. 
8. 
IFAD. The goal of IFAD’s Environment, Natural Resources Management (ENRM) policy is to enable 
poor  rural  people  to  escape  from  and  remain  out  of  poverty  through  more-productive  and  resilient 
livelihoods  and  ecosystems.  The  purpose  is  to  integrate  the  sustainable  management  of  natural  assets 
across the activities of IFAD and its partners. The policy sets out 10 core principles to guide IFAD’s support 
for clients in ENRM. The principles include both the core issues to be addressed and suggested approaches. 
In summary, IFAD will promote:  
scaled-up investment in multiple- benefit approaches for sustainable agricultural intensification;  
recognition and greater awareness of the economic, social and cultural value of natural assets;  
‘climate-smart’ approaches to rural development;  
– 
– 
– 
–  greater  attention  to  risk  and  resilience  in  order  to  manage  environment-  and  natural-resource- 
– 
– 
– 
related shocks;  
engagement in value chains to drive green growth;  
improved  governance  of  natural  assets  for  poor  rural  people  by  strengthening  land  tenure  and 
community-led empowerment;  
livelihood diversification to reduce vulnerability and build resilience for sustainable natural resource 
management;  
equality and empowerment for women and indigenous peoples in managing natural resources;  
increased access by poor rural communities to environment and climate finance; and  
– 
– 
–  environmental commitment through changing its own behaviour.  
9. 
integration into IFAD’s portfolio focusing on:  
Since its approval by IFAD’s board in 2011 the policy is being implemented through a systematic 
–  operations and its systematic integration in the project cycle; 
– 
in  promoting  knowledge,  advocacy  and  partnerships  through  promoting  integration  across 
communities of practice, including through South-South exchanges and farmer-to-farmer learning;  
resource  mobilization,  and 
sound; 
the 
and ‘climate-smart’ practices across IFAD’s lending portfolio;  
integration  of  environmentally 
supporting 
– 
–  promoting increased staff skills and internal capacity and procedures; and  
– 
embeding ENRM-related issues across IFAD’s results-based measurement system.  
10. 
A key tool to promoting the integration of the ENRM principles into the project cycle has been the 
development  of  IFAD’s  Social,  Environment  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP).    These 
procedures were designed to enable IFAD to (i) improve its decision-making and promote the sustainability 
of project outcomes, (ii) ensure greater harmonization with similar procedures of other multilateral financial 
institutions and with its own environment and NRM policy and climate change strategy; and (iii) continue 
to access environmental and climate financing  such  as the Global Environmental Facility and the Green 
Climate Fund.  MAP’s SECAP is discussed in more detail below. 
III. 
Anticipated Environmental Impacts 
Description of the Project 
11. 
The  goal  of  the  Maldives  Agriculture  Programme's  is  to  sustainably  increase  the  incomes,  food 
security and nutritional status of small farmer households.  MAP’s development objective is to strengthen 
the enabling environment for sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture. This objective will be achieved 
through policy refinement, strengthened services and institutions, enhanced agricultural technologies and 
better access to financing and markets for small farmer households.  
12. 
The  Programme  will  support  the  agribusiness  development  in  Maldives  by  investing  in  the 
generation and transfer of climate-smart technologies of modern agriculture, which are tailored to respond 
to the needs of agricultural production enhanced to meet with the identified market opportunities. This will 
29 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
be  achieved  through  activities  supported  under  three  technical  components:  (i)  enabling  policy, 
institutions  and  services  (component  1);  (ii)  climate-smart  production  (component  2);  and  (iii)  market 
connection (component 3).  MAP will be supported by a 4th programme management component. 
13. 
Activities  supported  under  Component  1  include:  (i)  providing  support  to  establish  policies 
(research,  studies,  strategies  and  bylaws);  (ii)  strengthening  institutional  capacity  of  the  Ministry  of 
Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMRA) and its Agriculture Research Centre (ARC) located 
in  Hanimadhoo  Island.    In  the  latter  case  this  includes  support  for  new  facilities  (e.g.,  laboratory, 
greenhouses),  systems  (vertical  production,  hydroponic,  drip  fertigation)  and  related  equipment  (e.g., 
water quality and tissue sampling equipment and reagents, grafting and photovoltaic); and (iii) support to 
MOFMRA/MED  for  the  soon  to  be  established  Maldives  Agriculture  Corporation  (MACO)  in  the  form  of 
training the Corporation’s  staff and subsequent provision of agricultural inputs and equipment to promote 
the adoption of new production systems among the smallholder farmers, and disseminating Maldives Good 
Agricultural Practices (MGAP) in conjunction with sustainable, climate-smart informed input management. 
Main expected outputs are: (i) policy knowledge products on sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture; 
(ii)  upgraded  capability  to  generate  knowledge  and  technology;  (iii)  packages  of  recommendations 
developed for enhancing economic return for small  holder farmers; (iv) new technologies and improved 
inputs  transferred  to  smallholder  farmers;  and  (v)  establishment  of  an  Agriculture  Information  and 
Communication Technology (AICT) Service. 
14. 
Following  the  training  and  transfer  activities  supported  under  component  1,  MAP’s  second 
component  will  support  the  rolling  out  of  services  in  support  of  climate-smart  production  of  high  value 
commodities for farmers using inputs supplied by MACO based on the seeds and technologies/production 
packages  developed  and  validated  by  ARC  with  agricultural  financing  provided  from  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprise Development Finance Corporation (SDFC) and the Maldives Finance Leasing Company (MFLC).  
The  main  outputs  will  be:  (i)  beneficiaries  trained  on  production  practices  and  technologies;  (ii)  farmer 
production forums organized in order to provide required quantity and quality of products in response to 
the market opportunities; and (iii) improved access to agriculture financing. 
15. 
Activities  supported  under  the  Programme’s  3rd  component  will  invest  in  supporting  market 
connections through providing support for market linkage arrangements, matching grants to help establish 
cold storage facilities in the three programme island hubs, regional hubs and sub-regional hubs, support 
to  cargo  vessels  for  upgrading  cold  storage  in  exchange  of  agreed  transport  services,  and  possibly  for 
purchase of refrigerated cargo vessels on a Hire-Purchase basis.  The main output will be the establishment 
of supply contracts between producers and private companies. 
16. 
The  MAP’s  target  groups  are  small  farmers  consisting  of  men,  women  and  youth  belonging  to 
households  of  different  socio-economic  categories. Small  farmers  who  depend  mainly  on  agriculture  for 
their  livelihood  are  economically  one  of  the  most  vulnerable  groups  in  the  country.  Women  and  youth 
continue to be important proportions of the active labour force in agriculture; they are also important actors 
in achieving food security and improved nutrition. 
Environmental Impacts. 
17. 
In light of MAP’s focus on developing and promoting the adoption of  sustainable, climate-smart 
technologies reflective of the latest thinking in Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) but adapted to the local 
needs  and  characteristics  of  the  Maldives,  it  is  clear  that  most  of  the  Programme’s  activities  will  either 
result in positive (or at very worse neutral) environmental and social impacts. Nevertheless, some potential 
adverse social and environmental impacts were identified.  While most of these will be minimal and site-
specific, the size and fragility of the small island ecosystems characteristic of the Maldives require that they 
be addressed in a robust manner through carefully designed and targeted mitigation measures.  A relative 
comparison  between  IFAD  and  EPA  and  likely  results  from  the  screening  of  programme  activities  is 
presented in Attachment 4. 
18. 
Broadly  based  on  international  best  practices,  SECAP  supports  the  environmental  and  social 
categorization of projects into three categories (A, B, C) that are defined according to the likely significance 
of environmental and social impacts in relation to pre-determined criteria.  During the mission that prepared 
the programme’s concept note (CN) the initial environmental and social category assigned was Category 
B.  The basis for this determination was that programme activities did not trigger any of IFAD’s Category 
A criteria and appear to be consistent with the following criteria and categories characteristic of Category 
30 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
B  projects:27  (i)  the  development  of  agro-processing  facilities;  (ii)  short-term  public health  and  safety 
concerns; (iii) agricultural intensification and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas that may 
have  adverse  impacts  on  habitats,  ecosystems  and/or  livelihoods;  and  (iv)  credit  operations  through 
financial service providers.   
19. 
Similarly,  MAP  appears  to  meet  the  following  social  criteria  typical  of  a  category  B  project:  (i) 
agricultural intensification and/or expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas that may have adverse 
impacts on habitats, ecosystems and/or livelihoods; (ii) short-term public health and safety concerns and 
(iii) requiring a migrant workforce or seasonal workers (for construction, planting and/or harvesting). 
20. 
During the preparation of the draft SECAP RN and subsequent review of the Programme Design 
Report (PDR) this risk category was confirmed and mitigation measures recommended in the revised SECAP 
RN. 28 The main environmental impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified in the SECAP are 
presented in Table 1 below.
27  Category B projects are those projects whose adverse environmental and/or social implications can be readily remedied with the 
incorporation of appropriate mitigation measures. 
28 The existing SECAP document for MAP was revised and updated the earlier draft RN prepared in November 2019 following the 
preparation of the draft PDR in December 2019. 
31 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
Table 1: ESMP Matrix1 
Environmental / 
Social and 
climate Impacts 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Public 
Consultation 
Activities 
- incorporate migrant 
workers as one of target 
groups into project design  
- island 
council 
- farmers fora 
Responsible 
Institution in 
Implementation 
Phase (possible 
support agencies) 
MFMRA/PIU 
Means of 
Verification 
(Monitoring and 
reporting) 
- documentation of 
participation in 
relevant MAP 
supported training 
activities 
Frequency 
of 
Verification 
- by event 
and reported 
in MAP’s M&E 
system 
Cost Estimate 
- costed in existing 
project design 
- MAP training and 
capacity building 
activities fail to 
reach migrant 
workers in 
agricultural sector 
- groundwater 
extraction 
increased due to 
intensification of 
agricultural 
production 
through shift to 
high yield 
varieties 
- reduction in 
aquifer recharge 
due to increased 
water harvesting, 
construction of 
non-permeable 
slabs associated 
with project 
supported 
construction and 
lining of existing 
irrigation canals) 
MFMRA/PIU 
MEE (WSD) 
- island 
council 
- island water 
users (if 
present) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor monitoring 
reports 
- bi-annual 
(wet & dry 
season) 
71,6002 
- identify water quality 
parameters to be 
measured in conformity 
with EPA requirements; 
- conduct groundwater 
assessments in drought 
prone islands; 
- increase project 
supported water harvesting 
investments; 
- use of permeable 
construction slabs 
- identify/enlarge/protect 
recharge areas (catchment 
areas).  The main focus 
would be on vegetated 
drainage areas that 
contribute to aquifer 
replenishment in particular 
those areas that terminate 
in morphological 
depressions and inland 
wetlands where they occur 
on the atolls; and 
- if needed, offset reduced 
recharge rates with 
32 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
reductions in less 
important extraction 
activities. 
- identify water quality 
parameters to be 
measured as part of the 
assessment in conformity 
with EPA requirements; 
- establish baseline and 
periodic monitoring where 
MAP supports groundwater 
extraction  
- application of existing 
policies on banned agro-
chemicals; 
- promote shift towards 
organic fertilizers using tax 
policies in compliance with 
draft agro-chemical bill and 
M-GAP certification criteria; 
 - provision of support for 
pest resistant seed 
varieties; and  
- support for IPM 
- preparation of a 
construction ESMP 
indicating specific 
construction related risks 
and impacts and their 
associated mitigation 
measures; 
- application of existing 
EPA/EIA environmental 
standards for land clearing; 
- limit construction to dry 
season; and 
- use of silt curtains. 
- groundwater 
quality not 
suitable for 
agricultural use 
- agro-chemical 
use and disposal 
(intensification of 
agricultural 
production 
through shift to 
HY varieties and 
rolling out of 
hydroponic 
schemes and 
application of drip 
fertigation) 
-  temporary loss 
of vegetative 
cover and 
exposure of soils 
to precipitation 
and possible 
increase in coastal 
/ nearshore  
sedimentation 
(land preparation 
including leveling, 
seeding and 
weeding; 
infrastructure 
construction 
- island 
council 
- island water 
users (if 
present) 
MFMRA/PIU 
ARC 
MEE (WSD) 
MEE (EPA) 
MOH (MFDA) 
M&E monitoring 
reports 
- bi-annual 
(wet & dry 
season) 
- costed in project design 
(infrastructure/equipment 
for ARC) 
- island 
council 
- farmer fora 
MFMRA 
MEE (WSD) 
MEE (EPA) 
MOH (MFDA) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor; monitoring 
reports; chemical 
analyses 
- costed in project design 
(infrastructure/equipment 
for ARC) 
Initially 
monthly 
(when 
cleaning 
closed 
systems and 
disposing 
residues on 
field crops) 
with reduced 
frequency 
when SOP In 
place 
- island 
council 
contractor 
MFMRA 
MEE (EPA) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor monitoring 
reports 
3 visits per 
activity (pre, 
on-going and 
post project) 
- see FN 2 
33 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
including research 
facilities, 
hydroponic 
structures, 
greenhouses, 
storage / 
processing / 
packaging and 
market facilities) 
- production of 
various by-
products and 
organic pollution 
(associated with 
the respective 
processing of 
commodities such 
as coconut chips, 
and UHT coconut 
water, pickles, 
jam and juice) 
- increase in solid 
waste (packaging 
from inputs and 
for by-product 
production) 
- “bankable” 
business plans 
and loans support 
adverse activities 
not in compliance 
with GOM/IFAD 
policies 
(development of 
“bankable” 
business plans) 
- incorporation of effluent 
treatment and disposal 
technology in process 
design 
-compliance with existing 
EPA/EIA Water Quality 
standards and regulations 
- island 
council 
MFMRA 
MEE (EPA) 
MEE (WSD) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor  
assessment reports 
53,7607 
Initial on-site 
assessment 
followed by 
ad hoc, 
unannounced 
site visits 
Initial on-site 
assessment 
followed by 
ad hoc, 
unannounced 
site visits 
- on demand 
-  costed  under  M&E  sub-
component 
- costed in project under 
component 2 
- improved recycling 
and/or safe disposal of 
waste per existing policies 
on solid wastes 
- island 
council 
MFMRA 
MEE (EPA) 
MEE (WSD) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor; 
assessment reports 
- provision of guidelines for 
borrower and financing 
institutions; 
- island 
council 
- SME 
- farmers fora 
- incorporation of 
environment and social 
screening templates as 
part of loan approval 
process 
- training ensuring loan 
resources support activities 
that are environmentally 
sustainable, climate 
change friendly and in 
compliance with 
- MFMRA 
- guidelines 
- bank approval 
documentation 
- MEE (EPA) 
- SDFC 
- MFLC 
- PIU business 
development 
specialist 
34 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
government EPA EIA 
requirements   
- flood proofing (e.g., 
application of dry exterior 
sealants and protection of 
exterior service equipment 
(e.g., pumps, generators) 
in conformity with Maldives 
national building code. 
- policy study on feasibility 
of offering indexed hazard 
insurance for small farmers 
- island 
council 
- MFMRA 
- (MHI) 
- construction site 
inspection 
- insurance policy 
- determined 
by a 
Construction 
ESMP 
- costed in project design 
and covered in MAP 
construction costs 
- farmers fora  - MFMRA 
- policy study 
- NA 
- costed in project design 
- application of existing 
EPA/EIA environmental 
screening and mitigation 
requirements 
- island 
council 
MFMRA 
MEE (EPA) 
- government 
inspections/private 
contractor  
assessment reports 
- MAP supported 
infrastructure 
(new and 
rehabilitated) and 
equipment at risk 
to the effects of  
storm/tidal surge 
and ensuing 
flooding from 
extreme events 
- adverse CC 
effects on 
agricultural 
production 
- project-
supported 
activities 
exacerbate risk 
and vulnerability 
to CC effects 
- failure to 
collaborate with 
island-based 
efforts to reduce 
CC-related risks 
and vulnerabilities 
- island 
council 
-farmers fora 
MFMRA 
DMC 
- identify on-going/planned 
island based activities 
through diagnostic 
assessments and agree on 
relevant collaborative 
activities including training, 
public awareness and 
information dissemination 
- agricultural 
production 
activities reduce 
island food 
security due to 
replacement of 
traditional 
cropping systems 
- identify existing cropping 
systems contributing to 
food security following 
natural hazard events 
(island diagnostics) and 
screen for possible adverse 
impacts and appropriate 
mitigation measures in 
- island 
council 
-farmers fora 
MFMRA 
DMC 
35 
- review of diagnostic 
assessments 
- documentation of -
participation in 
relevant CC 
adaptation/mitigation 
activities including 
training 
- review of diagnostic 
assessments 
- results of 
environmental 
screening/assessments 
of island investments 
- initial on-
site 
assessment 
followed by 
ad hoc, 
unannounced 
site visits 
- by event 
and reported 
in MAP’s M&E 
system 
- costed in existing 
project design 
- costed in existing 
project design 
- by island 
and reported 
in MAP’s M&E 
system 
- costed in existing 
project design 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme:  
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
with value-added 
production 
systems. 
project supported 
interventions 
36 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
IV. 
Environmental Assessment for Programme and Site-Specific Interventions 
21. 
The MAP is a national programme and will cover all of the Maldives’ regional and sub-regional 
hubs, clusters and islands where agriculture is undertaken by small farmers. MAP’s component 1 will cover 
all  19  atolls,  21  regions  covering  188  inhabited  islands  of  these  98  are  inhabited  where  agriculture  is 
practised on around 800 registered hectares. There are also 50 uninhabited islands leased for commercial 
agriculture in the programme are representing 956 hectares of land of which 24 islands are actively doing 
agriculture on 582 hectares of land.  Component 2 will initially focus on regions 1-3, covering 3 atolls and 
40  inhabited  islands.  Of  these,  26  are  inhabited  agriculture  islands  with  280  hectares  registered  land 
cultivated  by  registered  farmers,  and  85  hectares  cultivated  by  non-registered  farmers.  Within  this 
production  area  there  are  six  active  commercial  islands  cultivating  a  total  of  250  hectares.  Finally, 
component 3 will initially focus on regions 1-3 during the first two years and then expand to regions 4 - 7 
and eventually cover the whole country. 
Programme Level 
22. 
As noted above MAP  qualifies as a Schedule D project and will require the submission of an EIA/IEE 
application  form  (Schedule  C2)  together  with  a  project  brief  not  to  exceed  three  pages  requesting  an 
environmental decision statement.  The case should be made that at the programme level MAP should pass 
through only a single scoping meeting and require only an IEE for the entire programme.  
23. 
 However, given the number of islands involved in MAP a different process needs to be put in place 
to screen and where necessary,  go through a scoping process for each one receiving support under the 
Programme.29    Programme  proponents  will  need  to  provide  assurance  to  both  IFAD  and  the  national 
regulatory authorities  that a  process  is put  in place that “captures”  and mitigates site-specific issues to 
warrant maintaining an IEE scoping decision.  Finally, a mechanism has to be built into the process that in 
the rare event that proposed activities trigger the requirement for an EIA, this will be identified and take 
place following exiting regulations. 
Site-Specific Intervention Process 
24. 
At the time of appraisal, it is unlikely that many of the islands, their characteristic development 
options  and  constraints  in  the  sector  and  range  and  nature  of  MAP-supported  activities  will  be  known.  
Moreover, the Programme is likely to  find in  the  selection and  assessment process  of candidate  islands 
each are unique.  Variables include for example: (i) degree of farming as economic activity and presence 
of markets, (ii) inter-relationships between farmers and coconut collectors and access to the latter, (iii) 
environmental constraints (quality of groundwater and access to alternatives), (iv) distance from off-island 
markets, (v) capacity of the island council, (v) availability and characteristics of labor inputs, (vi) presence 
of other on-going projects that, due to the size and nature of these small islands, should be collaborative 
activities integrated with MAP-supported activities.  Overlaying this is the status of a number of relevant 
national programs described in section 3 of the SECAP that MAP should attempt to engage and collaborate.   
25. 
For purposes of the ESMF public consultation, environmental/social impact mitigation and M&E it is 
recommended that each island be “treated” as a “subproject.”  Based on initial consultations with the island 
chief,  council  and  farmers  there  will  be  a  better  understanding  of  what  will  be  the  likely  “package”  of 
interventions proposed for MAP-support.  In parallel to this process and critical to informing the selection 
of activities to be included in the “package”, baseline conditions for each island should be established and 
presented in the form of a diagnostic profile (see Attachment 5) preferably one supported by a map.  The 
baseline, results of public consultation and proposed MAP activities would provide the basis for screening, 
and  if  needed,  flagging  follow-up  activities  to  address  data  gaps  and  the  identification  of  site-specific 
mitigation measures and in those rare instances, when a detailed EIA may be required. This baseline and 
profile  will  also  be  critical  to  the  identification  of  possible  collaborative  opportunities  in  particular  with 
29 There appears to be no provision in the regulations that provide for frameworks when some or all project interventions/sites are 
unknown at the time of project appraisal. In discussions with EPA during the preparation of the SECAP it was suggested that application 
for approval should only be done only once the specific islands to receive project support are known.  This issue needs to be clarified. 
37 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
respect to solid waste, integrative water management efforts and CC adaptation interventions (see section 
3 in the SECAP).30  
Requirements for Environmental Screening and Classification 
26. 
At  present,  the  activities  identified  for  support  under  MAP  do  not  appear  to  justify  a  full  EIA.  
Moreover,  if  properly  prepared  and  followed-up,  the  island-specific  diagnostic  profiles  should  suffice  for 
designing a package of MAP-supported activities that are more sustainable, collaborative and in so doing 
justify the IEE scoping decision.  Once the diagnostic profiles and island-specific interventions are known, 
sufficient information should be at hand to screen the proposed activities.  An illustrative  relative impact 
matrix and criteria is provided for reference purposes (Attachment 6). This should be refined and included 
in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). 
27. 
To  support  these  efforts  this  Framework  supports  the  inclusion  of  a  number  of  safeguards  in 
programme  design.    These  include:  (i)  the  prohibition  of  use  of  any  pesticides  banned  in  the  Maldives 
(Approved and Banned Pesticides (MFMRA, 2019); (ii) screening for and avoidance of MAP supported effects 
in designated protected areas (List of Protected Areas (EPA, 2019); and (iii) prohibition of conversion and 
any adverse project impact on critical habitat (lagoons, mangroves and other wetlands, marine grassbeds 
and/or coral reefs.  An illustrative “blacklist” of activities has been provided in Attachment 7 that should be 
prohibited from receiving programme support in the absence of meeting the associates stated measures.  
This needs to be refined and included in the PIM. 
28. 
Specific roles and responsibilities of relevant institutions are provided in Section VI below. 
Requirements for Environmental Assessments and Environmental Management Plans  
29. 
See Attachment 8. 
V. 
Public Consultation, Information Disclosure and Grievance Redress Mechansim  
Public Consultation 
30. 
In  conformity  with  IFAD’s  emphasis  on  participation  in  programme/project  design  and 
implementation, greater consultation by communities (especially the marginalized poor) and stakeholders 
that  are  likely  to  be  affected  by  IFAD’s  operations  will  continue  to  be  sought  during  the  respective 
programme/project  cycle.  The  objective  of  such  consultation  is  to  receive  feedback  on  the  draft 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report and other relevant documents, ensure broad 
community support to the project (especially a Category A project or one that is highly sensitive to climate 
risks),  and  see  that  affected  people  endorse  the  proposed  mitigation/  risk  reduction  and  management 
measures. Consultation, leading to consent, should be initiated as early as possible during design and the 
results will be adequately reflected in SECAP assessments (and other relevant documents) reports. IFAD’s 
policies on targeting, gender equality and women’s empowerment, improving access to land and tenure 
security, and engagement with indigenous peoples contain further guidance on appropriate consultation 
mechanisms.    For  purposes  of  this  ESMF  public  consultation  will  focus  on  the  island  level  engaging  the 
island  chief,  council  and  farmers.    In  some  cases  where  issues  may  transcend  the  sector  (e.g.  water) 
broader consultation may be required.  Later after famers fora are created with support of the MAP, they 
may be the most efficient means to continue the consultation process.  
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
31. 
IFAD has established a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and 
complaints  with  respect  to  alleged  non-compliance  of  its  environmental  and  social  policies  and  the 
mandatory aspects of its SECAP in the context of IFAD-supported projects. The procedure allows affected 
complainants to have their concerns resolved in a fair and timely manner through an independent process. 
Although IFAD  normally addresses potential risks primarily through its enhanced QE/QA process and by 
means of project implementation support, it remains committed to: (i) working proactively with the affected 
parties  to  resolve  complaints;  (ii)  ensuring  that  the  complaints  procedure  is  responsive  and  operates 
effectively; and (iii) maintaining records of all complaints and their resolutions. Complaints must concern 
30 One example of the potential benefits derived from a collaborative activity would be between WMD (MEE) and DOA (MFMRA) where the former 
is working with farmers to dispose of their vegetative matter but don’t have the expertise of the latter to assist them in its use in making and applying 
compost. 
38 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
environmental,  social  and  climate  issues  only  and  should  not  be  accusations  of  fraudulent  or  corrupt 
activities  in  relation  to  project  implementation  –  these  are  dealt  with  by  IFAD's  Office  of  Audit  and 
Oversight.  More information can be found on the IFAD website (ifad.org). 
32. 
At the Project level, a Grievance Redress Mechanism will be established in line with IFAD policies 
and procedures and national laws. The GRM will include the following steps: 
a.  Step 1: Submission of grievances either orally, in writing, or through telephone 
hotlines/toll free numbers, SMS, to the Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and 
Agriculture (MOFMRA) 
b.  Step 2: Recording of grievances, classifying the grievances based on the typology of 
complaints and the complainants in order to provide more efficient response, and 
providing the initial response within 24 hours. The typology will be based on the 
characteristics of the complainant (e.g., vulnerable groups, persons with disabilities, 
people with language barriers, etc.) and also the nature of the complaint  
c.  Step 3: Investigating the grievance and Communication of the Response within 7 days 
d.  Step 4: Complainant Response: either grievance closure or taking further steps if the 
grievance remains open. If grievance remains open, complainant will be given 
opportunity to appeal to the MOFMRA.  
e.  Once all possible avenues of redress  received grievances have been proposed and if the 
complainant is still not satisfied then s/he would be advised of their right to legal recourse. 
In addition, the existing GRM will also be used for addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
in line with IFAD’s no tolerance for Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) policy.  
VI. 
Institutional Arrangements and Responsibilities 
33. 
The overall responsibility for the MAP implementation will be assumed by the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMRA), which is the lead Programme Agency. The Ministry of Finance 
(MOF) will be responsible for ensuring timely flow of funds to MOFMRA for programme implementation. A 
Programme Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MOFMRA and encompassing 
representatives from the related ministries such as MOF, Ministry of Economic Development (MED), Ministry 
of National Planning and Infrastructure (MONPI), MOE and other stakeholders that are related and relevant 
to  the  Programme.  A  Programme  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  will  be  established  in  the  Planning  and 
Programme Coordination Section of MOFMRA and located within or in proximity of MOFMRA. The PIU will 
be responsible for the overall operational management and coordination of the programme implementation. 
34. 
To support the recommendations of the SECAP and ESMF, the PSC should include representatives 
from MEE and EPA and the designation of their respective technical colleagues as focal points from Climate 
Change Department (CCD), Water and Sanitation Department (WSD) and Waste Management and Pollution 
Control Department (MMD). 
35. 
The PIU, with the assistance of selected technical staff from the Ministry, MACO and/or ARC, and 
in  some  cases  representatives  from  other  relevant  technical  agencies  supported  by  consultants,  will  be 
responsible for:   
– 
– 
– 
submit MAP’s EIA/IEE application form (Schedule C2) together with the programme brief to EPA, 
participate in scoping meeting and follow up with the contracting of a registered consultant to 
prepare either the IEE/EIA dependent on the scoping decision; 
refining and finalizing the screening criteria and “blacklist”; 
fielding small, multi-disciplinary teams to prepare the island-specific diagnostics; a process that 
would be mainstreamed into the public consultation process required before finalizing the 
package of island-specific interventions; 
screening activities to be supported by MAP; 
– 
–  based on the results of the screening and the agreed on findings of the MAP SECAP incorporate 
necessary mitigation measures into programme activities; 
–  where required ensuring that all regulatory clearances are obtained before initiation of activities 
– 
– 
– 
(e.g., starting civil works);  
ensuring that proposed mitigation measures and monitoring programs are properly implemented;  
in those cases where proposed activities may warrant a Category A classification review whether 
supplementary studies may be required subsequent to which, if necessary, contract the EIA to a 
registered consultant per national requirements;  
incorporate awareness training in environmental management and climate change as part of 
MAP’s training and public awareness activities;  
39 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
– 
– 
ensuring that meaningful public consultations (including both men and women) are undertaken 
with affected groups and local NGOs. The list of people attending the consultation, time and 
locations, subjects discussed during consultation will be recorded in a systematic manner; and  
sharing information and disclosure of environmental safeguard information where required.  
36. 
IFAD will take the following responsibilities:  
review MAP’s draft IEE/EIA dependent on the scoping decision;  
– 
–  publicly disclose the final IEE/EIA before project appraisal;  
–  monitor the development and implementation of selected island-specific MAP-supported 
interventions and mitigation measures as part of overall project review mission; and  
–  provide assistance to the EA/IA, if required, in carrying out its responsibilities and safeguard 
capacity building.  
VII.  Monitoring and Reporting 
37. 
MAP’s basic M&E framework will be designed on the basis of a logframe approach,  which is 
driven by the programme logical framework with a set of key indicators. The M&E system  will be set up 
before the field operations’ roll-out. The system set-up will be led by the Planning and M&E Officer/Specialist 
of PIU, who reports directly to the Programme Director. In view of the yet-to-be built M&E capacities, short-
term consultant should be recruited to support the system set-up. 
38. 
However  for  technical  monitoring  for  project  interventions  flagged  as  requiring  mitigation 
measures (e.g., residual water disposal) technical M&E system will need to be put in place to reflect the 
results  of  baseline  conditions  and  the  results  of  ad  hoc  or  periodic  monitoring  depending  on  the 
requirements.    Based  on  the  results  of  the  screening  and  environmental  assessment,  where  mitigation 
measures  are  warranted,  these  will  include  environmental  monitoring  plans  to  ensure  that  negative 
environmental impacts are addressed properly. It will identify environmental parameters to be monitored, 
frequency  of  monitoring,  applicable  standards,  agencies  and  institutions  responsible  for  monitoring  and 
provide indicative monitoring costs. 31  
39. 
Reporting requirements with respect to the mitigation  measures  will be agreed on between 
IFAD and MFMRA.  The budget for environmental monitoring shall be included as part of the contracts for 
relevant activities. 
40. 
system in line with the proposed programme activities are presented in Table 2.  
  Indicators  suggested  for  consideration  for  inclusion  in  MAP’s  Results  Framework  and  M&E 
Table 2.  List of Recommended Monitoring Indicators for Maldives Agricultural Programme 
(MAP) 
Activity 
water-harvesting 
lining irrigation 
canals (TBD) 
agricultural 
inputs 
land-levelling 
(TBD) 
production 
facilities 
(construction and 
processes) 
Suggested Monitoring Indicators 
- reductions in offtake from aquifer through bore holes (mt3) 
- increase in water use efficiency (%) 
- changes in aquifer levels (meters) and usage (mt3) 
- uptake of pest resistant seed varieties and use of  IPM practices(#/type of 
practices adopted) 
- reduction of use of agro-chemicals in programme areas(decrease in volume 
from baseline by class) 
- groundwater quality (presence and concentration of selected pesticides and 
fertilizers) 
- increase in water use efficiency (%) 
- for “greenfield” sites, inspection to ensure new facility is appropriate for 
designated land use (# and compliance with EIA requirements) 
- presence and concentrations of selected pollutants at “end of pipe” discharge of 
facilities/processes supported under the project 
31 This does not have to be burdensome.  For example, once a baseline is established for the disposal of residual waters associated with 
fertigation and the technology and protocol to manage these wastes are in place, if M&E results demonstrate that no adverse impact is 
occurring, follow-up monitoring efforts can largely focus on the protocols and processes themselves only occasionally controlled by 
field inspections (e.g., on an annual basis).  Similar approaches apply to application of agro-chemicals and disposal of project related 
project wastes. 
40 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
- development and adoption of improved recycling and/or safe waste disposal 
technologies (#) 
- increase in recycling efficiency (%) 
- functioning pilot certification schemes (#) 
- premium paid for certified products over baseline (MDV) 
- development and application of environmental guidelines incorporated into the 
plans  
- events (#) people trained (per-time) in climate change and environmental 
impact mitigation 
- events (#) and people (#) participating in climate change oriented PA activities 
promote adoption 
of sustainable 
certification 
schemes 
“bankable” 
business plans 
capacity building 
increasing public 
awareness (PA) 
41 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Attachment 1.  EIA Process for Schedule D Projects 
42 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Attachment 2.  EIA/IEE Application Form (Schedule C2) 
Part 1: Proponent's Information  
Name ofperson submitting form:  
On behalf of (company, other person, self):  
Address:  
Telephone number:  
Fax number:  
Email:  
ID number:  
Signature:  
Date:  
Part 2: Project Description  
Project Title  
Type of development:  
Location of project:  
Duration of project:  
Government agency(s) responsible for authorization:  
Financial support for project provided by:  
Brief description of project activities in chronological order (include 
information about equipment and machinery to be used):  
Consultant's Information  
Name:  
Address:  
Telephone number:  
Fax number:  
Email:  
ID number:  
EIA Consultant's Registration Number   
Signature:  
Date:  
43 
New development:  
Additions or improvement to 
existing development:  
(Attach location plan and photos 
of site)  
(number of months)  
(Please use additional sheets 
where appropriate)  
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Attachment 3.  List of Development Proposals Requiring an EIA Study (Schedule D) 
Development of new tourism resorts 
Additions and large-scale developments to resorts 
Aquaculture projects  
Fish processing facilities  
Artificial reefs  
Agriculture projects 
Livestock and animal husbandry  
Large scale deforestation  
Construction/dredging of Harbours  
Cutting, dredging and maintenance of channels  
Construction of jetties 
Development of marinas  
Land reclamation projects 
Sea defense structures (such as seawalls, revetments, offshore breakwaters, groynes) 
Beach nourishment  
Construction of major roads  
Development of airports, helipads/Seaplane hubs  
Major housing projects  
Development of factories  
Incinerators 
Landfills 
Large-scale waste storage and separation facilities  
Bottling plants 
Water supply projects 
Sewerage projects 
Marine outfall pipes  
Powerplants 
Oil, fuel and gas storage, handling and refining facilities  
Desalination plants  
44 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Attachment 4.  Comparative EA Screening Categories of MAP-supported Activities 
MAP Activities 
supported by 
Component 
MEE EIA Schedule 
D unlisted (either 
approved or IEE 
required) 
IFAD Category 
C  
MEE EIA 
Schedule D 
listed: 
determination 
(IEE required) 
IFAD Category B   MEE EIA Schedule 
D listed: 
determination (EIA 
required) 
IFAD Category 
A 
Component 1 
– 
infrastructure 
construction / reform 
equipment purchase 
– 
–  policy studies 
–  purchase of chemical 
inputs and planting 
material 
training & workshops 
adaptive research 
–  TA 
– 
– 
Component 2 
–  production activities 
farmer training  
– 
financing business 
– 
plans 
Component 3 
value chain 
– 
infrastructure 
–  TA 
– 
–  market infrastructure 
training 
investments 
equipment & goods 
Component 4 
– 
–  KM products 
–  TA 
– 
–  M&E 
– 
training 
salaries 
- 
X 
X 
- 
X 
X 
X 
- 
X 
- 
- 
X 
X 
- 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
X 
- 
- 
X 
- 
- 
- 
X 
- 
X 
X 
- 
- 
X 
NA 
45 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Attachment 5.  MAP: Illustrative Island Socio-economic Diagnostic and Profile 
(general) 
size: 
location (coordinates): 
atoll: 
–  name of island: 
– 
– 
– 
–  NAP 2020-2040: 
–  population (gender specific if possible): 
–  number of registered farmers (gender specific if possible) 
–  number of unregistered farmers (gender specific if possible) 
–  number of migrant workers (if available) 
(major natural features) 
–  main water features (water courses, lagoons, wetlands,acuifer) 
–  natural forests/vegetation (type and estimated area) 
– 
–  protected areas (type, size, location)  
critical habitat (natural forests, lagoons, wetlands and mangroves, marine grassbeds, coral reefs) 
(natural resources management) 
soils  
– 
–  water quality 
–  water quantity 
(cultural resources) 
(main environmental threats) 
exotic pests 
– 
–  water scarcity 
–  water contamination 
–  drought 
(status public services) 
access to wate 
liquid wastes management 
solid waste treatment and management 
– 
– 
– 
–  other 
(on-going/proposed) national programmes  
solid waste 
integrated water management 
– 
– 
–  other  
 (MAP interventions) 
existing agricultural production systems 
– 
–  proposed activities to be supported by MAP to include 
interventions to be supported 
location and area 
o 
o 
o  existing vegetative cover 
o  number of beneficiaries (disaggregated by sex) 
o  nature of tenure/farmer access 
o 
o  production and disposal of solid wastes 
source, quality and disposal of residual water 
 (natural hazards and adaptation) 
–  main CC and natural hazards) 
–  main adaptation measures by hazard  
46 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Attachment 6.  Relative Impact Matrix 
Impact 
Attributes 
Nature 
Magnitude 
Significance  Duration 
- water contamination 
- soil contamination 
- contributing to water scarcity 
- habitat conversion / degradation 
- loss of biodiversity 
- etc… 
47 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Attachment 7.  Illustrative Blacklist of Activities Prohibited for MAP Support 
activities in existing declared protected areas 
activities in or affecting critical habitat (either directly or offsite adverse impacts 
activities presenting a threat to existing wildlife and natural vegetation 
– 
– 
– 
–  deforestation/clearing of natural vegetation 
–  use of banned agro-chemicals in the Maldives 
– 
– 
– 
activities contributing to pollution of water course/bodies (agro-chemicals, residues from closed water 
fertigation systems) and processsing wastes of agricultural by products (e.g., taro chips) in the absence 
of testing and treatment if required 
activities  that  depend  on  use  of  groundwater  resources  in  absence  of  water  quality  analysis 
demonstrating safe use for agriculture purposes (water quality)  
activities  that  depend  on  groundwater  in  water  scarce  islands  in  absence  of  an  integrated  water 
management plan (water quantity) 
activities whose sustainability may be affected by security of farmer access to island lands 
activities resulting in dissemination and/or sprad of existing exotic species  
– 
– 
–  development of greenfield sites for infrastructure and agricultural production in absence of an EIA 
– 
activities  that  will  contribute  to  soil  degradation  (erosion,  salinization,  nutrient  depletion, 
contamination) in absence of soil management plan 
48 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Attachment 8.  Contents of an EIA Study (Schedule E)  
Title Page  
This should contain:  
title of the IEE or EIA  
location of project  
team responsible for the report  
 
 
 
  proponent's name and signature  
  date report was completed  
Non-technical Summary  
This should be:  
 
 
 
concise and use simple, non-technical language  
it should include an outline of the project and its location  
it should focus primarily upon selection of alternatives, key impacts and mitigation measures  
Introduction  
This should provide background information on the project and its costs, the proponents and their 
experience with similarprojects.  
Terms of Reference  
The agreed terms of reference for the IEE or EIA report must be included as an annex in the report.  
Project Setting 
This section should indicate how the project conforms with existing plans, policies, guidelines, 
regulations, laws and International Conventions.  
Project Description  
This should describe the project and indicate the justification and rationale underlying the project, 
including:  
 
Intended duration of the project  
  Need and justification of the project  
  Ownership of land and proof thereof, or lease agreement, clearly indicating the owner's consent 
to the project  
  Components of project design, size and scale of the project  
 
  Scaled site plan showing location of all proposed infrastructure (including the entire wastewater 
Location map  
collection, treatment & disposal system), setback of buildings from high water mark, landscaping 
works etc.  
  Architectural plans if available, or sketches or architect's impression ofthe project in the receiving 
 
environment  
Indication of other similar projects in the area and reference to previous IEE or EIA studies 
relating to such projects  
  Description of the expected environmental conditions at the time of probable project 
implementation, and associated constraints e.g. seasons, tidal regime etc.  
  Description of the proposed wastewater process supported by flow diagrams  
  Measures adopted to promote sustainable development (cleaner production, renewable  
Energy systems) during both the implementation and operational phases of the project  
  Work plan of activities during the site preparation, construction, decommissioning and  
operational phases of the project  
  Any Environmental Management System adopted for its operations  
  A vailability of water, other utilities and resources  
  Capital investment and employment opportunities  
A brief outline should be given of any enhancement work which is planned. This should be distinguished 
from mitigation measures, which are integral to the project and form part of the proposal. For example 
upgrading of an access road for the public, providing  
Description of the Natural, Economic and Human Environment  
This should include:  
  Certified and comprehensive site plans drawn to scale (by a Sworn Land Surveyor) with known 
landmarks as reference points, and showing Valued Ecosystem Components, water bodies, 
wetlands, low water mark, high water mark and beach frontage  
49 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
  Aerial photographs of the site  
  Description of site characteristics including soil type, relief, landforms, present land use,  
drainage systems  
  Type of flora and fauna, rare or endangered species, sensitive habitats of ecological  
importance including wetlands and mangroves  
  Marine environment including sand and rocky bottoms, coral reefs, sea grass beds  
  Beach systems; composition; stability; current, tide and wave dynamics  
  Description of surrounding infrastructure, including utilities  
  Socio-economic characteristics including population (numbers, ages, density, distribution), 
economic activities, housing and utilities, employment statistics and available skills, labour 
availability, unique cultural characteristics  
  Other attributes of the locality e.g. amenities, recreational values 
Methodology  
• Data collection methods, description of gaps in baseline data (note it is not necessary to include all 
the baseline data in the report, but it must be available for inspection, or submission, on request)  
 
  Analytical techniques and predictive methods  
Information on the uncertainties and assumptions involved in interpreting the data  
Public Consultation  
This is an important part of the IEE and EIA process and the report should include:  
• A list of the persons consulted including persons in statutory bodies, atoll and island offices, 
community groups and NGOs, local residents, local fishermen, tourism operators and any others 
likely to be affected by the proposed development  
• Information on how, when and where the consultations were conducted, e.g. stakeholder meetings 
in the affected area, individual meetings, questionnaires  
• Summaryoftheoutcomeoftheconsultationsincludingthemainconcernsidentified Assessment ofthe 
Direct and 
Indirect Environmental Impacts  
Impacts on the biophysical, economic and human environments, including the impacts on the human well 
being should be clearly defined and discussed with special emphasis on the key issues identified during 
the scoping process. Less important impacts should be mentioned but the 
amountofspacedevotedtothemshouldbeproportionaltotheirperceivedimportance.  
Evaluation of Alternatives Including No Development Option  
• Identify and describe at least three alternatives, one of which should be the no- development 
option; define clear criteria to evaluate the alternatives, and determine the preferred alternative  
  Discuss whether the project be undertaken elsewhere, perhaps an alternative location with less 
 
adverse impacts  
Include discussion on alternative ways in which the project may be carried out so as to cause less 
harm to the environment.  
Selection of the Preferred Alternative and Mitigation Measures  
Discuss the preferred alternative and why it was selected. Identify the major and minor 
environmental impacts ofthe preferred alternative and propose measures to mitigate the adverse 
environmental impacts.  
Environmental Monitoring  
An Environmental Monitoring Plan should be included that contains provisions made for on-site 
monitoring during (1) site preparation, (2) construction/implementation, and (3) decommissioning 
phases; as well as the longer term maintenance requirements.  
The cost ofthe monitoring should be determined and clearly stated in the IEE/EIAreport. 
The environmental monitoring plan will include the following components over the different  
project phases (Site Preparation, Construction/implementation Phase, Decommissioning Phase):  
  Site characteristics (include plans/photographs/drawings/ showing the project area, any 
environmental sensitive receivers, beach profiles and ambient air/water/sea water qualities)  
  Works involved and proposed mitigating measures to prevent negative impacts on water 
course/lagoon/beach/road users/immediate neighbors  
  Clauses to be included in contract documents to ensure implementation of proposed mitigating 
measures  
Parameters to be monitored  
50 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme: 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
  Monitoring methodology  
  Monitoring locations and control stations  
  Monitoring frequency and duration  
  Persons to conduct the monitoring and undertake the data analysis and reporting 
The institutional system by which monitoring data will be collected, analysed, interpreted and 
action taken, ifnecessary, to prevent or reduce unwanted impacts  
  Procedures for reporting to the authorities  
  Contingency plan (in case o f emergencies such as uncontrolled discharge o f pollutants,  
fire outbreak, natural calamities)  
  Allocation of financial resources by the developer  
  Maintenance component including building maintenance, daily and periodical maintenance of the 
site, setting up of appropriate maintenance teams for treatment plant, standby generator, etc.  
Reporting should be done annually, with summary reports at 2-monthly intervals.   
Conclusions  
This section should contain a final statement relating to the selection ofthe preferred alternative, the 
mitigation measures and the environmental monitoring that will be undertaken.  
Name: 
Signature: 
Date: 
Appendices 
These should include:  
terms of reference for the IEE/EIA  
 
  additional technical information and baseline data  
• full list of references  
• names and Registration Certificate numbers of the EIA consultants  
• CVs of any unregistered individuals who participated in the preparation of the EIA/IEE report  
51 
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 6: Annual Work Plan and Budget 
1.  Annual Work Plan and Budget. The annual work plan and budget (AWPB) constitute the 
annual basis for implementation and clearly describe the strategic direction of the 
programme, the expected results under each component, and associated risk mitigation 
measures. The PIU will prepare the AWPBs, in consultation with all stakeholders (MACO, ARC, 
Island Farmer Forums, commercial islands, wholesale markets, etc). A participatory annual 
planning process will be set up with Island Farmer Forums to ensure bottom-up feedback on 
community needs, priorities, contextual opportunities and limitations.  
2.  The PIU will seek PSC and IFAD approval for each AWPB in advance of the national annual 
budgeting process in order to ensure sufficient counterpart funding. IFAD supervision missions 
will offer opportunities to review implementation progress against annual targets. 
3.  The following tables present the Annual Work Plan and Budget for 2020-2021. 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (PY1) 
  Country: Repubic of Maldives 
  Project: Maldives Agribusiness Programme 
  Component 1. Enabling Services 
  Sub-compnent 1.1. Knowledge and Technology 
Description of Activiites 
Category 
Outputs 
Budgeted 
2020-2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 000'USD 
Govt 
IFAD 
IFAD 
Budget 
Grant 
Loan  
No 
1 
1.1 
1.1.1 
1.1.2 
1.1.3 
1.1.4 
1.1.5 
1.1.6 
1.1.7 
Upgrading Agriculture R&D Center (North) 
Equipment and Goods 
Upgrading laboratory facilities (to measure water quality for 
irrigation, fertility of soils, plant tissue nutrition and identify plant 
diseases) 
Improved greenhouse fitted hydroponic planting gutter space (for 
humid and hot climate, movable gutter to make space for operation 
lanes optimizing the use of floor space) 
Closed vertical production using artificial light /d 
Net houses against insects and shade fitted with hydroponic 
systems /e 
Net houses against bats /f 
Concrete apron for compost making 
Compost equipment /g 
Open field hydroponic production bucket system using drip (set 
covers 100 m2) 
Reagents, fertilizer, pest control agents (chemicals and biological) 
1.1.8 
1.1.9 
1.1.10  Tools like refractometer, tissue and soil nutrition analysis meter, 
insect catch plates and microscope 
1.1.11  Open field drip irrigation 
1.1.12  Grafting equipment 
1.1.13  HDPE drain cell rainwater storage tank dug in to the soil 
1.1.14  Rainwater polythene collection sheet with pump sump 
1.1.15  Photovoltaic solar system (10 Kw) 
1.1.16  Battery backup (9 KW) 
Policy studies 
2 
Knowledge and Technology (AR&DC) 
3 
3.1  Adaptive research (inputs) 
I 
II 
II 
1 lab 
152 
137 
350m2 
100m2 
500m2 
100m2 
200m2 
1 unit 
5 units 
lumpsum 
lumpsum 
5 units 
5 units 
200m2 
500m2 
1 unit 
1 unit 
1 study 
44 
35 
4 
1 
28 
25 
0 
5 
5 
13 
3 
30 
1 
14 
8 
30 
40 
28 
3 
0 
23 
20 
0 
4 
4 
10 
2 
24 
0 
11 
6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
30 
15 
4 
7 
1 
0 
6 
5 
0 
1 
1 
3 
1 
6 
0 
3 
2 
- 
3.1.1 
3.1.2 
3.1.3 
3.1.4 
3.1.5 
3.1.6. 
3.1.7 
3.1.8 
3.1.9 
Identification of best varieties (various crops) 
Establishing best hydroponic fertilisation for greenhouse, closed 
system and field systems 
Establishing best drip fertigation for open fields (annual crops) 
Establishing best drip fertigation for open fields (perrenial crops) 
Identification of compost amounts for crop production in open field 
Development of IPM recommendations for the various crops in 
greenhouse, closed system and open field 
Development of organic pest recommendations for the various 
crops in greenhouse, closed system and open field 
Preparation of farm budget based on field records for each 
recommendations developed 
Preparation of promotion material videos, pamphlet, prospectus for 
different systems  
3.2  Materials 
3.2.1 
4 
Planting material 
Knowledge and Technology Transfer 
4.1.1 
4.1.2 
4.1.3 
4.1  Technical assistance (UNOPS) 
Chief Technical Advisor 
Unspecified TA 
UNOPS management fee 
4.2  Technical assistance - extension 
4.2.1 
4.2.2 
4.2.3 
Development of the MGAP protocols for various crops produces 
Development of hand book for MGAP implementation 
Development of produce standards guided by FAO's Codex 
Alimentarius 
4.3  Technical assistance - other 
4.3.1 
Establishment of Agriculture Information and Communication 
Technology (AICT) platform 
4.3.2 
Illustrated training material 
4.4  Training and workshops 
4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.3 
4.4.4 
Project awareness on participating island 
Assisting farmers to form institutional frame work e.g. farmers' 
forum for decision making on production 
Assisting the Farmers' Forum to select an extension-linkage 
farmers (farmer to farmer) 
Training of selected link farmers (LF) 
Total 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (PY1) 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
10 products 
lumpsum 
1 consultant hired 
1 consultant hired 
1 consultant hired 
1 protocol 
1 handbook 
1 consultant hired 
1 platform 
established 
10 brochures 
prepared 
6 islands covered 
6 islands covered 
6 islands covered 
12 LFs 
I 
II 
II 
II 
II 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
146 
66 
12 
10 
5 
22 
32 
15 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
- 
3 
- 
- 
- 
10 
5 
22 
32 
15 
3 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
146 
66 
12 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
6 
756 
3 
6 
443 
- 
- 
254 
- 
- 
60 
Country: Repubic of Maldives 
Project: Maldives Agribusiness Programme 
Component 1. Enabling Services 
Sub-compnent 1.1. Input Supply 
No 
Description of Activiites 
1 
1.1 
MACO institutional capacity building 
Equipment and goods 
1.1.1  Walking tractors and implements 
1.1.2  Rain water harvesting and storage systems 
1.1.3  Stock of inputs for MACO's supply retail outlet 
1.1.4  Provision of climate resilient planting materials 
1.1.5 
Initial stock of greenhouses, closed vertical production units and net houses 
1.1.6  Reusable plastic crates 
1.1.7  Solar/photovoltaic systems 
1.1.8  Drip fertigation system and delivery systems 
1.1.9 
1.2 
Initial stock of solar driven cold storage 
Training 
1.2.1  Training of shop keepers/agriculture extension staff 
1.3 
Technical assistance 
1.3.1  Agronomist/extension 
Total 
Category  Outputs 
Budgeted 
2020-2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 000'USD 
IFAD 
Loan 
Govt 
Budget 
MACO 
I 
II 
II 
10 units 
1 unit 
lumpsum 
lumpsum 
60 units 
lumpsum 
1 unit 
1 unit 
5 units 
3 courses 
6 
persons 
25 
253 
122 
122 
314 
30 
57 
66 
177 
30 
23 
228 
109 
109 
282 
27 
51 
59 
159 
30 
102 
1 298 
102 
1 181 
3 
25 
12 
12 
31 
3 
6 
7 
18 
- 
- 
117 
0 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (PY1) 
Country: Repubic of Maldives 
Project: Maldives Agribusiness Programme 
Component 2. Climate Smart Production 
No 
Description of Activiites 
Category 
Outputs 
Budgeted 
2020-2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 000'USD 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
MACO 
SDFC 
Govt 
Bud 
1 
Financial products 
II 
1 
Development of financial products 
1 
Use of financial products 
1 
Understanding and interpretation of agriculture business plans 
1 consultant 
hired 
1 consultant 
hired 
1 consultant 
hired 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
Total 
17 
17 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (PY1) 
  Country: Repubic of Maldives 
Project: Maldives Agribusiness Programme 
Component 3. Market Connection 
No 
Description of Activiites 
Category 
Outputs 
1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.1-
3.2 
Training 
Food safety and quality (training to vendors at regional market hubs) 
Contract farming /b 
MGAP for CAI advisers 
Contract farming for CAI advisers 
Technical assistance 
Development of transparent pricing systems 
Provision of logistical management support to transport produce to Male 
 Market infrastructure investments 
Matching grants: duplication of production systems at the R&DC (to 
selected CAI at 20% of investment costs) 
Matching grants: upgrading  cold storage  on transport vessels (to 
selected CAI at 20% of investment costs) 
Contribution of CAI for market infrastucture investments 
Total 
II 
II 
III 
1 course 
1 course 
1 course 
1 course 
1 consultant 
hired 
lumpsum 
lumpsum 
1 cold storage 
Budgeted 
2020-
2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 000'USD 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Private 
Invest 
Govt 
Budget 
0.253 
0.253 
0.25 
5.06 
6.08 
0.25 
5.06 
6.08 
6 
1 
9 
30 
156 
213 
6 
1 
6 
20 
- 
43 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
11 
- 
14 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
156 
156 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (PY1) 
  Country: Repubic of Maldives 
  Project: Maldives Agribusiness Programme 
Component 4. Programme Management 
Description of Activiites 
Category 
Outputs 
Budgeted 
2020-2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 
000'USD 
IFAD 
Grant 
Govt 
Budget 
Equipment and Goods 
Technical Assistance 
Internal audit 
Staff Training 
Project management 
Business management 
Gender focus 
Innovation enhancement 
Study tours 
Integrated M&E and KM 
 Studies and impact assessment 
4.1.1  Development of MIS system 
4.1.2  Baseline study 
4.1.3  Thematic studies 
4.2 
KM 
Information dissemination seminars and workshops (start-
up) 
Salaries 
Project Director 
Planning and admin officer 
Policy and institution specialists 
Agriculturalist/extension 
Business development specialist 
Gender and targeting officer 
M&E and KM officer 
Financial management specialist 
Accountant 
Accountant assistant 
Procurement officer 
Support staff 
Performace-based incentives (about 20% of base salary 
based on staff performance) 
Allowances 
Operational expenditures 
IV 
IV 
IV 
I 
II 
II 
II 
II 
IV 
lumpsum 
contract 
1 course 
1 course 
1 course 
1 course 
1 tour 
MIS 
established 
1 study 
conducted 
1 study 
conducted 
lumpsum 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
5 persons hired 
PBS 
established 
per annum 
25 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
10 
10 
20 
3 
3 
24 
21 
21 
21 
21 
21 
19 
21 
19 
12 
19 
49 
36 
8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10 
20 
3 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
36 
- 
- 
- 
72 
25 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
10 
- 
- 
- 
- 
24 
21 
21 
21 
21 
21 
19 
21 
19 
12 
19 
49 
- 
8 
11 
5 
342 
Office running costs (including for PSC meetings, 
meetings of tender committees, travel and stationeries) 
Office rent 
Total 
lumpsum 
office rented 
11 
5 
414 
No 
1 
2 
2.1 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
4 
4.1 
4.2.1 
5 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
5.8 
5.9 
5.1 
5.1 
5.1 
6 
7 
8 
8.1 
8.2 
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
MALDIVES AGRO-BUSINESS PROJECT  PROCUREMENT PLAN 2020-21
Consultants
Country/Organisation : MALDIVES/PIU-MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, MARINE RESOURCES & AGRICULTURE
Project/Programme : MALDIVES AGRO-BUSINESS PROJECT
Loan/Grant  # : 
Procurment Period :May 2020 to October   2021
Description
Component  Lot Number
BASIC DATA
Estimated Amount IN 
USD ('000)
Issue # of 
Invitaion 
for Bids
Prourement Method
PROCURMENT PLAN (CONSULTANTS))
Bid Documents
Date 
proposed
Date No-
Objection
Bidding Period
Bid 
Invitaion  
Date
Bid Closing 
Opening
Bid Evalution
Contract Finalization
Bid Evalution 
Report
No 
Objection
Contract 
Amount In 
US $
Date 
Contract 
Award
Date 
Contract 
Signature
Time line 
Prior or   
Post         
Review
Plan Vs. 
Actual
Policy Studies
Adaptive Research Studies - 8 Nos
TA- Chief Technical Advisor- UNOPS
TA- Unspecified- UNOPS
Development of produce standards 
guided by FAO's Codex Alimentarius
Agronomist/ Extension - 6 persons
Development of Financial Products - 3 
persons
Development of Transparent Pricing 
System
Baseline Study
MIS Development
Thematic Studies
Internal Audit
Total Cost
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
II
III
IV
IV
IV
IV
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/01
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/02
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/03
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/04
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/05
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/06
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/07
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/08
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/09
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/10
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/11
MAP/cons/ 
2020-21/12
30.00
Individual Consultant
Prior review
Plan 
Actual
28.00
Individual Consultants 
Post Review
Plan 
146.00
Single Source
66.00
Single Source
22.00
Individual Consultant 
Prior 
Review
Prior 
Review
Prior 
Review
Actual
Plan 
Actual
Plan 
Actual
Plan 
Actual
102.00
Individual Consultants 
Post Review
Plan 
Actual
18.00
Individual Consultants
Post Review
Plan 
6.00
Individual Consultant
Post Review
Plan 
Actual
20.00
QCBS
Prior 
Review
Actual
Plan 
Actual
10.00
QBS
Post Review
Plan 
Actual
3.00
Individual Consultant
Post Review
Plan 
Actual
3.00
QBS
Post Review
Plan 
Actual
454.00
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
N.A
Jun-20
Jun-20
Jul-20
Jul-20
Sep-20
Jul-20
Oct-20
Oct-20
Jul-20
Jun-20
Jul-20
Jul-20
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Document Date: 
Project No. 
xxxx 
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the programme area 
I. 
Introduction 
Function and status 
This document 
II.  Overall programme framework 
  Goal and objective, programme area 
Target groups and targeting 
  Programme guiding principles for implementation and logic model 
III.  Component 1 – Enabling policy, institutions and services 
Area and technical targeting 
Subcomponent 1.1. Knowledge and technology 
  Subcomponent 1.2 – Input supply 
IV.  Component 2 – Climate-smart production 
V.  Component 3 – Market connection 
VI.  Programme management 
Start-up 
Programme governance and steering 
  Operational management 
  Supervision and implementation support 
VII.  Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication 
  M&E and MIS 
Planning 
  M&E exercises 
Learning, knowledge management and communication 
VIII.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
  Overview 
  Disbursement procedures, withdrawals and withdrawal applications 
  Auditing 
  Accounting systems, policies, procedures and financial reporting 
  Governance and Anti-corruption measures. 
IX.  Procurement 
X.  Costs and financing 
Programme costs 
Programme financing/ co-financing strategy and plan 
i 
iii 
iii 
iv 
vi 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
4 
7 
7 
7 
10 
12 
15 
17 
17 
17 
18 
20 
22 
22 
23 
24 
26 
28 
28 
29 
31 
33 
34 
36 
37 
37 
38 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: 
Appendix 2: 
Appendix 3: 
Appendix 4: 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Terms of reference for PIU key positions 
Programme logframe 
Proposed M&E formats 
Outlines of first AWPB (18 months) 
First procurement plan (18 months) 
Detailed cost tables. 
ii 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
USD1.0 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
Maldivian Rufiyaa (MVR) 
MVR 15.35 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iii 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
AA 
AICT 
ARC 
AWPB 
CSN 
CTA 
CVA 
DA 
ELF 
EOI 
FA 
FAO 
Authorized Allocation 
Agriculture Information and Communication Technology 
Agriculture Research Center 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Country Strategic Note 
Chief Technical Advisor 
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 
Designated Account 
Extension Link Farmer 
Expression of Interest 
Financing Agreement 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
FADiP 
Fisheries and Agriculture Diversification Program 
FM 
GAP 
GDP 
GoM 
Financial Management 
Good Agricultural Practice 
Gross Domestic Product 
Government of Maldives 
HACCP 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point 
ICP 
ICU 
IFAD 
IPSAS 
KM 
LDH 
Ltd. 
LTB 
MACO 
MAP 
M&E 
MED 
MEDeP 
MGAP 
MGFSS 
MFLC 
IFAD Client Portal 
Implementation Coordination Unit (MACO) 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
the International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
Knowledge Management 
Loan Disbursement Handbook 
Limited 
Letter to Borrower 
Maldives Agriculture Corporation 
Maldives Agribusiness Progreamme 
Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Ministry of Economic Development 
Mariculture Enterprise Development Project 
Maldives Good Agricultural Practice 
Ministry of Gender Family and Social Services 
Maldives Finance Leasing Company 
MOFMRA 
Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture 
MOF 
MONPI 
MoU 
MSME 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of National Planning and Infrastructure 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Micro, Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises 
iv 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
ORMS 
Operational Results Measurement System 
PCR 
PD 
PIU 
PIM 
PSC 
Pvt. 
RCF 
SDFC 
SDG 
SECAP 
SME 
SOE 
TA 
Project Completion Review/Report 
Programme Director 
Programme Implementation Unit 
Programme Implementation Manual 
Programme Steering Committee 
Private 
Revolving Credit Fund 
SME Development Finance Corporation 
Sustainable Development Goal 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Statement of Expenditure 
Technical Assistance 
UNOPS 
United Nations’ Office for Project Services 
VCC 
WA 
Value Chain Cooperative 
Withdrawal Application 
v 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Map of the programme area 
Insert map 
vi 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
I. 
Introduction 
  Function and status 
This draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) provides guidelines for the implementation of the 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP). The PIM elaborates how policy support, institutional capacity 
building  and  strengthening  of  institutional  agri-technical  support  system  take  place  under  the 
programme  framework  and  how  programme  investments  will  mutually  leverage  for  enhanced 
production and market connection with improved agricultural practices. These guidelines are supported 
by formats, standard documents, terms of references, agreements and examples. 
The PIM is drafted primarily on the basis of the main Project Design Report (PDR). It is stressed 
that this present PIM is a draft made at design time and it is a live document that will need to be carefully 
reviewed by all major stakeholders in the Programme, with periodic revisions to be made where needed. 
Any  changes  proposed  as  a  result  of  such  a  review  will,  however,  require  the  concurrence  of  IFAD 
before such a change is included as an approved programme implementation procedure or approach. 
Submission  of  a  revised  draft  of  the  Programme  implementation  procedures  by  the  Programme 
Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  should  be  one  of  the  key  milestones  for  operational  effectiveness  of  the 
Programme. 
  This document 
Implementation procedures for the Programme are described in the subsequent chapters after 
the introduction as chapter I, as follows:  
Chapter II – Overall programme framework 
Chapters III – V = Technical components  
Chapter VI – Programme management 
Chapter VII – Planning, M&E, learning, KM and communication 
Chapter VIII – Financial management  
Chapter IX – Procurement 
Chapter X – Costs and financing 
 Appendix include ToRs of PIU key positions, proposed M&E formats, outlines of first AWPB, first 
procurement plan and detailed cost tables. 
1 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
II.  Overall programme framework 
  Goal and objective, programme area 
The programme's goal is to sustainably increase the incomes, food security and nutrition status 
of small farmer households.  
The  development  objective  is  the  strengthened  enabling  environment  for  sustainable  and 
climate-resilient  agriculture.  This  objective  will  be  achieved  through  policy  refinement,  strengthened 
institutions and services, enhanced agricultural technologies and better access to financing and markets 
for small farmer households. 
Programme  area.  GoM  is  presently  developing  a  National  Spatial  Plan  (2020-2040)  with  the 
objective of reducing disparity among the capital and regions, facilitating effective regional development, 
providing  affordable  transport  connections  to  communities,  promoting  economically  sustainable 
infrastructure development and improving island-level livelihoods to create prosperous societies. The 
Spatial Plan will be based on growth hubs with the Male’ area being the central hub and five regional 
hubs, nine sub-regional hubs, three central clusters and six satellite clusters. MAP will be articulated 
within the National Spatial Plan as part of the alignment with government development strategies. 
Figure 1: Spatial Map for Maldives Strategic Action Plan  
The programme will be of nation-wide scale, cover all regional and sub-regional hubs, clusters 
and  islands  where  agriculture  is  undertaken  by  small  farmers.  The  main  programme  hubs  for 
programme activities are in region 1-3 are Haa Alif Hoarafushi for region 1. Haa Dhaalu Vaikaradhoo 
2 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
for region 2, and Shaviyani Milandhoo for region 3. Each of these hubs will serve 8, 9 and 9 inhabited 
agriculture islands respectively. Specifically under different technical components: 
Component 1 of Enabling policy, institutions and services will be nationwide in scope covering all 
19  atolls,  21  regions  covering  188  inhabited  islands  of  these  98  are  inhabited  where  agriculture  is 
practised on around 800 registered hectares. Also belonging to the programme area is 50 uninhabited 
islands leased for commercial agriculture, with a total of 956 hectares of land of which 24 islands are 
actively doing agriculture on 582 hectares of land.  
  Component 2 of Climate smart production will initially focus on region 1-3, covering 3 atolls and 40 
inhabited  islands.  Of  these,  26  are  inhabited  agriculture  islands  with  280  hectares  registered  land 
cultivated by 2,150 registered farmers, and 85 hectares cultivated by 645 non-registered farmers. Within 
this production area there are 6 active commercial islands cultivating a total of 250 hectares. 
  Component 3 of Market connection will initially focus on regions 1-3 during the first two years and 
then expand to 4-7 and eventually cover the whole country.  
  Target groups and targeting 
  Target  groups  are  small  farmers  who  are  constituted  of  different  segments,  including  men, 
women and youth belonging to households of different socio-economic categories. With a considerable 
socio-economic  and  socio-cultural  divide  between  rural  and  urban  populations,  also  with  respect  to 
gender and age, small farmers who depend mainly on agriculture for their livelihood are economically 
one of the most vulnerable groups in the country. Analysis of poverty correlated with economic sector 
indicates that those working in the agriculture and fisheries sectors are far more likely to be poorer than 
those  in  industry  or  services.  The  Household  and  Expenditure  Survey  of  2016  found  8.2%  of  the 
population  to  be  living  below  the  national  poverty  line.  However,  regional  disparities  are  significant; 
poverty incidence was only 1.7% in Male but 12.8% in the atolls. Urban-rural disparities are also striking; 
it  is  estimated  that  rural  poverty  is  three  times  higher  than  urban  poverty. The  situation  is  worse  for 
women with a high rate of divorce combined with limited employment opportunities contributing further 
to their level of impoverishment. 
  Women continue to be an important proportion of the active labour force in agriculture; they are 
also important actors in achieving food security and improved nutrition, the programme will pay special 
attention to the women’s participation in the programme activities and their access to opportunities of 
livelihood  improvement  and  their  sharing  of  generated  socio-economic  benefits.  Programme  direct 
support to participating individuals will be inclusive and gender sensitive, to be reflected from training, 
involvement in enhanced production, adoption of introduced technologies, market connection, access 
to inputs and finance. A gender strategy will be defined by the programme and its associated action 
plan elaborated and implemented. 
  Youth will be another important segment for special attention, as their engagement is crucial for 
the future of agriculture in the country. Sampled visits indicated that the youth constitutes 20% of the 
active labour force in the rural community. Rural youth may be more attracted by labour or employment 
migration to the urban areas, as they are among those who find difficult to be involved in agriculture 
due to the lack of assets and skills. However, the youth are motivated and dynamic; inclusive and tailor-
made  measures  can  turn  them  into  viable  socio-economic  actors.  The  programme  will  explore 
opportunities  of  engaging  the  youth  in  interventions  related  to  agribusiness  development,  agri-
technologies  and  knowledge  transfer,  management  of  modern  agriculture,  market  linkage  and  IT 
technologies in support of production and post-production management. 
  Geographic targeting strategy. In light of the above, the programme will apply a geographic 
targeting strategy to target all the small farmers in the country, adopting an inclusive targeting approach 
that is gender and youth sensitive at the level of beneficiary participation in order to ensure the equitable 
access to development opportunities and resources for the disadvantaged groups. 
3 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Specifically, under the technical components: 
  Gender targeting. The programme’s gender targeting is integrated into the overall programme 
targeting strategy and it aims to foster an enabling environment of equal opportunities for men, women 
and youth for their meaningful participation at both implementation and benefit levels. The strategy will 
be implemented through measures integrated into interventions under the four components including a 
position  of  targeting  and  gender  specialist  at  both  PIU  and  the  technical  team,  and  a  gender 
development action plan for execution once the PIU and its technical team’s staffing completed. This 
will mainly help pursue the informed actions to achieve: (i) increase in gender awareness for programme 
staff and participating agencies and business partners at all levels; (ii) integration of gender analysis 
and sex disaggregated targets and data into the programme M&E system including its planning and 
reporting;  (iii)  increase  in  authoritative  possibilities  and  number  of  women  and  youth  who  have  the 
adequate attributes necessary for leadership positions; and increase in the ability of rural women and 
youth to access and manage resources and agricultural services.  
  Programme guiding principles for implementation and logic model 
  Operational  approach  and  component  mutual  leverage.  The  activities  under  the  three 
technical  components  will  be  implemented  in  26  islands  under  the  three  hubs  mentioned  above. 
Component 3 will leverage the support provided to 2,150 farming households under components 1 and 
2  through  targeted  market  linkage  for  additional  3,850  farming  HH  in  the  remaining  country.  The 
component operational targeting approach will be market-led: focusing on (i) agriculture produce with 
the biggest demand; (ii) clustering of island around three main hubs in the north to facilitate scale of 
production and enhance logistic; (iii) use of link farmers in conjunction with AICT and visiting advisors 
for rapid  dissemination  of knowledge and technology; (iv) linking  island cluster/forums with markets; 
and (v) develop appropriated financial loan products. 
  Gender targeting. The programme’s gender targeting is integrated into the overall programme 
targeting strategy and it aims to foster an enabling environment of equal opportunities for men, women 
and youth for their meaningful participation at both implementation and benefit levels. The strategy will 
be implemented through measures integrated into interventions under the four components including a 
position  of  targeting  and  gender  specialist  at  both  PIU  and  the  technical  team,  and  a  gender 
development action plan for execution once the PIU and its technical team’s staffing completed. This 
will mainly help pursue the informed actions to achieve: (i) increase in gender awareness for programme 
staff and participating agencies and business partners at all levels; (ii) integration of gender analysis 
and sex disaggregated targets and data into the programme M&E system including its planning and 
reporting;  (iii)  increase  in  authoritative  possibilities  and  number  of  women  and  youth  who  have  the 
adequate attributes necessary for leadership positions; and increase in the ability of rural women and 
youth to access and manage resources and agricultural services.  
4 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Youth are motivated and dynamic; inclusive and tailor-made measures can turn them into viable 
socio-economic actors. The programme will explore opportunities of engaging the youth in interventions 
related  to  agribusiness  development,  agri-technologies  and  knowledge  transfer,  management  of 
modern agriculture, market linkage and IT technologies in support of production and post-production 
management. As concrete measures: (i) youth participation will be recorded and reported in the M&E 
system; (ii) youth will be encouraged to take active part in adoption of technologies and GAPs under 
components 1 and 2, (ii) youth will be given equal access to opportunities in activities of identification 
and recruitment of farmer forum leaders and ELFs, (iii) youth will be encouraged to take active part in 
participating in agribusiness supported by the programme, especially in production and marketing areas 
where modern technologies and IT tools are introduced. 
  Climate-smartness and resilience. The programme will introduce a number of climate-smart 
interventions, such as water harvesting and selection of climate resilient varieties and use of grafting, 
use of hydroponic and drip fertigation, and introduction of agroforestry. The programme will focus on 
biological  control  agents  and  IPM  minimising  use  of  pesticides  which  will  be  managed  through  the 
introduction of MGAP. 
  The programme will also initiate screening and developing of dwarf coconuts for multiplication 
and replanting of old senile plantations across islands. The dwarf type is higher yielding and withstands 
storms better than the tall varieties and it is also easier to control the Rhino Betel which is a problem 
because large number of senile coconuts. The project will also assist to commercialise the most suitable 
wild nuts and fruit by making planting material available and introduce as mix cropping with coconuts. 
The coconut plantation will also be used for cultivating legumes to be composted for field application to 
reduce imports of manure and fertilizer. These interventions will both be climate smart and having an 
environmental positive impact on reducing costal erosion, improve soil productivity and water holding 
capacity and generate income for framers in the Islands.  
  Nutrition sensitivity. 
The  micronutrient  survey  of  2007  found  micronutrient  deficiencies 
among  children,  especially  deficiencies  in  iron,  zinc  and  Vitamin A  to  be  of  significant  concern. The 
same study also found that overall, 38% of women were iron deficient and 26.8% were found to have 
zinc deficiency and 4.7% women and 39.3% women have severe and moderate vitamin A deficiency 
respectively. The micronutrient deficiencies are due to low consumptions of vegetables as part of limited 
availability, particularly in the northern part of the country. 
  The programme’s support to increase production of vegetable, fruits and nuts (both indigenous 
and  conventional)  and  root  crops  will  increase  availability  of  vegetables,  fruits/nuts  and  root  crops. 
Additional intake of vegetables, fruit/nuts and root crops can lead to reduced micronutrient deficiencies, 
especially among children and women. 
  For  vegetables  the  focus  will  be  tomato,  eggplants,  okra,  squash,  pumpkin,  different  lettuce, 
cabbage,  chilli,  bell  pepper, microgreen,  cucumber,  herbs,  leeks,  onions,  watercress,  broccoli  Raba, 
string beans and chives. Fruit to which will be supported under the programme are papaya, banana, 
citrus, coconuts and mango. Support to root crops will be focused on taro, yam and in particularly sweet 
potato. 
  Support  will  also  be  provided  to  preserve  suitable  vegetables,  fruits  and  nuts.  Within  the 
agroforestry system, the programme will identify most suitable fruits and nuts for fresh consumption and 
for preparation of preserved food and for medicinal use. 
In close consultation with the Ministry of Health, the programme will seek to map the area where 
cultivation  of  specific  vegetable,  fruit/nuts  and  root  crops  be  intensified  to  address  micronutrient 
deficiencies.  The  programme  will  also  work  closely  with  Ministry  of  Health  to  develop  appropriate 
training courses and materials to raise  awareness and understanding of nutrition issues, among the 
target group of the programme. 
  Logic model. 
Following  is  the  programme  logic  model  that  shows  the  interlinkage  and 
mutual leverage between services, production and market. 
5 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
6 
   SERVICES Research Centre - North  Adaptive research o Seed testing o Nursery/planting material o Tissue culture  Coconut Systems  Extension  Equipment testing Ministry of Fisheries, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMA)  Extension  Supervision  Project management  Food safety and standard guidelines  Quality and branding  IPM Maldives Agricultural Company Limited (MACO)  Input supply  Technical assistance  Safety/quality standards  Marketing support  Training and technology transfer e.g.: o Hydroponic systems o Greenhouses o Grafting equipment o Drip Irrigation SDFC  Agricultural financing for home-based farmers, non-registered business individuals and companies Research Centre - South  Adaptive research o Seed testing o Nursery/planting material o Tissue culture  Coconut Systems  Extension  Equipment testing PRODUCTION Farmers/Groups: Island 1  Rainwater harvesting  Production  Sorting/grading/branding  Quality control  Aggregation  Value addition/processing Farmers/Groups: Island 2  Rainwater harvesting  Production  Sorting/grading/branding  Quality control  Aggr egation  Value addition/processing Farmers/Groups: Island 3  Rainwater harvesting  Production  Sorting/grading/branding  Quality control  Aggregation  Value addition/processing MARKET Regional/Cluster Wholesale Market:  Collection  Local Sale Commercial Agriculture Islands:  Purchase from farmers  Contract farming  Purchasing logistics  Selling logistics  Refrigerated vessels Male’ Wholesale Buyers:  Aggregation  Sale to resorts  Sale to Male’ consumers Resorts:  Purchase of agricultural output  Forward contracting  Payments POLICY SUPPORT: (i) structured holistic agricultural policy framework; (ii) promotion of domestic markets; (iii) incentive framework for resort market to source local production PARTNERSHIPS: (i) knowledge partnerships for the two research centres; (ii) implementation partnerships for MOFMA/PIU  
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
III. Component 1 – Enabling policy, institutions and services 
  Area and technical targeting 
  This component aims to achieve the expected outcome of increased productivity of agriculture 
commodities. To achieve this, support will be provide to establish conducive policies and strengthened 
institutional capacity of MOFMRA and its Agriculture Research Centre (ARC) in Hanimadhoo Island in 
conducting quality adaptive research for generation of climate resilient recommendations for planting 
material,  husbandry  practises  and  new  production  systems  like  greenhouses,  hydroponic  systems, 
closed vertical hydroponic units, drip fertigation systems, and grafting equipment. Staff of the MACO, 
currently under the process of establishment, will also be trained in providing high quality and effective 
supply of agricultural inputs and equipment for new production systems to the smallholder farmers, and 
disseminating MGAP in conjunction with sustainable, climate-smart informed input management. 
  This will lead to transfer of production technologies and MGAP to the 26 inhabited islands and 6 
uninhabited  commercial  agricultures  islands  in  region  1-3.  These  islands  will  be  clustered  around  3 
hubs including: (i) Haa Alif Hoarafushi for region 1; (ii) Haa Dhaalu Vaikaradhoo for region 2; (iii) and 
Shaviyani  Milandhoo  for  region  3.  Each  hub  is  serving  8,  9  and  9  islands  respectively  and  project 
activities under each hub will be managed by an agriculture advisor from MACO.  Each island under 
the  hubs  will  form  an  island  farmer  forum  which  will  be  the  focal  point  for  decisions  on  crops  to  be 
produced, staggering and appointing Extension  Link Farmer cum input retailer. The ELF will receive 
technical capacity building and financial support to establish agricultural retail enterprise. Results from 
ARC’s adaptive research will be validated through field trials/demonstrations in a typical island under 
each project hub. It is estimated that 2,150 farming HH across the 3 northern regions will benefit and 
3,850 from the remaining regions will benefit from the component interventions. Farmers from region 1-
3  will  receive  direct  support  under  the  project  and  the  remaining  regions  will  receive  direct  support 
through  MOFMRA  and  MACO.  MOFMRA  and  MACO  will  mirror  the  extension  link  farming  mode 
introduce by the project in region 1-3. The projects will provide training to the six staff of ARC, and six 
staff of MACO. Three of MACO’s staff will be stationed at each of the northern three regional project 
hubs and the remaining  will be provide services to the remaining regions. The ELF on each of the 26 
islands under region 1-3 will also receive continues training under the project.  The ELF from each of 
the 3 islands selected for validation of adaptive research results will be trained in conducting on-farm 
trials/demonstrations, farmers field schools and farmers field days. ELFs for the remaining regions will 
be trained by MOFMRA and MACO.  
  Farmer  targeting.  The  target  group  are  6,000  farming  households  of  which  55%  has  to  be 
women and 10% youth and the remaining can me men. Special focus will give to all poor farming HH 
on the initial production islands in the northern three regions.  
  Subcomponent 1.1. Knowledge and technology  
  Output 1.1.  Policy knowledge products on sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture 
will be completed (research, study, strategy, bylaw) based on the thematic and sector issues that will 
promote the country ownership and enabling environment for agribusiness. 
  Activity  1.1.1  Enhanced  participation  of  the  agribusiness  community  in  policy  process.  This 
activity will promote the inclusion of agribusiness players, supporters and influencers in policy process 
with the regulators such as MOFMRA. Thematic and sector issues of policy and strategic interests will 
be shared and consulted with the agribusiness community for the sake of better responsiveness to their 
interests and concerns.  Partnership with policy research divisions or institutions will be established in 
order to carry out relevant researches and studies in support of the agriculture-related policy dialogues 
in  the  country.  The  project’s  interventions  in  linking  MSME  financing  to  production  and  market 
(partnership  between  MOFMRA,  MFLC  and  SDFC),  operational  procedures  on  distribution  and 
application of quality inputs (partnership between MOFMRA and MACO) represent good potential of 
case  studies  in  support  of  the  further  formulation  of  sector  or  sub-sector  standards  and  regulations 
7 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
where necessary. The project will provide financing to support related consultancy and training in this 
regard.  
  Other possible topics for policy dialogue may include: (i) establish regulations governing ground 
water  extraction; (ii) Improve the present  weak regulation for import of agriculture crop  produce can 
cause  serious  damage  to  both  reputation  of  locally  produce  as  well  as  imported  produce;  (iii) 
establishing an ISO 17025 accredited laboratory for analysis of residue of pesticide and heavy metals; 
(iv)  Presently  there  are  no  guidelines  on  the  safe  handling,  use  and  disposal  of  chemicals  in  the 
Maldives and databases on chemicals are very weak this needs to be addressed in complementarity 
with introduction of MGAP.  
  The MAP TA management support and the project director will take the lead in prioritising the 
most  important  policies.  The  dialogue  with  relevant  government  institutions  will  be  evidence-based 
policy papers prepared by assistance from independent hired experts. New policies and regulations will 
be  accompanied  by  awareness  building  activities  to  share  the  analysis  and  recommendations  and 
ensure continuous follow-up of the policy recommendations. 
Activity  
1.1.1 
Timeline 
Throughout the project implementation as patient 
term 
policy 
sustainability is identified   
to  project 
related 
issues 
long 
Responsible Party 
Project Director and hired TA for preparation 
of policy papers. 
  Output 1.2. Upgraded capability of generating knowledge and technology  by the ARC  in 
Hanimadhoo  Island  including  include:  (i)  new  facilities  able  to  examine  water,  soil,  tissue  and  plant 
diseases;  (ii)  greenhouse  for  humid  and  hot  climate  fitted  hydroponic  moving  planting  gutter  using 
minimal  space  for  walk  ways;  (iii)  insulated  house  with  vertical  production  under  artificial  light;  (iv) 
different type of net houses; (v) machinery and apron for compost making; (vi) open field hydroponic 
systems; (vii)  reagents for analysis, fertilizer, pest control agents (chemical and biological); (viii) tools 
such as refractometer, tissue and soil nutrition analysis meter, insect catch plates and microscope; (ix) 
open field drip irrigation; (x) HDPE drain cell/storage and rainwater collection sheet with pump sump 
and pillow water bladder storage tank; (xi) grafting equipment; and (xii) photovoltaic system with battery 
backup. Related activities can be outlined as follows: 
  Activity 1.2.1. Upgrade laboratory: The MAP will finance new equipment to upgrade the existing 
laboratory at the ARC. The supplier of the equipment will provide ARC staff the required training in using 
the equipment and maintenance. Follow up training will be undertaken by Maldives National University 
on  a  need  basis.  Hired  TA  hired  by  MAP  will  also  provide  training  to  the ARC  staff  in  establishing 
protocols and test methodologies.  
  Activity  1.2.2.    Greenhouse  and  enclosed  vertical  houses  fitted  hydroponic  systems:  The 
suppliers of new production systems will be charge with training the relevant staff at the ARC in their 
operation  and  maintenance.  The  project  engaged  to  support  the ARC  will  also  provide  training  and 
develop  production  protocols  for  various  crops  in  compliance  with  MGAP.  In  turn  the ARC  will  train 
MACO staff and farmers investing in these production systems. 
  Activity  1.2.3.  Different  type  of  net  houses:  The  staff  of ARC  have  a  good  understanding  of 
designing, maintaining  and using net houses for different production systems. In addition to existing 
knowledge the TA under the project will provide assistance to develop the adaptive research programme 
and the knowledge required for specific crops. 
  Activity 1.2.4. Machinery and apron for compost making: TA support to ARC will assist with the 
design and appropriate production of biomass to be cultivated for compost. The cultivation of biomass 
(legumes)  will  be  agroforestry  based.  It  will  also  be  promoted  in  replanted  coconut  plantations  and 
where feasibly also introduced in the open field cropping system.  
8 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Activity  1.2.5. Open field drip/hydroponic systems: The supplier  will provide the training  in  the 
installation, maintenance and use. In turn the ARC will transfer the knowledge to the MACO agricultural 
advisors, dealers, extension link farmers and to farmers.  
  Activity 1.2.6. Field test kits: The MAP, TA service to the ARC will provide training in the field test 
kits and from the ARC it will be disseminated to extension link farmer.   
  Activity 1.2.7. Production inputs: The recommendations developed by ARC and validated on one 
island under each project hub will be taught to extension staff, extension link farmers cum input retailers. 
Appropriate written/illustrated material will be developed and used as handout and for drag down on 
the AICT mobile app. The TA assisting ARC will support to undertake this task. 
  Activity 1.2.8. Rainwater drain cell/storage and rainwater collection sheet with pump sump and 
pillow water bladder storage tank: The supplier of  these products will provide training to the ARC on 
how to install, maintenance and use, and the ARC will train MACO staff, extension staff and ELF/input 
retailers. The TA engage from time to time in supporting ARC will also provide assistance. 
  Activity 1.2.9. Grafting equipment: Grafting of fruit and vegetable will be critical to optimise yields 
to make planting material more climate resilient. TA under MAF will train the ARC staff, MACO staff link 
farmer/input retailers. 
Timeline and Responsible Parties for Implementation  
Activity  
1.2.1 
1.2.2 
1.2.3 
1.2.4 
1.2.5 
1.2.6 
1.2.7 
1.2.8 
1.2.9 
Timeline 
Immediately after project effectiveness. Follow up training on 
a need basis 
Immediately  after  project  effectiveness  for  ARC  and  each 
time when farmers buy a production system from MACO 
Immediately  after  project  effectiveness  for  ARC  and  each 
time farmers buy a screen house from MACO 
At  the  ARC  immediately  after  project  effectiveness.  Each 
time a entrepreneur  invest in compost making 
At  the  ARC  immediately  after  project  effectiveness.  Each 
time a entrepreneur  invest in hydroponic 
When field implementation commence around 6 months after 
project effectiveness  
Immediately after project effectiveness  
At  the  ARC  immediately  after  project  effectiveness.  Each 
time a farmer  invest in rainwater harvesting and storage 
At the ARC immediately after project effectiveness. At field 
level each time a farmer  engage in grafting  
Responsible Party 
Company  supplying  equipment,  MAP  TA  and 
Maldives National University 
Company  supplying  equipment,  MAP  TA  and 
MACO staff together with ELF cum input suppliers 
ARC  TA  will  provide  support  for  preparing 
protocols for  adaptive  research. MACO  staff  will 
train farmer in the use of screen houses  
TA for ARC, and ARC staff will train MACO staff 
and ELF com input suppliers 
Supplier  of  the  hydroponic  system  and  TA  for 
ARC, and ARC staff will train MACO staff and ELF 
com input suppliers 
The TA will train ARC staff who in turn will train 
MACO staff and ELF cum input retailers 
Training material will be developed by local TAs  
Supplier of the system and TA for ARC, and ARC 
staff  will  train  MACO  staff  and  ELF  com  input 
suppliers 
Supplier of the equipment and supplier of the root 
variety planting material.  
  Output 1.3. Packages of recommendations developed for enhancing economic return for 
small holder farmers. This will be achieved through adaptive research including: (i) identify best varieties 
for different crops; (ii) hydroponic fertilisation for greenhouse, closed system and field systems; (iii) drip 
fertigation for open fields; (iv) level of compost to use for crop production in open field; (v) develop IPM 
recommendations  for  the  various  crops  in  greenhouse,  closed  system  and  open  field;  (vi)  develop 
organic pest recommendations for the various crops in greenhouse, closed system and open field; (vii) 
Prepare farm budget based on field records for each recommendations developed; and (viii) prepare 
promotion material videos, pamphlet, prospectus for different systems. Main activities are summarized 
as follows: 
  Activities 1.3.1. Development and training in conducting adaptive research: The TA under MAP 
will train ARC staff to conduct on station adaptive research and off station validation trials and undertake 
farmer’s acceptability and market evaluation of well performing varieties. Other tested technologies will 
be evaluated jointly by the ARC and farmer in the 3 selected test islands before disseminated across 
all islands.  The evaluation will be based on well prepare protocols measuring parameters related to 
yields,  palatability,  use  of  water  from  aquifers,  rainwater  harvest,  pesticide  use  and  effect  on  the 
environment and overall emersion foot print.  
9 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Activities 1.3.2. Knowledge management: The project will publish its finding and recommendation 
on its home webpage, prepare training videos, leaflets and prospectus with detailed production guides 
and financial analysis and financial services possibility and its requirements. A TA will be engaged to 
establish the KM framework, methodology and the material.  
Timeline and Responsible Parties for Implementation  
Activity  
1.3.1 
1.3.2 
Timeline 
Immediately after project effectiveness.  
Immediately after project effectiveness. 
Responsible Party 
TA will train ARC staff  
TA will develop the KM framework  
  Subcomponent 1.2 – Input supply 
  The  Ministry  of  Fisheries,  Marine  Resource  and  Agriculture  and  the  Ministry  of  Economic 
Development are currently in the process of establishing the Maldives Agriculture Corporation (MACO). 
MACO  will  be  a  legal  registered  PPP  LTD  owned  by  government  and  private  enterprises  under  the 
patronage of the Ministry of Economic Development. MACO will be mandated to ensure availability and 
supply of high-quality consumable inputs, equipment and machinery for the agricultural sector in the 
country. MACO will also develop mechanism that will ensure domestic produce competitiveness with 
imports of similar produce.  
  MACO  will  be  supported  to  build  its  management  capacity  to  meet  its  scope  of  business, 
especially in its operation of importing and distributing appropriate high quality inputs such as planting 
material, and initial rootstock for grafting, fertilizer and pest control agents for conventional and organic 
production, power tillers and implements, tropical natural ventilated and forced ventilated green/screen 
houses  with  water  harvesting  systems,  and  hydroponic  growth  vessels  with  shade  nets, 
solar/photovoltaic  systems,  drip  fertigation  and  water  harvesting  liners.  The  project  will  also  support 
MACO in the procurement of simple processing equipment for commodities such as coconut chips and 
UHT coconut water, VCO, pickles, jam and juice. MACO will sell these inputs and equipment to farmers, 
ideally at market rates. The project will provide the initial capital to MACO to procure an initial stock of 
inputs and equipment; MACO would thereafter operate the scheme on a financially sustainable basis. 
MACO  will further  explore  the  possibility  of seeking to produce  and  procure some inputs  locally (for 
instance organic inputs, seeds, planting material, compost). Main activities are summarized as follows: 
  Output  1.4.  New  technologies  and  improved  inputs  transferred  to  smallholder  farmers. 
Transfer of knowledge  and technologies  will entail: (i)  MACO  hire and train  6  agronomist/extension 
staff  with  project  support;  (ii)  MACO  staff  provide  project  awareness  among  farmers  in  participating 
Island; (iii) MACO assist farmers form institutional frame work, e.g. island farmers forum for decision on 
type of produce to ensure scale of production; (iv) MACO assist farmer forum to select an ELF (farmer 
to farmer) who will also double as retailer of input and equipment; (v) MACO train selected ELFs; (vi) 
TA under the project develop the MGAP protocols for various crops produces and hand book for MGAP 
implementation; (vii) TA assist to establish an agriculture Information and Communication Technology 
and prepare illustrated training material also for use during live training. Main activities are summarized 
as follows: 
  Activity 1.4.1. Capacity building: TA under MAP will train the MACO staff in validation of adaptive 
research results, advisory/extension service using LEF. The staff will also participate in conducting field 
validation trials/demonstration providing them with in-depth knowledge of recommendations and new 
technologies extended to farmers.   
  Activity 1.4.2. Awareness and Wealth ranking: The MACO staff will undertake to conduct detailed 
awareness  of  MAPs  activities  in  a  phased  manner.  The  awareness  will  focus  on  services  available 
under the project and  partner financial  institutions providing financial service to project target  group. 
During the awareness  wealth ranking  will also take place. The ranking of village HH  will include the 
following wealth classes Better off HH, Moderate off HH, Poor HH, Very poor HH and women headed 
HH (also grouped according to wealth). 
10 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Activity 1.4.3. Island farmer’s forum: The staff of MACO will assist island to form a farmer’s forum 
which  will  be  the  focal  point  for  planning  production  of  commodities  and  staggering,  introduction  of 
MGAP and group certification, extensions service, linkage with financial institutions, and linkage with 
market and establish contract farming with commercial agricultural islands, resorts, wholesalers in Male 
and also sales to MACO. The forum will also assist in selecting ELF cum input retailer. 
  Activity 1.4.4. Training of ELFs: The ARC/MACO will provide training in production techniques, 
financial literacy, MGAP, water management, business planning, and use of ACTI to be developed by 
MAP and use of the recommendations developed by the ARC. 
  Activity 1.4.5. MGAP protocols for various crops and  handbook for MGAP implementation: TA 
under MAP will assist to develop the protocols and handbooks and train the master trainers of MGAP 
to be appointed by MOFMRA's. MGAP can be defined as optimisation of technologies and resources 
for  sustainable  agriculture  and  food  safety. There  are  costs  related  to  introducing  GGAP  as  well  as 
recurrent cost which will initially be born by MAP and eventually by MACO. The initial cost is related to 
farm assurers’  assessing the gaps to be closed for achieving MGAP certification, training of members 
of farmers forums on each island to close the gaps and meet the MGAP management requirements 
and  the  cost  of  audit  and  certification.  There  are  also  cost  related  to  soil  and  water  analysis  and 
construction/modification of storage facility of chemicals and fertilizer. The recurrent cost is annual audit 
and renewal of certification. There are also savings, which can generate benefits in excess of the cost 
e.g. Vietnam report that on average farmers generates USD 1,250 per Ha in net benefit from VGAP. 
Activity  
1.4.1 
1.4.2 
1.4.3 
1.4.4 
1.4.5 
Timeline 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after 
project effectiveness  
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after 
project effectiveness 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after 
project effectiveness 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after 
project effectiveness 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after 
project effectiveness 
Responsible Party 
TA and MACO staff 
MACO staff 
MACO staff 
ARC and MACO staff 
TA, ARC and MACO staff  
  Output  1.5  Agriculture  Information  and  Communication  Technology  (AICT)  Service 
Established. 
  Activity 1.5.1. Agriculture Information and Communication Technology (AICT) and illustrated training 
material: The programme will hire  a service  provider  to develop  a mobile app for AICT and relevant 
training material for farmers to drag down. The app will also have a marketing platform for interactions 
between  producers,  buyers  and  input  suppliers.  The  programme  will  negotiate  with  mobile  service 
provides to share the income from SMS traffic to the app, ensuring sustainability.  
Activity  
1.5.1 
Timeline 
Immediately upon MAP effectiveness 
Responsible Party 
Agriculture  ACTI  owner  from  neighboring 
countries  could  adopt 
to 
Maldives. 
their  system 
11 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
IV. Component 2 – Climate-smart production 
  This component aims to achieve the expected outcome of improved productivity by the adoption 
of  new  and  improved  existing  technologies,  good  practices  and  inputs.  Further  to  the  training  and 
transfer under component 1, farming households from region 1-3 will begin to receive the first services 
under component 2 during the first part of PY2.  
  Output  2.1.  Beneficiaries  trained  on  production  practices  and  technologies.  Under  the 
component, climate-smart production of high value commodities will be undertaken by farmers using 
inputs supplied by MACO based on the seeds and technologies/production packages developed and 
validated by ARC, and agricultural financing from SDFC and MFLC. Irrigation water supply will typically 
come  from  investment  in  rainwater  harvesting  and  storage  systems.  Farmers  will  be  trained  in 
production  techniques,  MGAP  standards,  Codex  Alimentarius  and  preliminary  steps  to  HACCP  if 
required,  branding,  sorting  and  grading,  quality  control,  aggregation,  and  basic  processing  for  value 
addition where applicable. Project regional hubs and islands with substantial aggregation of output may 
be supported with hybrid (solar/battery) pre-cooling facilities. Main activities are summarized as follows: 
  Activity 2.1.1. Training of famer’s in basic crop production and MGAP. The MACO advisers will 
develop a training schedule based on the MGAP crops protocols and mentor the ELF undertake training 
of  farmers.  Farmers  will  first  receive  crop  based  basic  training  according  to  the  crops  selected  for 
production from the MGAP crop protocols. This will be followed by training farmers on MGAP leading 
to audit and MGAP certification. Training of migrants hired by the farmers and those who have rented 
land to undertake farming will also receive training and other project services. 
  Activity 2.1.2. Training of farmers in quality. Sorting produce according to cosmetic and qualities 
according to Codex Alimentarius, ensure a uniform product for the market allowing comparison  with 
imported produce. This will also feed into branding of produce form Maldives.   
  Activity 2.1.3. Technical training of relevant farmer in operation and maintenance of greenhouse, 
closed  vertical  production  systems,  hydroponic,  open  field  drip  and  hydroscopic  systems,  walking 
tractors, photovoltaic system..  
  Activity 2.1.4. Water harvesting and storage. Best location, Installation and maintenance of water 
harvesting and storage systems. 
  Activity  2.1.5.  Cold  storage.  Train  operators  in  precooling,  refrigeration,  hygiene,  and 
maintenance of cold storage facilities.  
  Activity 2.1.6. Compost and mulching. Train farmers in the importance of using compost in open 
field,  how  to  make  compost,  apply  it  and  adjust  chemical  fertilize  accordingly.  Using  compost  and 
biodegradable polythene as mulching.  
  Activity 2.1.7. Grafting. Teach interested farmers grafting to improve climate resilience (resistance 
to pest and disease, improve heat tolerance and tolerance of difficult growing conditions). The ARC will 
also make grafted planting material available to MACO via its retail outlets. 
Timeline and Responsible Parties for Implementation  
Activity  
2.1.1 
2.1.2 
2.1.3 
2.1.4 
2.1.5 
2.1.6 
2.1.7 
Timeline 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after project 
effectiveness 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after project 
effectiveness and ongoing 
As and when required  
As and when required  
As and when required  
As and when required  
As and when required  
Responsible Party 
MACO technical staff 
MACO technical staff 
MACO technical staff 
MACO technical staff 
MACO technical staff 
MACO technical staff 
ACR, MACO staff and ELFs  
12 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Output 2.2 - Farmer production forums will be organized in order to provide required quantity 
and quality of products in response to the market opportunities. 
  Activity 2.2.1. Island farmer forum. The MACO will assist farmers on island belonging to each of 
the three island hubs to form farmer forums. The island farmer forum will agree on commodity to be 
produced and staggering of production who and when and select the ELF cum retailer of inputs. One 
representative  from  each  island  farmer  forum  will  form  the  hub  farmer  forum  which  will  make 
recommendations regarding what island produces what commodity. A representative from each of the 
three hubs will represent farmer on MAP’s steering committee.  
  Partnerships  will  be  sought  with  NGO  particularly  regarding  formation  of  farmer’s  forums.  TA 
support  related  to  preparation  of  training  material  will  also  be  drawn  from  research  institutions  from 
neighbouring countries.  
  The expected benefits will  not only be to  the  2,150 participating farming households,  but  also 
have financial and economic impacts for the six commercial islands, three regional markets and one 
wholesale market in Male and four wholesalers companies. 
Timeline and Responsible Parties for Implementation  
Activity  
2.2.1 
Timeline 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after project 
effectiveness and ongoing till farmers forum established on 
all islands 
Responsible Party 
MACO technical staff  
  Output  2.3.  Improved  access  to  agriculture  financing  (SDFC  and  MFLC).  The  SME 
Development Finance Corporation (SDFC) has been established in early 2019 as a specialized financial 
institution under the State Trading Organization plc to providing financial products and ancillary services 
to  MSMEs  and  entrepreneurial  start-ups  with  the  primary  purpose  of  easing  access  to  finance  for 
MSMEs. SDFC is under the patronage of the Ministry of Economic Development. 
  Maldives  Finance  Leasing  Company  Pvt  Ltd (MFLC)  has  been  in  operation  since  June  2002. 
MFLC was an initiative of the International Finance Corporation and the Maldives Monetary Authority. 
The primary objective of setting up the company was to diversify the Maldivian financial sector. In April 
2014, MFLC was acquired by Tree Top Investments Pvt Ltd, a company that was founded in 2013 by a 
group of successful businessmen with illustrious careers. MFLC’s primary objective is to provide finance 
leases of movable assets to small and medium scale business enterprises in the Maldives 
  Since its start MFLC has primarily been engaged in providing finance leases of marine vessels 
mainly fishing boats  with cold storage, plant, machinery, equipment, and vehicles to the commercial 
sector  and  recently  in  micro-financing  of  motorbikes,  consumer  durables  to  individuals.  Further,  the 
company provides home improvement loans as well. MFLC’s products include Finance Lease, Hiyaa 
Faseyha, Salhi Lease, Direct Lease, Lifestyle Lease, V Lease, Debt Factoring and Housing Loans. MAP 
will seek collaboration with MFLC for Hire Purchase products for vessels with cold storage facilities. 
MAP will collaborate with MFLC for Hire Purchase products for vessels with cold storage facilities. It is 
anticipated that a total of eight vessels and five regional and sub regionals cold storages will benefit 
from this Hire Purchase partnership with MFLC. 
  Currently  SDFC  has  developed  and  introduced  six  products,  out  of  which  ‘Dhanduveri  Nafaa’ 
product  is  specifically  for  the  agriculture  sector  and  provides  loans  of  MVR  75,000  for  home-based 
farmers, MVR 500,000 for non-registered business individual, and MVR 2 million for companies and 
partnership business entities. These loan product was introduced in collaboration with the MOFMRA to 
help ease the access to finance for individuals and corporative societies within the agriculture sector. 
One of the key purposes include encouraging the current community to integrate technology into the 
various types of farming activities. As part of the conditions for access to finance, 20% equity  by the 
applicant is required and the collateral means needs to be valued at 120% of the loan amount. The 
assets procured from the loan will be regarded as collateral.  
13 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  As the SDFC is still in its early operational phase financial services to the SME sector in terms of 
service range and coverage is still limited. The project will provide technical assistance in strengthen its 
operational capacity, which in return help improve and increase its lending portfolio to the agribusiness 
in the country.  
  Activity 2.3.1.  Building SDFC and MFLC capacity in agricultural financing. The project support 
will include: (i) TA for developing new financial products where required; (ii) training of relevant SDFC 
and  MFLC  staff  in  using  the  new  financial  products;  and  (iii)  training  relevant  SDFC  and  MFLC  in 
assessment agriculture business plans. The project support will focus on building SDFC's and MFLC’s 
capacity  in  providing  diversified  services  and  products  in  agricultural  financing,  such  as  value  chain 
financing (tri-partite arrangement involving bank, producer, buyer where the forward contract serves as 
collateral  and  repayments  are  made  from  the  buyer  to  the  bank  on  behalf  of  farmers),  receivable 
financing (where a company uses its receivables as collateral in a financing agreement), and supplier 
or inventory credit. In addition, the feasibility of introducing mobile technology-based payment services 
will also be explored 
  Activity 2.3.2. The PIU Business Development Specialist and MACO’s staff will support farmers 
and enterprises develop business plans. The poor beneficiaries represent 15% of the target borrowers 
and  matching grants for this category will be provide to substitute own equity contribution amounting 
to 20% of SDFC’s loan. The remaining 1825 estimated borrowers will contribute their own 20% equity 
as part of the required investment capital. It is anticipated that SDFC’s will finance loans to the tune of 
USD 7.5 million, of which USD 5 will be incremental financing and USD 2.5 million will be based on 
reflows.  
  Activity  2.3.3.  The  PIU  business  development  specialist  will  support  preparation  of  feasibility 
studies/business plans for the estimated eight enterprises investing in cargo vessels with cold storage 
and the five enterprises investing in regional and sub-regional cold storage facilities. If financial viable 
these enterprises will receive 20% matching grant as down payment for the respective investment in 
the form of a  Hire Purchase products from MFLC. MFLC will be the legal owner of the assets until 
hire term has matured in compliance with HP contract; hereafter ownership will be transferred 
to the investor. 
Timeline and Responsible Parties for Implementation  
Activity  
2.3.1 
2.3.2 
Timeline 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after project 
effectiveness and ongoing till needs are meet 
Once MAPÉPIU – SDFC agreement signed and credit funds 
available 
2.3.3 
Once participating enterprises identified 
Responsible Party 
Project  TA  and  PIU  Business  Development 
Specialist 
Project  TA  and  PIU  Business  Development 
Specialist, MACO involved staff and SDFC credit 
officers 
Project  TA  and  PIU  Business  Development 
Specialist, MACO involved staff and SDFC credit 
officers, MFCL 
14 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
V.  Component 3 – Market connection 
  One of the biggest constraints along the value chain is market linkage. Most commonly used sea 
vessels for interisland cargo transport are the wooden mechanised ‘dhoanis’ boats totalling 6,295 and 
ranging in size from small one man fishing boat to 30 to 40 meter long boats with a DWT of up to 160 
Mt. Most of the dhoanis are fishing vessels but several hundred are used as cargo boats, the smaller 
once between islands close to each other, and larger vessels ply the waters between regions and Male. 
Most resort island have a large vessel fitted with cold rooms for collecting supplies once or twice a week 
from Male including meat, dairy products, fish and vegetables. Some resorts also use these boats for 
collecting  vegetables  from  airport  islands,  regional  and  sub-regional  islands  having  a  vegetable 
wholesale market. Most of the island classified as commercial agricultural island (6 active agriculture 
commercial islands in region 1-3 and xx in the remaining regions) also have refrigerated cargo vessels 
mainly used to take vegetable to Male and to a less extent to resort islands. Some of the commercial 
agricultural islands also engaged in contract farming on agriculture inhabited islands.  
  Despite  this  fleet  of  refrigerated  vessels  most  of  the  xx  inhabited  island  where  agriculture  is 
practised  are  having  unreliable  transport  services  and  mostly  as  ambient  cargo,  resulting  in  huge 
losses, rendering agriculture production unprofitable. This situation makes transportation of agriculture 
produce one on the most limiting factors along the value chain.   
  Output 3.1. Supply contracts established between producers and private companies will 
contribute  to  formalize  the  business  relationship  between  organised  production,  transportation  and 
markets. 
  The project will assist to overcome this limitation in the following ways: (i) link commercial islands 
with agriculture inhabited islands for contract farming; (ii) support the project hubs establish cold storage 
facilities  and  to  increase  availability  of  agriculture  produce  for  domestic  population,  and  also  link  to 
tourist  resorts,  regional,  sub  regions  and  Male  markets;  (iii)  call  for  interest  among  ‘dhoanis’  cargo 
vessels to upgrade their service with cold storage; (iv) and if still a need for additional transport services 
during  third  year  of  implementation  the  project  can  reallocated  funds  for  procuring  up  to  three 
refrigerated vessels which can be sold to interested enterprises on Hire Purchase basis.  
  Activity  3.1.1.  The  PIU  Business  Development  Specialist  will  actively  support  linkage 
arrangements  in  the  form  of  contract  farming  between  agriculture  commercial  islands  and  inhabited 
agriculture  islands.  To  agricultural  commercial  islands  will  be  provide  incentives  in  the  form  of:  (i) 
matching  grant  for  upgrading  cold  storage  on  cargo  vessels  enabling  the  increased  volume  from 
agriculture  inhabited  islands  to  be  transported  to  markets;  (ii)  upgrade  production  facilities  on  the 
agriculture  commercial  island  to  be  used  as  training  facilities  for  farmers;  (iii)  decreasing  financial 
support for hiring embedded supply chain manager providing support to the farmers at inhabited islands; 
and  (iv)  staff  of  the  islands  can  receive  training  for  introduction  of  MGAP.  The  PIU  Business 
Development Specialist will seek co-financing for above from the MFLC and from SDFC. 
  Activity  farmers  3.1.2. The  project  will  support  private  enterprises  interested  to  establish  Cold 
storage facilities at the three project island hubs, regional hubs and sub-regional hubs. The support will 
be in the form of matching grants, technical management training of operating the cold storage, MGAP 
training and MGAP certification. The PIU Business Development Specialist will seek co-financing for 
above from the MFLC and from SDFC as mentioned under activity 2.3.3. 
  Activity 3.1.3. The project will issue a call for interest among ‘dhoanis’ cargo vessels to upgrade 
their service with cold storage through matching grant, linkage to MFLC and from SDFC, MGAP training 
and  MGAP  certification.  To  qualifying  for  support  the  ‘dhoanis’  enterprise  has  to  agree  to  service  a 
specific number of islands on a pre agreed regular basis. 
Timeline and Responsible Parties for Implementation  
Activity  
Timeline 
Responsible Party 
15 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
3.1.1 
3.1.2 
3.1.3 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after project 
effectiveness  and  ongoing  till  all  islands  have  marketing 
linkage 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after project 
effectiveness  and  ongoing  till  all  islands  have  marketing 
linkage 
Upon commencement of field activities 6 months after project 
effectiveness  and  ongoing  till  all  islands  have  marketing 
linkage 
PIU  Business  Development  Specialist,  MACO 
technical staff, ACI, MFLC, and SDFC 
PIU  Business  Development  Specialist,  MACO 
technical staff, ACI, MFLC, and SDFC 
PIU  Business  Development  Specialist,  MACO 
technical staff, ACI, MFLC, and SDFC 
16 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
VI. Programme management 
  Start-up 
  The programme’s readiness for operational effectiveness is subject to a number of steps as 
outlined below. 
  The Financing Agreement (FA) for MAP is expected to be negotiated in March-April 2020. Using 
the resources of the start-up facility; a number of steps are required to get the Programme underway.  
  Establishment of PSC and PIU. 
The GoM will confirm the establishment of MAP PSC and 
PIU by sharing the official decree or authorization. 
  Recruitment of key PIU staff. The attached PIM includes Terms of References and specifies 
required qualifications. For positions where no qualified government staff can be found or be freed from 
other duties qualified staff will be selected from the market. The Planning and Programme Coordination 
Section  of  MOFMRA  is  to  lead  the  process  for  selection  of  key  PIU  staff  under  the  guidance  of  the 
Permanent  Secretary.  The  recruitment  of  all  key  PIU  staff  needs  to  be  submitted  to  IFAD  for  no 
objection.  
  Office facilities. Office space needs to be availed within or in proximity of MOFMRA where the 
PIU  can  be  housed  for  the  full  duration  of  the  Programme.  The  office  space  should  be  able  to 
accommodate the MAP’s PIU and its operations, including meeting facilities 
  Readiness of financial management, accounting and procurement. The GoM will ensure the 
readiness in this regard in line with the Financing Agreement (FA) and the Letter to Borrower. (LTB). 
  Annual Work Plan and Budget and procurement plan of first 18 months. The PIU – once 
established – should submit review the two documents and make updates or revisions where necessary, 
submit to IFAD for prior review. 
  Project Manuals. The PIU needs to review and (where need be) revise the two draft manuals, 
viz.: Project Implementation Manual (PIM), Financial Management Manual (FMM), and submit the final 
versions to IFAD for approval. 
  Conditions prior to the release of initial advance. 
The PIU will comply with the possible 
conditions prior to the release of initial advance, which should be included in the FA. 
  Start-up workshop. 
Assuming  adequate  progress  on  the  above,  a  start-up  workshop  is 
foreseen for May-June 2020. Aside from marking the start of the Programme, the workshop will be used 
to:  
  The  workshop  programme  will 
include  dedicated  sessions  for  financial  management, 
procurement and M&E and KM among others. 
  Programme governance and steering 
  The  overall  responsibility  for  the  MAP  implementation  will  be  assumed  by  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture, Marine Resources and Agriculture (MOFMRA), which is the Lead Programme Agency.  
  The Ministry of Finance (MOF) will be responsible for ensuring timely flow of funds to MOFMRA 
for programme implementation. The Ministry of Economic Development (MED) will be responsible for 
guiding  the  setting  up  of  MACO  that  will  be  a  beneficiary  recipient  and  implementing  agency  of  the 
17 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
programme.  The  Ministry  of  National  Planning  and  Infrastructure  (MONPI)  will  partner  with  the 
MOFMRA to set up the markets, cold storage facilities, and relevant infrastructure.  
  Programme Steering Committee (PSC). The Programme will be implemented under the overall 
direction of a Programme Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MOFMRA 
and encompassing representatives from the related ministries such as MOF, MED, MONPI, MOE and 
other  stakeholders  that  are  related  and  relevant  to  the  Programme.  The  PSC  will  meet  at  least  bi-
annually, and on ad hoc basis when necessary. The PSC will evaluate and approve annual work plans 
and budgets (AWPBs) and annual procurement plans, periodic progress reports, provides directives on 
strategic  aspects  of  the  implementation  management  such  as  due  compliance  and  inter-agency 
coordination, and approve major competitive agreements and contracts. Special and ad hoc technical 
committees can be formed under the PSC upon needs to provide due guidance and bring in synergy 
with stakeholders and partners other than the identified implementing parties. 
  Operational management  
for 
  Programme  Implementation  Unit  (PIU)  will  be  established  in  the  Planning  and  Programme 
Coordination  Section  of  MOFMRA  and  located  within  or  in  proximity  of  MOFMRA.  The  PIU  will  be 
responsible 
the  programme 
the  overall  operational  management  and  coordination  of 
implementation. A qualified Programme Director (PD) reporting to the MOFMRA Permanent Secretary, 
will be appointed to lead the PIU. Under the direction of the PD, the PIU will include a management 
team of government-seconded officers, support staff provided by the government, and supported by a 
programme  implementation management  agency,  which  will  form  a  technical  team  in  support  of  the 
PIU. 
  The PIU will assume the overall responsibility for programme management and coordination. Its 
specific key responsibilities are as following:  
PIU staffing. 
The PD will be composed of one (1) Programme Director, three 
(3) Component Coordinators/Specialists, one (1) Planning and Administrative Officer, one (1) 
Financial Management Officer, one (1) M&E and KM Officer, one (1) Procurement Officer, one 
(1) Targeting and Gender Officer deputed from the Government and assisted by support staff. 
The  Government-seconded  staff  should  meet  the  agreed  relevant  levels  of  qualification  and 
experience  as  a  condition  of  their  appointment/deputation.  Outlines  of  ToRs  for  PIU  key 
positions are proposed as appendix 1. 
18 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  PIU staff incentive mechanism. 
The purpose of the incentive package financed by IFAD 
grant  is  to  provide  a  motivational  and  encouraging  tool  to  PIU  staff  whose  salaries  are  financed  by 
MOFMRA as part of the government contributions. The incentive is an additional amount of payment 
given to the PIU senior and technical staff with their fixed agreed and fixed salaries and time of the year. 
  The incentive package is structured on the basis of quantitative and qualitative achievement of 
the annual work targets to be identified and agreed with each individual staff entitled to the incentive 
package, and individual work targets must be made in line to fully support the achievement of the AWPB 
of the period. 
  Positions entitled to the incentive package are as follows: 
  Programme Director,  
  Component Coordinators/Specialists,  
  Planning and Administrative Officer,  
  M&E and KM Officer, 
  Procurement Officer,  
  Targeting and Gender Officer. 
  Financial Management (Executive) Officer,  
  Accountant, 
  Accountant assistant,  
  Appraisal and approval.  The Project Director’s performance will be appraised by the PSC and 
approved by the PSC Chairperson. 
  Component coordinators/specialists, Planning and administrative officer, Financial management 
officer, M&E officer, Procurement officer, Targeting and gender officer will be appraised by the Project 
Director,  who recommends the performance rating and incentive categories to the PSC, or the  PSC 
authorized special committee or PSC member for approval. 
  Accountant and accountant assistant will be appraised by the Financial management officer, who 
recommends the performance rating and incentive categories to the Project Director for approval. 
Proposed rating categories and performance of available annual incentive budget 
Outstanding 
100% 
Excels 
<100% 
>80% 
Proficient 
<80% - >70% 
Needs Improvements  Unsatisfactory 
<70% - >65% 
<65%  
- 
quantitative 
Categories 
Set 
targets achieved 
Set qualitative targets 
achieved 
(Brief comments) 
Areas 
improvements 
development 
for 
Goals/objectives 
next evaluation period 
Agreed/not agreed 
for 
and 
  Maximum of annual incentive allocated to respective position will be set once the available annual 
budget is calculated and recommended by PSC to IFAD for No-Objection. 
  The incentive mechanism should be proposed by PIU and reviewed by HR and FM divisions of 
MOFMRA, before going to PSC for its recommendation to IFAD for No-Objection. 
  Technical assistance and technical team. The technical assistance to MAP will be contracted 
to  provide  technical  support  in  daily  operational  management  and  coordination  of  the  programme 
implementation.  Three  options  were  offered  as  options  by  the  design  mission  to  MOFMRA:  (i) 
contracting of a UN agency such as UNOPS; (ii) contracting of a private sector consulting firm or NGO; 
or  (iii)  contracting  of  individual  consultants  by  the  PIU.  Following  extensive  deliberation  of  the 
advantages and disadvantages of each option, the mission and MOFMRA agreed to select UNOPS for 
this purpose (subject to UNOPS agreement). UNOPS would provide a qualified and experienced Chief 
19 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Technical Advisor / Programme Management Specialist on long-term basis, and short-term technical 
specialists as required. The duration of this support would be two years, and would have the broader 
objective  of  strengthening  programme  management  capacity  within  MOFMRA.  During  this  first  two 
years’  period,  MAP  and  especially  the TA  team  will  work  to  sensitize  other  development  partners  in 
search of additional funding to support continued TA till the programme completion. 
  Specifically, the TA will provide specialised managerial and technical support to the PIU, primarily 
in the area of developing the programme management systems and capacities as part of the institutional 
capacity building to MOFMRA under the programme framework, and support the programme progress 
and performance towards the achievement of expected targets at output, outcome and objective levels. 
The TA should support the PIU and related participating technical divisions and agencies of MOFMRA 
by  following  a  clear  roadmap  of  management  knowledge  and  skill  building  and  transfer  along  the 
programme implementation.  
  The technical team established under the TA will be recruited through external and open process. 
It will be composed of at least one (1) Chief Technical Adviser who reports to the PIU Director and leads 
the technical team, and other expertise key to the programme management and operations, such as in 
financial  management,  procurement,  M&E  and  KM,  and  other  specials  fields  relevant  to  the  three 
technical components. 
  Focal points. 
Related ministries and institutions such as MOF, MED, MONPI, MOE, 
SDFC will appoint respective focal point to liaise and work with the PIU and its technical team. Similarly 
for  participating  technical  agencies  and  institutions  under  MOFMRA  and  other  partner  agencies  or 
organizations, such as the Agricultural Extension Centers (AEC) and the Agriculture Research Center 
(ARC), Ministry of Gender Family and Social Services (MGFSS). 
  MACO will establish its Implementation Coordination Unit (ICU) to implement the tasked activities 
under the technical components, under the guidance and supervision of the PIU Director. 
  Each island under the hub will form an island cluster/forum making which will be the focal point 
for  decisions  on  crops  to  be  produced,  staggering  and  appointing  extension  link  farmer.  The  island 
forum leads and Extension Link Farmers who lead the farmers’ forums will be trained by the programme 
to act as key facilitators.  
  MoUs on implementation partnership. Implementation agencies and partners such as MACO, 
SDFC, MFLC and possibly MGFSS will enter into partnership agreement by signing a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with MOFMRA that stipulates respective roles and responsibilities among others. 
Similarly, MoUs will be signed between PIU and public and private companies and commercial islands 
to highlight respective roles and responsibilities, agreed duties and operational modalities. 
  Supervision and implementation support 
  Supervision.  IFAD  will  administer  the  loan  and  grant,  and  supervise  the  programme.  IFAD’s 
annual direct supervision will mainly relate to the programme financial management, its physical and 
financial progress, implementation management’s efficiency and implementing agencies’ performance 
at  all  levels.  Supervision  missions  will  primarily  address  issues  such  as:  (i)  Programme  fiduciary 
aspects,  (ii)  Implementation  progress,  (iii)  Outputs  and  outcomes  under  related  components,  (iv) 
Sustainability,  (v)  Risks  and  opportunities,  (vi)  Innovations  and  knowledge  management,  and  (vii) 
Poverty focus, targeting and gender mainstreaming. 
  A Mid-term review will be conducted by IFAD. This is tentatively scheduled for 2023 at the end 
of  the  third  full  year  of  implementation. A  key  function  of  the  MTR  will  be  to  review  the  likelihood  of 
achieving the development objectives, outreach to target groups and target segments’ capture issues, 
and to adjust programme focus, budget and design if considered necessary.  
Implementation  support  will  be  provided  by  IFAD  as  follow-ups  of  its  direct  supervision  and 
progress  review,  and  as  response  to  possible  supports  required  by  the  programme  management. 
Support will be conducted on a demand-driven basis and in accordance with needs identified.  
20 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Programme completion review (PCR). At the end of the programme implementation cycle, a 
programme completion review (PCR) will be undertaken first by the PIU as a self-assessment of the 
programme performance. On the basis of that, IFAD will conduct a PCR mission in close coordination 
with the government in order to report on the results achieved through programme interventions. The 
main purposes of the completion review process are to promote accountability, reflect on performance 
and  elicit  lessons  learned  to  inform  new  programme design,  to  identify  opportunities  and  scaling-up 
best practices, and to define an appropriate post-programme strategy. The learning dimension of the 
completion  process  should  be  regarded  by  both  IFAD  and  the  government  as  the  foundation  for 
improvements in future programme design and programming.  
  Planning, M&E, learning, KM and communication, and financial management are integrated part 
of the programme management. They will be elaborated in separately in subsequent chapters. 
21 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
VII.  Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication 
  M&E and MIS 
  Setting up the programme M&E system. MAP’s basic M&E framework will be designed on the 
basis of a logframe approach, which is driven by the programme logical framework with a set of key 
indicators. The logframe needs to be closely linked to the project cost tables and exercises of the key 
functions such as AWPB preparation, progress reporting, surveys and studies should be undertaken 
accordingly, and supported by allocated financial resources and well-trained human resources. 
  At the programme start, the M&E system should be set up before the field operations’ roll-out. 
The system set-up should be led by the Planning and M&E Officer/Specialist of PIU, who reports directly 
to the Programme Director. In view of the yet-to-be built M&E capacities, short-term consultant should 
be  recruited  to  support  the  system  set-up. ToRs  are  proposed  as  appendix  X  for  the  recruitment  of 
consultant in this regard. 
  Monitoring is the routine tracking of the key elements of programme performance, usually inputs 
and  outputs,  through  record-keeping,  regular  reporting  and  surveillance  systems  as  well  as  facility 
observation and client surveys. Monitoring helps programme managers determine which areas require 
greater  effort  and  flag  questions  that  might  contribute  to  an  improved  response.  In  a  well-designed 
monitoring and evaluation system, monitoring contributes greatly towards evaluation. 
  Evaluation in contrast is the episodic assessment of the change in targeted results that can be 
attributed to the project intervention. In other words, evaluation attempts to link a particular output or 
outcome  directly  to  a  particular  intervention  after  a  period  of  time  of  implementation  of  a  particular 
project  has  passed.  Evaluation  helps  project  managers  determine  the  value  or  worth  of  a  specific 
project. 
Integrated  M&E  and  KM  system.  The  integrated  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (M&E)  and 
Knowledge  Management  (KM)  system  will  be  developed  in  accordance  with  IFAD  guidelines  and 
government frameworks. It will have with three main objectives as following:  
(i) monitoring results: it will enable the tracking programme outputs and outcomes, within farmer 
groups and communities, between genders, age groups and different social groups.  
(ii) implementation guiding and policy dialogue: the information and analysis of data will support 
timely results-based management at all levels to develop profitable and sustainable activities and 
to adapt strategies accordingly. It will also support policy decision making of MOFMRA to better 
respond to the challenges of agricultural commercialisation in the country. 
(iii) knowledge sharing and scaling up of good practices: the integrated M&E and KM system will 
capture lessons, shortcomings for risk management, good practices, successful innovations and 
technologies options or scaling up. 
  Strategic principles. The integrated M&E and KM system’s features will be: (i) open and easily 
accessible, i.e. information and knowledge should be available to all stakeholders and not restricted to 
programme or MOFMRA staff; (ii) participatory and accountable: the process of planning, monitoring 
and  knowledge  dissemination  will  involve  associate  programme  stakeholders  and  beneficiaries  with 
two-way communication i.e. upward (to  and from government and IFAD) but also downward (to and 
from programme stakeholders and target groups) and horizontal (with other programmes); (iii) focused 
on analysis, learning and sharing in support of decision-making and policy dialogue, and not merely on 
data  production  and  consolidation;  (iv)  harmonised  with  and  connected  the  government’s  relevant 
information  systems  such  as  the  coming  Agricultural  Information  and  Communication  Technology 
system;  (v)  inclusive  to  allow  women,  poor  and  marginalised  groups  participate  in  the  system;  (vi) 
strengthening: building capacity and better respond to the people needs and market demand.  
  ORMS  is  a  fully-fledged  online  system  that  builds  on  interconnected  templates  for  online 
presentation,  analysis,  reporting,  and  approval  of  project  design,  supervision  and  completion 
22 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
documents.  The ORMS will bring IFAD (under the Development Effectiveness Framework) more in line 
with the standards of other MDGs while gaining efficiencies throughout. Such efficiency gains include 
streamlined  harmonized  processes,  improved  data  generation  capturing  and  accessibility,  better 
statistics and reports, and thus enable more timely and evidence-based decision making through better 
quality, accessible and real-time results analysis and report.  
  Management Information System (MIS). MAP will establish an MIS system in the first year of 
programme implementation.   The MIS would generate, monthly, quarterly and annual progress reports 
on physical and financial progress and on  programme outputs and outcomes - and may have a GIS 
interface so that key data can be shown on maps.  
  Planning 
  MAP will apply a results-based management approach which establishes a solid linkage between 
planning  (including  resource  allocation),  implementation,  monitoring  and  expected  results.  The 
Programme Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) will be a basis for implementation and should clearly 
describe the strategic direction of the programme for the coming years by resenting a budget estimate, 
the expected results under each component and how these results would be achieved with risk analysis 
if  any.  The  preparation  of  AWPBs  will  be  jointly  conducted  by  the  programme  management  in 
consultation  with  participating  agencies  and  organizations,  all  implementing  partners,  private  sector, 
local service  provider and  beneficiaries (farmers and  women) where relevant. A  participatory  annual 
planning  process  with  stakeholders  will  be  set  up  to  ensure  the  bottom-up  feedback  on  community 
needs, priorities, contextual opportunities and limitation. The consolidated AWPB will be submitted to 
IFAD in advance of the Government’s annual budgeting process to ensure sufficient counterpart funding 
  The Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) is an important management tool and its process 
should be completed through participatory exercise from the village level to avoid top-down planning. 
AWPB is also a core document that is closely related to further progress reporting and M&E exercises. 
  Preparing the AWPB. An AWPB primary consists of seven parties (chapters), which first update 
the past achievements with focus on the previous year’s (except the first-year AWPB), then address the 
projections for the upcoming fiscal year: 
In preparing the first AWPB, the Programme Management should be aware of available budget 
and the amount of Initial Advance released in order to prioritize critical investments identified. It would 
be necessary to prepare the following programme year’s budget to avoid shortage of funds available 
for  the  succeeding  year.  Programme  Management  at  different  levels  should  assume  the  timely 
undertaking of AWPB and submit it to IFAD for No-Objection. 
  Counterpart matching funds and other partners’ contributions should be secured and accounted 
in the AWPB. 
In preparing the AWPB, narrative presentation should be concise and precise; spreadsheet tables 
and schemas should be used where needed to illustrate targets, achievements, costs and financing. 
  Progress  prior  to  programme  start  may  be  described  for  PY1  AWPB.    This  may  include: 
Compliance  with  the  effectiveness  of  Financing  Agreement,  establishment  of  management  and 
operational  structure,  procurement,  staffing,  project  areas’  preparation,  beneficiary  selection  and 
targeting, identification of support and training needs, commitments of local stakeholders and levels of 
counterpart matching funds. 
23 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Summary Presentation by Components. 
This  chapter  should  present  the  implementation 
programming both in physical and financial targets, expected outputs and outcomes that lead to future 
impacts.    Indicate  if  there  are  any  major  changes  compared  to  last  year's  programme  and  budget, 
referring to the previous chapter if appropriate. 
  Detailed Presentation by Components. 
In  this  Chapter,  a  detailed  discussion  of  the 
programming and implementation strategy of each component is presented as well as a discussion of 
the expected results and how the implementation modalities eventually differ from the previous year(s)' 
practices.  For each component, present the following: 
  Cost and Financing. 
This  Chapter  discusses  issues  related  to  the  AWPBs  costs  and 
financing. Overall summary cost tables by component and by expenditure category should be prepared 
to help outline the sums of AWPB, followed by detailed cost tables by component/sub-component, which 
should be closely linked to the project detailed cost tables (DTs). All tables should indicate the financial 
resources  by  financier  as  related  to  component  activities,  and  to  the  summary  table  by  expenditure 
category. 
  Costs:  Any  major  changes  in  unit  costs  due  to  inflation/deflation  and  to  changes  in  design 
compared to previous years and to the Appraisal report should be discussed and the manner who to 
deal with them indicated. (Unit costs may have changed since the appraisal report) 
  Financing: Issues related to the flow of funds, the timeliness of funds availability, of approval and 
disbursement  procedures  for  all  financiers  will  be  highlighted,  and  ways  to  improve  or  overcome 
constraints indicated. (Not likely to be relevant in the project’s first year).  
  M&E exercises 
  Data  recording  and  reporting.  Data  recording,  reporting  and  consolidation  will  follow  the 
operational structure of implementation in organizational accountability. A set of standardized tables for 
data recording and reporting are proposed as appendixes, to be used from the field action level by the 
contracted implementing agencies in charge of the activity or intervention execution, or the facilitating 
agencies involved. The data forms will be revised and updated at the programme start-up in line with 
the possibly revised logframe, and the AWPB spreadsheet forms. 
  The PIU is responsible for monthly record and  report on implementation progress by filling up 
and compiling the forms of: 
- 
- 
- 
Component-wise output-level indicators, which will feed the logframe output-level reporting; 
AWPB progress report; and 
Beneficiary participation and state of benefits. 
  Similarly, implementing partners, service providers contracted for implementation will observe the 
M&E and reporting duties, reporting on physical and financial progress, beneficiary participation and 
state of benefits as agreed as in the MoU or contract agreement with the PIU, and by applying the same 
record and report formats with some possibly minor modifications. 
24 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Data consolidation. Data collected and consolidated by PIU M&E Officer/Specialist. The results 
of review, analysis and recommendations will be periodically (monthly or at least quarterly) submitted 
to the piu to assist its operational decision making. 
  The PIU will provide guidance on priority follow-ups to involved implementing partners or service 
providers. The PIU will integrate the M&E results in its periodic reports to PSC and IFAD. 
  Progress reports. Semi-annual and annual progress reports should be made and submitted to 
IFAD (As required by Section 8.03 (Progress Report) of the General Conditions) during the programme 
implementation period. 
In addition, quarterly result report preparation focusing on outputs and quarterly review exercises 
will be maintained by the PIU in order to periodically keep in track the progress, and raise questions 
where  indicators  may  show  irregularities  therefore  necessary  operational  adjustments  would  be 
undertaken to assist the safeguard of implementation performance. 
  The  progress  report  should  present  the  main  achievements,  issues  and  constraints  of  the 
previous  period,  including  the  main  recommendations  of  supervision,  progress  review,  MTR, 
spontaneous support missions and the state of related follow-ups, as well as an appreciation of possible 
indications of outcomes and impact of the programme on the poverty and gender situation.  
  Evaluation. MAP may have four types of evaluations. 
  The Baseline Survey, which is a semi-formative evaluation to be conducted in the design phase 
or immediately after the start-up to identify and resolve intervention and evaluation issues before the 
programme is widely implemented, and form the basis for assessing impact achievement in the future. 
In another word, this exercise will lay down the start points for the interventions designed to achieve the 
realistic goals. 
  The baseline survey is primarily designed to assess the physical and socio-economic status of 
the  programme  area  and  its  inhabitants  in  order  to  define  their  ‘baseline’  status  before  the 
implementation of programme activities so as to allow for the impact of the programme to be measured 
at a later stage by comparison to the baseline. This survey will cover a selection of clusters and islands 
in  the  programme  area.   The  indicators  to  be  monitored  will  be  selected  from  the  MAP  programme 
Logframe in line with the latest revised IFAD ORMS. The ToRs that include the survey methodology, 
sample  size,  timelines  for  field  survey,  analysis  and  reporting,  qualifications  of  outsourced  service 
provider should be submitted to IFAD for its no-objection. 
  The mid-term review (MTR) survey is a typical outcome evaluation, which is designed specifically 
with the intention of being able to attribute the changes to the intervention itself. At the very least, the 
evaluation design has to be able to plausibly link observed outcomes to a well-defined programme, and 
to demonstrate that changes are not the result of non-project factors. Thematic and sector surveys and 
studies can be undertaken in relationship with the project scope of intervention.  
  The programme MTR would be conducted no later than 30 months (2.5 years) after its entry into 
force, to assess the progress, achievements, constraints and emerging impact and likely sustainability 
of  programme  activities  and  make  recommendations  and  necessary  adjustments  for  the  remaining 
programme period. The MTR would be carried out jointly by the  government and IFAD, and will also 
assess the role of the implementing agencies and involved parties, and the role of the private sector 
and government, partnering financial institutions, etc. The MTR survey will follow the overall framework 
of  the  baseline  survey,  but  measuring  possible  behavior  and  fundamental  changes  since  the 
programme start. 
  The end-line/completion review will be a logical step at or after the programme completion, if the 
MTR  evaluation  shows  a  change  in  outcomes.  True  end-line  evaluation,  able  to  attribute  long-term 
changes to a specific project, is very rare. Rather, monitoring impact indicators taken in conjunction with 
process and outcome evaluations are considered to be sufficient to indicate the overall impact. 
25 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  At  the  end  of  the  project,  the  PIU  will  draw  up  a  Project  Completion  Report  (PCR)  based  on 
IFAD’s guidelines1 for project completion.   IFAD  will provide support to the  programme in this  work. 
IFAD will carry out a PCR Validation on the basis of the programme PCR at least 3 months before the 
loan closing. IFAD’s Independent Office of Evaluation (IOE) may also undertake a formal Evaluation of 
the programme well after its closure (which is usually known as Project Performance Assessment or 
PPA). 
  Special thematic/diagnostic studies. The programme may carry out, or commission, a number of 
relevant thematic special studies.  The programme will allocate budget in its AWPB and some of the 
thematic studies could include, for example, policy engagement, climate resilience, behaviour changes 
in agriculture, etc.  All the studies must be carried out through gender lens where applicable. 
  Gender focus in M&E. Integrating gender dimension in M&E and reporting on gender through 
sex-disaggregated data is imperative in all IFAD projects. Integrating gender into M&E system helps to 
measure the extent to which a project has addressed the different needs of women and men, and has 
made an impact on their lives and overall social and economic well-being. It also facilitates to improve 
project  performance  during  implementation,  allows  for  mid-term  course  correction,  and  makes  it 
possible  to  derive  lessons  for  future  projects.  Because  of  the  project’s  commitment  to  gender 
transformation, it will undertake simplified Pro-WEAI survey at baseline and completion. An indicative 
budget  of  USD  50,000  (from  the  allocated  M&E  budget),  will  be  directed  to  the  Pro-WEAI  survey. 
However, the figure may change during implementation based on procurement outcomes. 
  Learning, knowledge management and communication 
  Learning. MAP represents a good linkage between strengthened institutional technical support 
system,  enhanced  production,  marketing  and  commercialization  together  with  nutrition  aspect  and 
climate-smart sensitivity. The dedicated  M&E concerned staff will also be responsible for knowledge 
management  and  learning. The  programme  learning  would  comprise  of  various  activities  relating  to 
M&E and KM functions. Some of these would include monthly, quarterly and annual review meetings; 
capturing  information  on  progress,  lessons  and  finding  solutions  for  implementation  constraints.  KM 
and lessons learning would be used as a tool for internal learning by programme stakeholders such as 
staff of various implementing agencies, participating communities and farmers, both women and men.  
  Knowledge Management and Communication (KMC) strategy and plan will be developed in 
line  with IFAD policy on  KM and  to  ensure that knowledge, technologies and innovations generated 
within the programme is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared, and that it is used 
to:  (i)  improve  programme  performance  and  delivery  of  programme  objectives;  (ii)  be  flexible  and 
responsive  to  changing  circumstances;  (iii)  support  the  dissemination  of  innovation  to  the  benefit  of 
stakeholders throughout the programme area and beyond; (iv) provide information to support decisions 
on  up-scaling  to  be  made  at  mid-term  review;  and  (iv)  identify  important  issues  to  convey  to  policy 
makers. Particular attention will be given to documenting good practices, successful technologies and 
innovation  models  for  sustainably  competitive  agriculture.  Knowledge  products  may  include  studies, 
events, videos and blogs. They will be distributed through multiple channels such as social media, local 
media and platforms. 
  Potential for innovations and scaling up. In the context of Maldives MAP will undertake the 
following innovative interventions which are commercially interlinked: (i) introduction of self-ventilated 
greenhouses  for  the  hot  humid  tropics;  (ii)  moving  gutter  with  hydroponic  irrigation,  increasing 
production area minimising water use; (iii) closed vertical hydroponic production  systems minimising 
water  use  and  space  for  production;  (iv)  rainwater  harvesting  and  storage  reducing  pressure  on 
groundwater; (v) introduction of a commercial sustainable extension system in conjunction with input 
supply,  with  a  good  chance  to  become  sustainable;  (vi)  introduction  of  marketing  arrangement  and 
unbroken  transport  cold  chain;  (vii)  introduction  of  selection  of  appropriate  coconut  varieties,  and 
propagation  of  the  most  climate  resilient  varieties;  (viii)  commercialisation  of  wild  fruit  and  nuts  and 
1 https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/4675ae7d-0b76-4d01-87fa-090b86920eba 
26 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
propagation  of  planting  material;  (ix)  introduction  of  a  holistic  coconut  based  agroforestry  cropping 
system including most promising wild fruits, nuts for processing and legumes for compost making and 
commercial sale substituting import of manure form India and Sri Lanka; (x) introduction of MGAP and 
Codex  Alimentarius  on  a  large  scale;  and  (xi)  support  MACO  to  provide  agriculture  extension  in 
conjunction with high quality agriculture inputs, equipment and machinery. 
If the commercial interlinkage of the MAP interventions is successful, its scaling up will happen 
with limited external inputs and with little pressure on the public merger resources. It is however not 
possible for proposed project interventions to safeguard against rising sea level, which is the biggest 
threat to the Maldives.    
27 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
VIII. Financial management, procurement and governance  
  Overview 
  Brief introduction: This section lays down the basic principles of financial management of the 
project. It lays down the system of funds flow to the project and within the project, the disbursement 
systems,  submission  of  withdrawal  application  for  reimbursement  of  funds,  the  system  of  recording 
transactions, reporting the same and the audit requirements.  
  Lending terms: MAP will be financed by a highly concessional loan of USD 3.3 million and a 
DSF Grant of USD 1.2 million from IFAD The terms related to the loan assistance will be as per the 
Guidelines for IFAD Lending Terms and Financing Conditions and be specified in the Letter to Borrower.  
  Retroactive Financing: At the Borrower’s request IFAD financing can be provided as retroactive 
financing as an exception to the General Conditions and with Executive Board approval, to cover eligible 
expenditures between the date of approval of the design document by IFAD and the date of Entry into 
Force. Some of the activities that can be funded under retroactive financing will be: (i) costs related to 
Company (MACO) formation (ii) staff recruitment cost including advertisement cost and salary cost of 
the key staff; (iii) some operating costs; (iv) costs for studies to be initiated (v) purchase of a minimum 
set  of  equipment  and  materials  like  computers  with  related  software,  minimum  furniture,  accounting 
software; and (vi) activities related to the baseline survey. To be eligible for retroactive financing, goods 
and services must have been  procured according to the procurement procedures  applicable to  loan 
financing.  It  is  expected  that  the  costs  for  these  activities  will  not  exceed  USD  450,000  and  will  be 
charged to the respective loan categories. The funds for these activities will be provided initially by the 
GoM which will be reimbursed once the IFAD conditions precedent to first withdrawal have been met.  
  Start-up  Financing:  IFAD  encourages  the  use  of  pre-approved  start-up  advance  for  specific 
activities that enable project fast-start between the date of signature of the Financing Agreement (Entry 
into Force) and the conditions precedent to the first withdrawal having been met. 
  Fund Flow mechanism:  
(I) 
To the Project:  The Project will be funded from the following sources: IFAD Loan, IFAD 
Grant,  GoM  contribution  to  the  PIU,  by  way  of  operational  costs  and  salaries,  GoM 
contribution by way of taxes and MACO for some operational expenses. Contribution from 
SDFC will be by way of financing project beneficiaries.  Funds from IFAD loan will flow to a 
Special/Designated Account maintained in USD in a bank acceptable to IFAD and operated 
by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF),  Government  of  Maldives  (GoM).  MoF  will  have  two 
designated accounts – one for loan and the other for grant funds in  the Maldives Monetary 
Authority (MMA). The  MMA  will release these funds  on the request made by  the PIU  in 
respect  of  project  expenditure  duly  authorized  by  the  MoFMRA  and  the  MoF  for 
implementing project activities directly to vendors, service providers, beneficiaries.     
a) 
IFAD Funds: Proceeds of IFAD loan funds will be disbursed using one of the following four 
methods: (i) advance withdrawals or replenishments to the bank account(s) designated to 
receive loan resources; (ii) direct payment; (iii) Special Commitment (under letter of credit); 
and (iv) reimbursement.  IFAD will make an initial advance of USD 330,000 which is about 
six months of IFAD allocation towards the project into the Designated Loan Account and 
USD 120,000 million into the Designated Grant Account and then replenish the Designated 
Accounts on the basis of Withdrawal Applications submitted by the PIU through the GoM.  
b)  Counterpart Funding   
(i) 
Government of Maldives: The PIU of the project will be responsible for preparing the 
Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB) for the Project by consolidating the AWPBs of all 
implementing partners and community level activities. For availing GoM funding also 
payment request will be made by the PIU to MoFMRA which in turn will submit it to the 
MoF.  On  approval  by  the  MoF,  the  MMA  will  release  the  funds  to  the  payee  as 
requested. Taxes on project implementation will be borne by the GoM. 
28 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Maldives Agriculture Corporation (MACO): The proposed company MACO will be 
one of the implementing partners for the project. It will incur some operational expenses 
for  project  implementation.  Support  will  be  provided  to  MACO  for  procuring  inputs 
which will be su0pplied by them to the project beneficiaries. 
SME  Finance  Development  Company  (SDFC):  SDFC  is  a  non  banking  finance 
company which provides finance to small and medium enterprises including agriculture 
loans.  It  is  envisaged  that  in  cases  where  SME  Development  Finance  Company 
(SDFC)  finances  the  project  beneficiaries,  the  project  will  fund  the  gap  between  the 
SDFC finance, the beneficiary contribution and the cost of the activity undertaken. 
(II) 
Within the Project:  Since all funds will be disbursed directly by the MMA for implementing 
project activities based on approved payment request from the PIU, the PIU as such will not 
have any other project bank account. 
  Accounts by type: designated accounts and project account: Two Designated Accounts in USD, 
one for Loan and the other for Grant, will be opened by the GoM at the Central Bank viz. The Maldives 
Monetary Authority (MMA) to which funds will flow from IFAD. The advance funding from IFAD to the 
Designated Accounts will be equivalent to six months of projected annual budget. PIU will submit WAs 
for the IFAD financed eligible expenditures as per the procedures and formats agreed with IFAD through 
the MoF, GoM.  
  The PIU will not have any separate bank account as all disbursements for project expenditure 
will be made by the MMA directly to the vendors, service providers and other payees. The counterpart 
funds, other than salaries to the GoM staff, (which will be paid directly by the Govt) will also be paid 
directly from the MMA. GoM and MACO will provide the details of expenditure incurred by it directly 
(salaries and allowances) towards the project, to enable consolidation and reporting of total expenditure 
of the project. 
  Disbursement procedures, withdrawals and withdrawal applications 
  There are four standard procedures that are used for disbursing Loan funds from IFAD. The Loan 
Disbursement  Handbook  for  IFAD  Directly  Supervised  Projects  provides  details  of  disbursement 
methods and submission of Withdrawal Applications. 
  Procedure I: Designated Account (DA) and initial advance. IFAD financing to the Project will 
be  routed  through  a  Designated  Account  denominated  in  United  States  Dollars  maintained  at  the 
Maldives  Monetary Authority  (MMA)  under  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF)  which  will  administer  the 
Designated Account. IFAD will establish an Authorized Allocation for initial advance, initially up to USD 
330,000  for  Loan  and  USD  120,000  for  Grant.  This  will  be  indicated  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower/ 
Recipient.  However,  the  quantum  is  subject  to  the  agreement  between  IFAD  and  GoM  at  Loan 
Negotiations, as this will count for the payment of interest and service charge.  
  This procedure provides a mechanism like a revolving fund to assist the government in financing 
eligible  expenditures  defined  in  the  Financing  Agreement  as  payment  falls  due.  While  the  project 
implementation  is  underway  the  account  is  replenished  when  satisfactory  evidence  of  expenditure 
incurred  is  received.  Deposits  to  replenish  the  Special/  Designated Account  are  claimed  under  this 
procedure using Application for Withdrawal – Form 100. 
  Summary sheet (SS) Form 101 is used when additional space is required, that is, more than one 
contractor, or  if expenditures relate  to multiple suppliers on  a reimbursement basis. Summary sheet 
Form  101  is  used  to  summarise  several  invoices  or  receipts  claimed  for  replenishment.  Separate 
summary sheets are used for each disbursement category.  
  SS Form 102 is used when expenditures are claimed under Statement of Expenditures (SOEs). 
If expenditures are claimed under an SOE, supporting documents are not required to be submitted with 
29 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
the  withdrawal  applications.  SS  Form  102  is  attached  to  the  withdrawal  application,  supported  by 
Summary  Sheet(s)  in  Form  101  in  which  the  corresponding  itemised  expenditures  and  related 
information is provided. Also if supporting documents are not required, the project shall itemize every 
single claim by indicating relevant data (good/services provided, date, amount disbursed, bill number, 
etc.). 
If  the  expenditures  are  not  claimed  under  a  SOE,  the  supporting  documents  (bills,  invoices, 
receipts, evidence of payment and evidence of shipment) are submitted and attached to the withdrawal 
application. 
  Procedure  II:  Reimbursement. All  eligible  expenditures  pre-financed  by  the  government  are 
claimed  for  reimbursement  under  this  procedure  using  Application  for  Withdrawal  –Form  100  and 
Summary sheets Forms 101 & 102 as with Procedure I above. This type of disbursement will be very 
common with the project. This procedure is followed when expenditures have already been incurred, 
that  is,  the  suppliers  of  goods  or  services  have  already  been  paid  by  the  Government  from  its  own 
funds. The reimbursement procedure is generally suitable for payment of (i) local currency costs, (ii) 
petty purchases; and (iii) small civil works payments. The reimbursement procedure normally requires 
full documentation. However, where it is impractical or unduly burdensome to submit full documentation 
in support of application for withdrawal of loan/ grant proceeds IFAD accepts simplified documentation 
by way of Statement of Expenditures (SOE). 
  Withdrawals  from  the  Loan/  Grant Account  may  be  made  against  SOEs  in  respect  of  Eligible 
Expenditures in such amounts/ or at such intervals as IFAD may designate from time to time by notice 
to  the  GoM.  The  records  evidencing  such  expenditures  need  not  be  submitted  to  IFAD  but  will  be 
retained by the GoM and made available for inspection by the representatives of IFAD. The PIU will 
retain the relevant documents and make them readily available for inspection and review by supervision 
missions and the auditors. No taxes and duties will be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD loan. 
The  PIU  will  compile  and  consolidate,  on  a  timely  basis,  eligible  Project  expenditures  for  all  project 
activities and consolidate and process, on a timely basis, withdrawal applications for all eligible Project 
expenditures  and  submit  such  withdrawal  applications  to  IFAD  through  MoFT  for  reimbursement  or 
replenishment of the Special/Designated Account. 
  PIU shall submit withdrawal applications every quarter based on the actual eligible expenditures 
incurred at PIU and by the implementing partners. Expenditure categories eligible for financing under 
the Financing Agreement and as per the disbursement percentage will be financed out of the proceeds 
of the IFAD loan/Grant. 
  Procedure III: Direct Payment. Under this procedure, the government requests the Fund to pay 
suppliers directly from the loan/grant funds. The procedure is similar to Procedure I described above 
but the payment is made direct to the third party as advised and instructed by the Government. 
  Procedure IV: Direct Payment to a foreign supplier. Under this procedure, the government 
uses a Letter of Credit (L/C) as a mode of payment to a foreign supplier. Form 301, an Application for a 
Special  Commitment,  Form  302  Letter  of  Commitment  from  IFAD  to  a  Bank  and  Form  303  Bank’s 
Request for Payment. This is extensively used for financing import of goods and under this procedure 
IFAD gives assurance to the suppliers. 
  No withdrawal can be made in respect of expenditures until:  
(i)   the PIU for implementation of the project is established and finance staff recruited;  
(ii) the GoM shall have duly opened the Special/Designated Account  
(iii) the MoF has added MAP into their accounting/financing system  
(iii)  the  first  AWPB,  including  the  procurement  plan  for  the  initial  18  months  of  Project 
implementation, shall have been submitted to, and approved by IFAD. 
  The disbursement procedures are summarized below: 
30 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Disbursement 
Procedure 
Procedure I 
Disbursement 
Type 
Special/ 
Designated 
Account 
Procedure II 
Reimbursement 
Procedure III 
Direct Payment 
Procedure IV 
Special 
Commitment 
Description 
This is for advance funding from IFAD for 
start up activities and is used for claiming 
further deposits to replenish the Special/ 
Designated Account 
This  procedure  is  used  for  claiming 
reimbursement  where  eligible  project 
expenditure reimbursable by IFAD have 
been pre-financed by the Government    
IFAD  makes  direct  payment  to  a  third 
the  basis  of  Government 
party  on 
instructions 
This  is  used  for  items  imported  by  the 
Project under a Letter of Credit requiring 
guarantees for reimbursement 
  The formats of the above mentioned forms will be provided at the time of start-up of the project. 
  Checklist for compiling a withdrawal application: Following aspects need to be checked and 
verified  before  an  Application  for  withdrawal  is  sent  to  IFAD  for  reimbursement  or  payment.  The 
supporting documents mentioned below are needed only if the expenditure exceeds the threshold of 
USD 20,000 for a single payment: 
  Designation of WA signatory 
  Designation for operation of the special/designated account 
  WA Sequential number and coverage period 
  WA signatory 
  Currency and the amount due 
  Account number 
  Banking instructions 
  Correspondent bank 
  Supporting documents 
  Percentage of Financing 
  Disbursement procedure used 
  Procurement details 
  Contract or purchase order no and date 
  Description of goods, works or services 
  Currency and total amount of contract 
 
Invoice numbers and net amount of invoice covered by this application 
  Withdrawal details: category and % of expenditures to be financed by IFAD 
  Auditing 
  Audit procedures and arrangements for conducting effective audit for each year and 
arrangement for internal audit and its procedures: The accounts of the Project for each Fiscal Year 
shall be audited by independent auditors acceptable to IFAD. The audit shall be in accordance with 
Article 9 of the IFAD’s General conditions and the IFAD Handbook of Financial Reporting and Auditing 
of IFAD-financed Projects, 
(https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421009/IFAD+Handbook+for+Financial+Reporting+and
+Auditing+of+IFAD-Financed+Projects/133b165d-15c7-4f79-8217-aef95b79dd67) .  The ToR for the 
auditors is also provided in the aforesaid Handbook. The GoM will engage the services of the Office of 
the Auditor General (OAG), Republic of Maldives to conduct the annual audit of the project. 
  The auditors shall adopt the Standards of Auditing acceptable to IFAD and the Government while 
auditing and reporting on the Project Accounts. The accounting and auditing standards adopted should 
31 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
be  disclosed  in  the  notes  to  the  accounts.  The  audit  report  shall  contain  a  clear  expression  of  the 
auditor’s opinion regarding the financial statements. The auditor is required to deliver an audit package 
that includes: (i) the audited financial statements including additional disclosures as required by IFAD 
Handbook  (ii)  an  audit  opinion  on  the  financial  statements  (iii)  a  report  on  factual  findings  and  any 
ineligible expenditure identified should be reported (iv) a Management Letter. Through the management 
letter, the auditor will identify deficiencies in the project accounting records, procedures, systems and 
internal  controls  and  make  appropriate  recommendations  for  improvement.  It  will  also  include  any 
significant  matters  that  come  to  the  auditor’s  attention  and  might  have  a  material  impact  on  project 
implementation. The audit of the Designated Account will also be done by the OAG.   
In reviewing the project accounts and financial statements, the auditor will adhere to the scope 
of audit provided in the IFAD Handbook (Appendix 7). The auditor also will: 
 
verify  that  acceptable  accounting  standards  have  been  consistently  applied  and 
indicate any material deviation from these standards, and the effect of such deviation 
on the annual financial statements; 
  assess  the  adequacy  of  accounting  and  internal  control  systems  (procedures  and 
responsibilities) 
transactions 
(commitment, review, approval, payment and accounting) and ensuring safe custody 
of project-financed assets, and document any instances where controls are lacking or 
need strengthening; 
for  monitoring  expenditures  and  other 
financial 
  determine  whether  the  PIU/IPs  have  maintained  adequate  documentation  for  all 
transactions;  e.g.  procurement  documents,  contracts,  suppliers.  invoices,  letters  of 
credit  and  evidence  of  payment,  and  ascertain  that  expenditures  were  properly 
authorized and in compliance with legal requirements; 
 
 
 
 
verify the numerical accuracy of statements and accounts; 
verify that disbursement requests for expenditures submitted to IFAD are eligible for 
financing  under  the  loan  agreement,  and  identify  clearly  any  ineligible  expenditures; 
and  
carry out a physical verification of any significant assets purchased and confirm their 
existence and use for project purposes. 
report  on  the  status  of  implementation  of  recommendations  issued  in  the  previous 
years 
  The auditor shall discuss the findings in the form of a draft report with the project's finance and 
accounts department and the Project Director. The auditor shall consider and include the response of 
the project in the final report. 
  The audited statement of accounts along with the audit report and the Management Letter shall 
be furnished by the project to IFAD within six months of the end of each Fiscal Year. The auditor shall 
discuss the draft management letter with the PIU and include the Project’s replies/comments in the final 
version of the management letter. In any case, the project shall submit to the auditors and IFAD the 
reply to the management letter of the auditors within one month of receipt thereof. 
  The PIU shall maintain an Log of Audit Observations made by the auditors and also a Table of 
Summary Status of Audit Observations and get it validated by the auditor during the subsequent audit 
or earlier.  
Internal Audit: MOFMRA does not have a system of internal audit. It is proposed that a firm of 
Chartered Accountants will be engaged as Internal Auditor (IA) of the project who will be responsible 
for the internal audit of the PIU and implementing partners, such as MACO, on a quarterly basis. A copy 
of the report along with the Management replies to the observations will also be submitted to IFAD. The 
32 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
internal auditors will, besides the financial audit, will review the systems of internal control and suggest 
improvements, if required, thereto. The internal audit should also include statutory compliances. The 
TOR will include the key aspects of financial management and procurement. The internal auditors will 
submit  quarterly  reports  to  the  Project  Director.  Corrective  follow  up  action  shall  be  taken  by  the 
PIU/MACO. The action taken report shall be submitted to the PD and the internal auditors. The internal 
auditors will evaluate action on previous internal audit reports, and effectiveness thereof and report on 
the  compliance  thereof  in  the  subsequent  report.  The  Project  Director  will  place  the  reports  and  its 
action taken reports before the PSC every six months. The quality of internal audit reports submitted by 
the internal auditors in the first year of implementation will be reviewed by the Review Mission of IFAD 
and if these reports are found to lack quality, PIU may be requested to make alternate arrangements, 
acceptable to IFAD, for conducting the internal audit in later years. The ToR of the Internal Auditor will 
be submitted to IFAD for prior review. 
Ineligible Expenses. If the auditors during the course of their review find ineligible expenses, 
these will be reported as an exception regardless of their materiality. If the ineligible expenditures are 
immaterial and if the project agrees on the auditor’s review, IFAD recommends immediate correction, 
in order to avoid unnecessary qualifications. If the WA are found to include ineligible expenditures, the 
borrower will be required to refund the amounts in question. 
  Accounting systems, policies, procedures and financial reporting 
  The  project  will  follow  a  double  entry  and  computerized  accounting  system  at  all  levels.  The 
accounting will be in accordance with the generally accepted Standards of Accounting and accounting 
practices adequate to reflect the operations, resources and expenditures related to the project until the 
Financing Closing Date, and shall retain such accounts and records for at least ten (10) years thereafter. 
 MOFMRA currently uses SAP software for its accounting.  The project will have a uniform chart 
of accounts across all its implementing offices and consolidation of accounts will be done at the PIU 
every month through the use of the software.  The reports will be useful for preparation of the quarterly 
withdrawal applications. The PIU shall be also responsible for the preparation of the annual financial 
statements  of  the  project  which  will  be  subject  to  external  audit.  The  AWPB,  six-monthly  reports 
prepared by the project and the audited accounts shall be submitted to the PSC for approval and then 
forwarded  to  IFAD.  The  PFS  shall  include  financial  statements  covering  the  reporting  period  in 
accordance  with  IPSAS  –  Financial  Reporting  under  the  Cash  Basis  of Accounting.  In  addition,  the 
following specific disclosures will be included in the financial statements 
  Withdrawal application statement – appendix 1 to the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting 
and  Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects 
  Sources and uses of funds statement- appendix 2 to the IFAD Handbook 
  Statement of Expenditure – appendix 5 to the IFAD Handbook (applicable to grants) 
  Taxes: Section 11.01 of the General Conditions stipulates  that the Loan and all Loan  Service 
Payments shall be exempt from all Taxes, and all loan service payments shall be made free and clear 
of taxes. It is the policy of the Fund that Loan proceeds are not to be used to pay Taxes, including (but 
not limited to) any taxes levied on the imports, procurement or supply of any good, civil work or services 
financed  by the  Loan but  excluding taxes on the overall income. If taxes are to be absorbed  by  the 
Government, they will be recorded under the counterpart contributions. A separate record should be 
kept for taxes paid by the Project.  
  Materiality: Information is material if its omission or misstatement could influence the decisions 
or assessment of the users made on the basis of the financial statements. Materiality depends on the 
nature or size of the item or error judged in the particular circumstance of omission or misstatement. In 
the public sector, materiality includes compliance with authorities, legislative concern or public interest. 
33 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
In the context of IFAD-financed operation will include compliance with the Project Financing Agreement 
and in particular the requirement that IFAD funds may only be used for the purpose stated therein. 
  Project  completion  report  with  reference  to  financial  management:    The  Project  will  be 
completed and loan/grant closed as specified in the Finance Agreement. 
  Withdrawal Applications may be continued to be submitted up to the Loan Closing date i.e. 
six months after the project completion date. 
  Only payments made, or payments due for goods and services, which have been provided 
prior  to  the  project  completion  date,  qualify  for  disbursement.  The  only  additional 
expenditures allowed are for winding up activities (salaries, audit fees, project completion 
report) 
  No replenishment will be made after the project completion date. 
  The  Special/Designated  Account  recovery  will  begin  early  enough  to  ensure  that  no 
balance remains in the special/designated account at the closing date. 
  The following three steps will be adhered to for loan closing: (i) final statement of accounts, 
(ii) preparation of final audit report, and (iii) preparation of Project Completion Report 
  Asset Management: Proper record of fixed assets shall be maintained at the PIU and the DMUs 
which shall include the date of purchase, the specification, the unique identification number, the location 
and the cost. In case assets are allocated to any staff member this should be mentioned in the asset 
register. The fixed assets shall be physically verified at least once in a year and the evidence thereof 
shall be recorded in the asset register. All assets procured by the project shall be adequately insured. 
The asset registers should be regularly reconciled with the books of accounts. 
  Financial  Manual:  MOFMRA  has  a  manual  for  Program  Management  and  Accounts 
Implementation Manual which was approved and adopted in December, 2012. The regulations contain 
operational processes of accounting, financial rules, maintenance of books of accounts, procurement 
rules, personnel management, document management, asset management, data security, delegation 
of financial powers etc. This is a dynamic document and can be changed under proper authority. The 
PIU will update this with the current rules, regulations, policies and accounting systems which will meet 
with the requirements of MAP and the same can be used as a Financial Manual for the project. 
  Governance and Anti-corruption measures.  
In  accordance  with  provisions  of  the  IFAD  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  its 
Activities and Operations, IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy with regard to any fraudulent, corrupt, 
collusive or coercive actions in the programmes it finances. This entails not only pursuing all allegations 
of  fraudulent  practices  and  applying  appropriate  sanctions  but  also  promoting  preventive  control 
measures  such  as  assessments  of  national  and  programme-specific  FM,  auditing  and  procurement 
systems during the programme design phase. 
  Where it is determined that fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive practices have occurred in 
programmes  financed  through  its  loans  and  grants,  IFAD  applies  a  range  of  sanctions,  including 
disciplinary measures for concerned staff; and pursues the recovery of any losses in accordance with 
the provisions of the applicable IFAD rules and regulations and legal instruments. 
  The Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption has been integrated into IFAD's legal framework 
(Programme Procurement Guidelines2, General Conditions for Agricultural Development  Financing3, 
IFAD’s Code of Conduct4) and applies to all recipients of IFAD financing. 
2https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/39438991 
3https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/39500875 
4https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-detail/asset/40186603 
34 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
In line with this, the PIU will ensure that all its activities are implemented within a transparency 
framework. This framework will include measures to ensure that both procurement (either carried out 
by PIU or any other implementing partner) and the selection of agribusinesses and farmer groups that 
will benefit from the programme, are carried out in accordance with IFAD rules and programme's design 
specifications. 
  Measures which shall form part of the framework for transparency include:  
a)  Publication of sourcing, tendering and contracting processes at PIU & other implementing 
partners;  
b)  Participation of representatives of end-users in bid assessments;  
c)  Prompt communication to bidders of bid evaluation outcomes; 
d)  An internal code of conduct to be signed by all Programme staff; 
e)  A code of business ethics, to be included in all agreements/contracts signed with partners 
and  beneficiaries  of  the  programme  activities.  The  code  of  conduct  and  the  code  of 
business  ethics  will  be  included  in  the  Programme  Implementation  Manual  after  due 
discussion with implementation partners; 
f)  Annual programme audits, that will include a routine assessment of companies and farmer-
group grants participating in the programme; 
IFAD’s direct supervision which inter alia will address fiduciary compliance; 
Involvement of Programme stakeholders (and especially farmers and their organizations) 
in programming, implementation and M&E of programme activities;  
Evaluation and impact assessment outsourced to independent institutions. 
g) 
h) 
i) 
  Lessons  learned:  The  quality  of  FM  of  MEDEP  was  moderately  satisfactory  at  closure.  The 
programme  had  issues  with  internal  controls,  contract  management  and  maintenance  of  adequate 
supporting  documentation  for  its  transactions.  Staffing  was  not  adequate  Lack  of  management 
experience at the PIU level and an overburdened finance section remained a constraint. It is proposed 
to have adequate and experienced staff since the beginning of the programme.  SAP, which is being 
used in the MOF should be used at PIU from the very beginning of the programme with intensive training 
to improve the accounting and financial reporting of the programme. 
35 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
IX. Procurement 
  Procurement for the Programme will follow the National Procurement regulations (Chapter 10 of 
the Public Financial Regulations) to the extent that it does not contradict with the provisions of the IFAD 
Procurement  Guidelines  and  Procurement  Handbook.    The  Programme  shall  follow  the  IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook where the National Procurement Regulation does 
not adequately cover any stages of the procurement process. To ensure that programme procurement 
is carried out as per the National Procurement Regulations and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines and 
Handbook,  the  Programme  shall  have  a  full  time  Procurement  Officer  in  the  PIU. The  Procurement 
Officer’s responsibilities shall be defined in line with the National Procurement Regulations and include 
as  a  minimum,  preparation  of  procurement  plans,  procurement  of  goods  works  and  services, 
procurement  documentation,  monitoring  and  supervision  of  all  contracts.  A  detailed  ToR  for  the 
Procurement officer shall be developed in consultation with IFAD. 
  As MAP’s implementation  may  heavily rely on the effectiveness of procurement of goods and 
services, special panels of procurement may need to be set up by PIU. 
  The thresholds defined in the National Procurement Regulation shall be followed for application 
of the procurement methods. However, for each of these methods, the procurement shall ensure the 
minimum  time  limits  as  follows  (which  is  in  line  with  section  10.43  of  the  National  Procurement 
Regulation: 
Procurement 
Method 
Minimum  Time  limits  for 
submission of bids 
Remarks 
Open Tenders 
4 weeks 
Goods, Works and Services 
Request 
Proposals 
Restricted 
tendering 
Quotations 
Expression 
Interests 
for 
4 weeks 
Consulting Services 
2 weeks 
1 week 
of 
2 weeks 
Goods, Works and Services 
Individual  Consultants  and 
Consulting Firms 
  Bidding  Documents  shall  be  prepared  using  the  Standard  Bidding  Documents  issued  by  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF).  Where  such  standards  are  not  available,  the  Programme  will  prepare 
customized  bidding  documents  in  line  with  Module  H:  Bidding  Documents  of  the  IFAD  Procurement 
Handbook.  The  first  set  of  Bidding  Documents  prepared  by  the  Programme  for  each  type  of 
procurement of Goods, Works, Services and Consulting Services shall be submitted for IFAD’s review 
and no-objection. There after these documents shall be used as sample for the rest of the procurement 
activities. 
  The threshold for prior and post review will be provided in the LTB. A selected sample of all other 
procurement activities may be post reviewed at the end of each financial year.  
  More  detailed  guidance  on  procurement  will  be  provided  by  IFAD  at  programme  start,  which 
should be incorporated into the PIM. 
36 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
X. Costs and financing 
  Programme costs 
  The  main  assumptions  underlying  the  derivation  of  programme  costs,  estimated  programme 
costs and financing plan are described in this section. The programme costs are based on November 
2019 prices. Some of the key parameters are presented below: 
  The total investment and incremental recurrent programme costs, including physical and price 
contingencies,  are  estimated  at  about  USD  12.9  million  (MVR 195.8 billion).  Physical  and  price 
contingencies are low at 2% of the total programme costs due to the fact that investments associated 
with the grants, credits and TA represent around 70% of the total programme costs (expressed as a 
lump sum, no contingencies). The foreign exchange component is  estimated at  USD  9.96 million  or 
77% of the total programme costs. The programme management cost makes about 15% of the total 
programme costs. The summary programme costs are presented below. 
Table 1: Programme costs by component (and sub-components) and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Table 2: Programme costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
37 
Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Enabling Policy, Institutions and ServicesKnowledge and Technology73653.657842.1------584.21,37210.6Input Supply1,55886.8--1216.8----1176.51,79513.9Subtotal Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services2,29472.457818.31213.8----1745.53,16724.6B. Climate Smart Production6099.92454.0330.5--5,00081.32614.26,14847.7C. Market Connection38223.31006.1--1,14069.7--150.91,63712.7D. Programme Management--29315.1------1,64684.91,93815.0Total PROJECT COSTS3,28525.51,2159.41541.21,1408.85,00038.82,09616.312,890100.0IFAD LOANTotalGovt BudgetSDFCPrivate InvestMACOIFAD Grant 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Table 3: Programme costs by component and year 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
  Programme financing/ co-financing strategy and plan 
  An IFAD loan, USD 3.285 million (25.5% of the total programme costs), would finance: 72.4% of 
the Component 1. Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services (USD 2.29 million), 9.9% of Component 2. 
Climate Smart Production (USD 0.61 million), and 23.3% of Component 3. Market Connection (USD 
0.38 million). An IFAD grant of USD 1.215 million (9.4% of the total programme costs) would finance: 
18.3%  of  Component  1  (USD  0.58  million),  4.0%  of  Component  2  (USD  0.25 million),  6.1%  of 
Component 3 (USD 0.1 million) and 15.1% of Programme Management (USD 0.29 million). 
It is expected that additional USD 5.0 million would be attracted from the SDFC, which would 
finance loans for farming households,  or 81.3% of Component 2. It is also expected that the private 
sector (mainly CAIs and MFLS) would allocate about USD 1.14 million to finance market infrastructure 
investments or 69.7% of Component 3. 
  Government  contribution  in  cash  of  USD 2.25 million  would  finance  5.5%  of  Component  1 
(USD 0.174 million),  4.2%  of  Component  2 
(USD 0.261 million),  0.9%  of  Component  3 
(USD 0.015 million), 84.9% of Programme Management (USD 1.65 million) as well as it would partially 
cover  the  costs  of  institutional  capacity  building  of  MACO  amounting  to  USD 0.154 million.  The 
Government will be also covering all taxes and duties if they emerge in future.  
====== 
38 
Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment CostsA. Goods, Equipment and MaterialsGoods, Equipment and Materials1,70588.8--------21511.21,91914.9B. Technical Assistance and StudiesInternational TA6713.045287.0--------5194.0National TA54676.6131.812117.0----324.57125.5Studies--210100.0--------2101.6Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies61342.567546.81218.4----322.21,44111.2C. Training and WorkshopsTraining and workshops32775.6163.7337.6----5713.14323.4D. Innovation Investments /a64030.134516.2--1,14053.6----2,12516.5E. SDFC Financing--------5,00095.02615.05,26140.8Total Investment Costs3,28529.41,0359.31541.41,14010.25,00044.75655.111,17986.7II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and Allowances--18011.1------1,44888.91,62812.6B. Operational Expenses----------84100.0840.7Total Recurrent Costs--18010.5------1,53189.51,71113.3Total PROJECT COSTS3,28525.51,2159.41541.21,1408.85,00038.82,09616.312,890100.0IFAD LOANTotalGovt BudgetSDFCPrivate InvestMACOIFAD GrantTotals Including ContingenciesPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalA. Enabling Policy, Institutions and ServicesKnowledge and Technology756.5392.0101.676.945.31,372.1Input Supply1,297.8135.7139.1109.9112.71,795.3Subtotal Enabling Policy, Institutions and Services2,054.3527.7240.7186.8157.93,167.4B. Climate Smart Production16.7659.32,056.41,710.01,705.66,147.9C. Market Connection213.0388.1601.8243.8190.01,636.6D. Programme Management414.4359.5386.8365.0412.41,938.1Total PROJECT COSTS2,698.41,934.63,285.62,505.62,465.812,890.0 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Appendix 1:  Terms of reference (ToR) for PIU key positions 
Position: Programme Director (PD) 
Objective: Enable small farmers in the programme area to sustainably enhance their production levels 
to such a degree that they provide  increased income, secured food and nutrition  for their household 
demands and deliver produce to connected markets. 
Output: The Maldives Agribusiness Programme is implemented along the guidelines provided by the 
design report, implementation manual, lead ministry, steering committee and supervision missions 
Activities 
  To ensure an optimum use of Programme resources and to report to the lead Ministry and the 
financier(s) on the same; 
  To ensure the Programme adheres social, environmental and climate-related safeguards and 
contributes  to  gender  equity,  women’s  empowerment,  youth  promotion  and  inclusive 
development; 
  To direct Programme implementation in accordance to agreed plans and to report on progress 
and outcomes in a methodological manner; 
  To ensure collection, processing and analysis of surveys and progress data in order to assess 
and strengthen the effect and impact of the Programme; 
  To ensure periodic reporting on Programme implementation, including  physical and financial 
reports; 
  To  ensure  proper  financial  management,  including  timely  application  for  disbursements  and 
comprehensive reporting on expenditures and expenditure forecasts; 
  To ensure a strong sense of teamwork within the PIU and to foster constructive engagement 
among the partners involved in Programme implementation;  
  To advice the lead Ministry, the Programme partners and the PSC on adjustments in focus and 
direction of the Programme; 
  To  direct  PIU  staff,  hired  services  and  consultants  to  carry-out  their  agreed  duties  in  a  way 
aimed at achieving the Programme objectives; 
  To maintain liaison with islands, their leadership and their representatives in the  Programme 
area; 
  To  develop,  negotiate  and  implement  agreements  with  Programme  partners,  including 
participating institutions and service providers; 
  To represent the Programme to all external stakeholders; and 
  To undertake additional tasks agreed with PSC and IFAD. 
Qualifications:  
  A Master degree or more in a field related to agricultural development; 
 
xx-years’ experience in rural development in country, of which five in a managerial position; 
  Experience  in  Programme  administration,  financial  management  and  reporting,  preferably 
using IFAD systems; 
  An  existing  network  of  relations  pertaining  to  agribusiness,  agri-extension  support  services, 
smallholder agriculture, value chains and market linkage; 
  Experience in collaborating across government ministries and in public-private dialogue; 
  Strong leaderships skills, including the ability to delegate responsibility within the team and to 
implementing partners; 
  Proven ability to constructively interact with teams of professionals from various stakeholders. 
40 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Position: Policy and institution specialist (Component 1 coordinator) 
Objective: Together with the other component coordinators/specialists and the targeting and gender 
specialist the Policy and institution specialist will lead the implementation of MAP Component 1 and 
activities related to policy, institutional capacity building and service strengthening.  
Output: The specialist will provide overall leadership for programme support to enabling policy 
framework, strengthened institutions and services to support the small farmers to apply climate smart, 
sustainable and profitable good agricultural practices. 
Activities:  
The specialist pursues the successful execution of under Component 1. S/he reports to the 
Programme Director and works closely with other partner institutions and service providers. Key tasks 
include: 
  Liaise on a regular basis with the MOFMRA related technical departments/divisions and ARC 
and other implementing agencies involved in implementation of Component 1 activities for 
joint planning and monitoring; 
  Develop detailed work plans which identify, prioritise and sequence the activities required for 
successful delivery of the Component 1, and contribute to the development of the Annual 
Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB);  
  Ensure that each member of the programme field team involved in Component 1 activities 
has a clear understanding of their role, responsibilities and short-term activities and goals; 
  Establish and regularly update a training plan for the required capacity building measures 
linked to implementation of the component; 
  Assist in the establishment and update of the procurement plan for items linked to the 
implementation of Component 1. 
  Ensure that component outputs are delivered in a due manner without targeting deviation; 
  Assist in the design of an M&E system with regards to the activities, outputs, outcomes and 
impacts of Component 1 activities;  
  Report to the Program Director as per agreed upon reporting schedules and formats and 
proactively raise issues of concern with program leadership 
  Facilitate case studies and documentation of good practices as developed during 
implementation as part of knowledge management; 
  Participate in monitoring, supervision missions, mid-term reviews and program completion 
missions; 
  Carry out any other duties as designated by the Program Director from time to time. 
Qualifications:  
  A Bachelor degree in agronomy, agricultural extension, agricultural economics, or closely 
related field;  
  A minimum of xx years’ experience in the area of agriculture development; 
  A minimum of x years’ experience in project management and coordination; 
  Sound background and experience in good agricultural practices; 
  Practical knowledge and understanding of working with institutions, farmers and private 
sector; 
  Substantial experience in capacity building of public and private institutions;  
  Proven ability to constructively interact with teams of professionals from various stakeholders;  
  Excellent oral & written presentation skills (English language); 
  Creative, innovative system thinker, with ability to catalyse change. 
Position: Agriculture Extension Specialist (Component 2 coordinator) 
41 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Objective: Together with the other component coordinators/specialists and the targeting and gender 
specialist the Policy and institution specialist will lead the implementation of MAP Component 2 and 
activities related to climate smart production enhancement.  
Output: The specialist will provide overall leadership for programme support to training of the 
beneficiaries on production practices and technology adoption, organization of farmer production 
forums and access to agriculture financing. 
Activities:  
The specialist pursues the successful execution of under Component 2. S/he reports to the 
Programme Director and works closely with other partner institutions and service providers. Key tasks 
include: 
  Liaise on a regular basis with the MOFMRA related technical departments/divisions and ARC 
and other implementing agencies such as MACO, SDFC and MFLC involved in 
implementation of Component 2 activities for joint planning and monitoring; 
  Develop detailed work plans which identify, prioritise and sequence the activities required for 
successful delivery of the Component 2, and contribute to the development of the Annual 
Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB);  
  Ensure that each member of the programme field team involved in Component 2 activities 
has a clear understanding of their role, responsibilities and short-term activities and goals; 
  Establish and regularly update a training plan for the required capacity building measures 
linked to implementation of the component; 
  Assist in the establishment and update of the procurement plan for items linked to the 
implementation of Component 2. 
  Ensure that component outputs are delivered in a due manner without targeting deviation; 
  Assist in the design of an M&E system with regards to the activities, outputs, outcomes and 
impacts of Component 2 activities;  
  Report to the Program Director as per agreed upon reporting schedules and formats and 
proactively raise issues of concern with program leadership 
  Facilitate case studies and documentation of good practices as developed during 
implementation as part of knowledge management; 
  Participate in monitoring, supervision missions, mid-term reviews and program completion 
missions; 
  Carry out any other duties as designated by the Program Director from time to time. 
Qualifications:  
  A Bachelor degree in agronomy, agricultural extension, agricultural economics, or closely 
related field;  
  A minimum of xx years’ experience in the area of agriculture development; 
  A minimum of x years’ experience in project management and coordination; 
  Sound background and experience in good agricultural practices; 
  Practical knowledge and understanding of working with institutions, farmers and private 
sector; 
  Substantial experience in capacity building of public and private institutions;  
  Proven ability to constructively interact with teams of professionals from various stakeholders;  
  Excellent oral & written presentation skills (English language); 
  Creative, innovative system thinker, with ability to catalyse change. 
Position: Agribusiness development specialist (Component 3 coordinator) 
42 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Objective: Together with other component coordinators/specialists and the targeting and gender 
specialist the Agribusiness development specialist will lead the implementation of MAP Component 3 
and activities related to market connection.  
Output: The specialist will provide overall leadership for programme support to building partnerships 
between producers and private companies, and fostering market-driven business relationship 
between organized production, transportation and markets in the forms of supply contracts or contract 
farming.. 
Activities:  
The specialist pursues the successful execution of under Component 3. S/he reports to the 
Programme Director and works closely with other partner institutions and service providers. Key tasks 
include: 
  Liaise on a regular basis with the MOFMRA related technical departments/divisions and ARC 
and other implementing agencies involved in implementation of Component 3 activities for 
joint planning and monitoring; 
  Develop detailed work plans which identify, prioritise and sequence the activities required for 
successful delivery of the Component 3, and contribute to the development of the Annual 
Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB);  
  Ensure that each member of the programme field team involved in Component 3 activities 
has a clear understanding of their role, responsibilities and short-term activities and goals; 
  Establish and regularly update a training plan for the required capacity building measures 
linked to implementation of the component; 
  Assist in the establishment and update of the procurement plan for items linked to the 
implementation of Component 3. 
  Ensure that component outputs are delivered in a due manner without targeting deviation; 
  Assist in the design of an M&E system with regards to the activities, outputs, outcomes and 
impacts of Component 3 activities;  
  Report to the Program Director as per agreed upon reporting schedules and formats and 
proactively raise issues of concern with program leadership 
  Facilitate case studies and documentation of good practices as developed during 
implementation as part of knowledge management; 
  Participate in monitoring, supervision missions, mid-term reviews and program completion 
missions; 
  Carry out any other duties as designated by the Program Director from time to time. 
Qualifications:  
  A Bachelor degree in agronomy, agricultural extension, agricultural economics, or closely 
related field;  
  A minimum of xx years’ experience in the area of agriculture development; 
  A minimum of x years’ experience in project management and coordination; 
  Sound background and experience in good agricultural practices; 
  Practical knowledge and understanding of working with institutions, farmers and private 
sector; 
  Substantial experience in capacity building of public and private institutions;  
  Proven ability to constructively interact with teams of professionals from various stakeholders;  
  Excellent oral & written presentation skills (English language); 
  Creative, innovative system thinker, with ability to catalyse change. 
Position: Financial management officer / Financial controller 
Objective: To administer programme funds in support MAP targets and objective 
43 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Output: Transparent financial management, accounting and reporting is established, and outcomes are 
analysed on a recurrent basis 
Activities: 
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
 
Installation and utilization of automized systems with a well-coded chart of accounts to ensure 
that the PIU and especially the Programme Director and M&E officers are regularly informed of 
on-going financial activities and transactions; 
  Communicate to all implementing entities and service providers their financial responsibilities, 
the funds available and how to access it, and the requirements of reporting and record keeping 
in accordance with prevailing government practices which are acceptable to IFAD; 
  Maintain all accounting records in a form appropriate for regular auditing (at least once a year); 
  Ensure that: 
o  All MAP funds are used in accordance with the conditions of the financing agreements, 
with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for the purposes for which the 
funds were provided; 
o  Counterpart funds have been provided and used in accordance with the conditions of 
the financing agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for 
the purposes for which they were provided; 
o  Goods  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in  accordance  with  the  financing 
agreement and in accordance with government and IFAD’s rules and procedures; 
o  All necessary supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect of all 
Programme  activities,  with  clear  linkages  between  the  books  of  account  and  the 
financial statements presented to the financiers; 
o  Designated accounts are maintained in accordance with the provisions of the financing 
agreement and in accordance with the financier’s rules and procedures; 
o  The financial statements are prepared in accordance with International Public Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS)- Cash basis with the prerequisite disclosures for non-
cash items 
  Liaise with external auditors to audit the MAP accounts to meet the required submission dates 
by IFAD;  
  Oversee tax matters of the Programme, ensuring that tax exemptions for the procurement of 
goods for the Programme are secured at the appropriate time;  
  Provide any support to assist in procurement for the Programme in accordance with procedures 
laid down by Financing Agreements of IFAD and  government’s procurement regulations and 
guidelines; 
  Process  documentation  and  follow  up  on  disbursements  from  the  government  and  IFAD  to 
ensure that releases are not delayed;  Ensure that funds for Programme implementation  are 
disbursed in a timely manner to enable Programme interventions to be carried out on time; 
  Prepare and submit regular withdrawal applications to IFAD and follow up to ensure that the 
Programme does not run short of liquidity; 
  Follow up on all Programme funds released to implementing entities and technical partners for 
timely retirement and proper utilisation; 
  Ensure that statements of expenditure (SOEs) are carefully compared for eligibility with relevant 
financial agreements and the disbursement letter, and with reference to the Programme Design 
Report for guidance when necessary; 
  Ensure  that  fixed  assets  are  well  accounted  for  and  annual  verification  is  undertaken  of  the 
condition of assets and their location; 
  Prepare half-yearly consolidated statements of Programme accounts as an integral part of the 
Management Information System to be submitted to the Programme Steering Committee, and 
subsequently to IFAD; 
  Act as a counter-signatory to Programme fund releases as required for Programme financial 
transactions and also sign as witness to contracts as much as possible; 
44 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Prepare  periodic  reports  regarding  aspects  of  Programme  financial  monitoring  bringing  out 
variances and advising component heads as to the limits of expenditure; 
  Ensure the effective and efficient operation of administrative aspects of the MAP; 
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Programme Director. 
Qualifications  
The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in business or finance, and a professionally qualified 
accountant  with  Membership  of  association  body  of  Chartered  Accountants  in  Maldives.  Other 
qualifications include: 
  At least xx years of relevant work experience, including at least xx as a financial manager or 
accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions.  
  Strong managerial skills and demonstrated capacity to manage people and interact with a wide 
range of private sector partners and government representatives. 
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Computer-literate and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word and financial software. 
Position: Monitoring and Evaluation and knowledge management officer 
Objective: Enable the PIU to effectively and efficiently implement MAP, including readjustment of the 
programme if and when needed 
Output: Analysis of implementation progress, using management information systems, ORMS, special 
studies, annual work plans and budgets, regular and technical reports, factsheets and KM instruments 
and products 
Activities 
  Establish and maintain systems that guide and assess programme implementation progress, 
as described in the PIM; 
  ensure  that  the  programme  monitoring  and  evaluation  will  comply  with  the  IFAD-required 
ORMS and concentrate on selected core indicators (Cis); 
  Coordinate  preparation  of  semi-annual  progress  reports,  revised  logical  framework,  annual 
work plans and budgets and periodic procurement plans; 
  Set-up and manage a system whereby programme agreements are periodically reviewed and 
transfer relevant information into the Programme’s MIS; 
  Organise  reviews  and  assessments 
that  provide  qualitative 
insights 
in  Programme 
achievements or lack thereof;  
  Plan and coordinate the conduct of surveys and studies at required periodic times during the 
programme  duration,  namely  at  beginning,  mid-term  and  completion,  or  when  it  is  judged 
necessary 
  Develop and implement an effective mechanism for systematically capturing the good practices 
and  innovative features of the Programme 
  Associate  with  PIU  staff,  implementing  agency  staff  and  beneficiaries  to  understand  the 
mechanisms through which programme benefits are delivered;  
  Signal  problems  in  implementation  progress,  the  Programme’s  risk  profile  and  the  resource 
utilisation by the Programme; 
  Take the leadership in the programme evaluation and guide the related programme partners 
 
and staffs in focusing on the key outcome and impact levels 
Identify  key  issues  facing  Programme  implementation  and  contribute  to  the  identification  of 
alternative approaches to address the issues.  
Qualifications:  
  A Master’s degree in a field related to agricultural development; 
45 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  10-years’ experience in rural development in Malawi, of which five in monitoring and evaluation; 
  Experience  in  Programme  administration,  financial  management  and  reporting,  preferably 
using IFAD systems; 
  Well-versed with approaches for planning, monitoring and evaluation; 
  Experience  in  facilitation  of  interactive  sessions  among  professionals,  aimed  at  knowledge 
management; 
  Proven ability to constructively interact with teams of professionals from various stakeholders. 
Position: Procurement Officer/specialist 
Objective: To purchase the best value-for-money equipment and services for the achievement of the 
MAP targets and objective 
Output: Transparent and efficient procurement and contract management. 
Activities 
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
 
Installation  of  appropriate  procurement  systems  and  procedures  for  effective  planning  and 
monitoring of procurements under the Programme; 
  Communicate  to  all  implementing  entities  and  service  provider  their  responsibilities  and 
requirements  with  respect  to  procurement  in  keeping  with  prevailing  government  practices 
which are acceptable to IFAD; 
  Oversee preparation and consolidation of inputs to the Annual Procurement Plan; 
  Oversee  the  contracting  process,  including  ensuring  that  special  panels  and  evaluation 
committees of procurement have people with appropriate expertise; 
  Monitor  implementation  of  contracts:  report  status  and  problems  to  the  Programme  Director 
(PD) on a monthly basis; and intervene to address problem upon request by the PD; 
  Maintain all procurement records in a form appropriate for regular auditing. Each procurement 
package must have its own identifiable procurement file with all the history of documentation 
from the initiation of the procurement to contract closure; 
  Ensure that goods and services financed have been procured in accordance with the financing 
agreement and the public procurement regulations in the country; 
  Work with the Financial Controller/Officer to ensure that tax exemptions for the procurement of 
goods for the Programme are secured at the appropriate time; 
  Prepare  periodic  reports  of  progress  with  implementation  of  the  Procurement  Plan,  and 
regularly  inform  the  Programme  Director  of  problems  and  make  proposals  to  overcome 
bottlenecks; 
  Provide any reports needed by the authority of procurement administration in MOFMRA or in 
Maldives; 
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Programme Director; 
Qualifications  
The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in business, finance or related subject, and specific 
training in procurement and membership of relevant professional bodies. A Master’s Degree shall be 
an added advantage. Other qualifications include: 
  At least five years of relevant work experience, preferably including experience in procurement 
in government/donor investment projects or large institutions;  
  Ability to work well in teams and to interact with a wide range of private sector partners and 
government representatives; 
  Knowledge of work planning and reporting; 
  Computer-literate and well-versed in the use of Excel and Word. 
46 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Position: Targeting, gender and nutrition specialist 
Objective: In close collaboration with the component coordinators/specialists, the Targeting and gender 
specialist is expected to lead the delivery of social impacts to target beneficiaries in MAP  
Output: Gender, youth and nutrition-inclusive concerns are reflected are mainstreamed in all aspects 
of the programme; and reflected in targeting decisions by the programme, its beneficiaries and partner 
agencies.  
Activities 
The Specialist will lead a continuous process of targeting and identifying beneficiaries to participate in 
programme’s  activities.  S/he  reports  to  the  Programme  Director  and  works  directly  with  component 
coordinators, focal points of implementing agencies and partners, Extension Link Farmers as well as 
various  Programme’s  Service  Providers  to  undertake  target  group  identification  and  analysis  and 
develop the targeting strategy together with the implementation mechanisms. Key tasks include: 
 
Identify opportunities in the local governance system for enhancing the targeting of programme 
benefits to the poor, female-headed households and youth; 
  Develop guidance for Programme staff and staff of mobilised agencies on directing programme 
benefits to the target beneficiaries; 
  Contribute to the design of the implementation surveys, tracer and thematic studies in order to 
 
 
gauge the impact of development on differentiated beneficiary categories; 
Identify innovative ways of providing  equitable access to resources and opportunities for the 
disadvantaged groups including female-headed households and youth; 
Identify opportunities for gainful employment for women and youth, from activities undertaken 
by the programme; 
  Assess the capacity of agricultural extension services (both government and service providers) 
to  meet  the  needs  of  small  farmers  in  terms  of  nutrition  education,  and  formulate  adequate 
support measures to improve their performance in servicing the programme’s target group;  
  Develop  detailed  gender  action  plan  with  the  PIU  colleagues  to  help  identify,  prioritise  and 
sequence the activities required for successful delivery in targeting and gender empowerment; 
  Develop joint M&E oversight plan with MAP M&E Specialist and Service Providers to monitor 
the implementation and efficiency of targeting and gender empowerment;  
  Conduct regular field visits to programme implementation areas and provide technical and on 
the job support to partners, focal points and service providers to ensure the targeting strategy 
is implemented as planned;  
  Develop localised training materials on the relevance of improved nutrition to women and their 
households; 
  Support  M&E  officer  in  monitoring  and  reporting  on  nutrition  outcomes  and  lead  the 
development of the project’s social inclusion/gender strategy;  
  Support the development and implementation of nutrition intervention material for the project 
area in close collaboration with the PD and Component Coordinators/Specialist; 
  Provide technical assistance and guidance to field level staff;  
  Document lessons learnt and achievements in mainstreaming nutrition in the project.  
Qualifications 
  MSc degree in Gender Studies, social sciences or similar; 
  Ten or more years of relevant professional experience; 
  Proven experience in developing strategies for effective gender and poverty-mainstreaming 
  Working knowledge of remote area or outer islands, agriculture and value chain development;  
  Basic  knowledge  of  global  health  and  nutrition  issues  and  the  current  trends,  methods  and 
approaches; 
  Excellent oral & written presentation skills 
  Creative, innovative system thinker, with ability to catalyse change. 
47 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Position: Accountant 
Objective: To administer programme funds in support MAP targets and objective. 
Output: Up-to-date financial management, accounting and financial reporting  
Activities 
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
  Support in the preparation of Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
  Analysing  payment  requests  and  reconciliation  with  approved  documentation  including 
purchase orders and contracts 
  Posting payment invoices into financial management systems in line with approved work plans. 
  Assist  in  preparation  of  half-yearly  consolidated  statements  of  Programme  accounts  as  an 
integral  part  of  the  Management  Information  System  to  be  submitted  to  the  programme 
oversight committee, and subsequently to IFAD. 
  Ensure that fixed assets are  well  accounted for and regular  verification  is undertaken of the 
condition of assets and their location. 
  Ensure that supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect of all Programme 
activities,  with  clear  linkages  between  the  books  of  account  and  the  financial  statements 
presented to the financiers; 
  Preparation of bank reconciliations for the Programme accounts.  
  Assisting in review of invoices and supporting documents before any payments are processed. 
  Following up on outstanding advances both to staff and service providers. 
  Assisting  in  ensuring  budgetary  controls  to  ensure  that  no  payment  is  done  unless  there  is 
sufficient budgetary provision. 
  Ensuring systematic and accurate recording/filing of accounting records. 
  Prepare the SOE’s and the WA Application to IFAD for timely replenishment. 
  Participating  in  the  Audit  exercises  providing  auditors  will  all  information  and  documentation 
they require 
  Any other duties as may be assigned by the Financial management officer/Financial controller. 
Qualifications  
The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in business or finance, and an  affiliate professional 
accountant. Other qualifications include: 
  At least five years of relevant work experience, including at least four as a financial manager or 
accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions.  
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Computer-literate and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word and financial software. 
Position: Assistant Accountant 
Objective: To administer programme funds in support MAP targets and objective  
Output: Timely logistic and administrative support and up-to-date entry of financial transactions 
Activities: 
The Assistant Accountant is part of the Finance team and will, under the supervision of the Accountant, 
take responsibility for maintaining all accounting documentation in good order. 
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
  Cashiering of Programme funds. 
  Prepares payments vouchers and prepare payments upon authorised approvals. 
  Agent to MAP accounts in commercial banks 
48 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Maintains  petty  cash  floats  for  the  programme;  make  payments  and  prepare  a  float 
reimbursement returns. 
  Follows  up  accountabilities  of funds  advanced  at  the  level  PIU  and  with  other  implementing 
partners. 
  Ensure systematic and accurate recording/filing of accounts records. 
  Ensure that salary and tax deductions are remitted in timely way and that all acknowledgement 
of receipt is documented. 
  Withholding  Tax  is  recovered  from  payments,  remitted  and  Tax  Certificates  are  issued  to 
suppliers. 
  Participates in field supervision of Programme activities. 
  Participates in Audits of Programme’s Financial Statements. 
  Manage the financial and related aspects regarding foreign travel by the staff and other partners 
under the Programme. 
  Any other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Programme management. 
Qualifications  
The candidate should have a Bachelor’s Degree in Business/ accounting. Other qualifications include: 
  Practical  experience  (at  least  3  years)  of  working  in  Government  and  Donor  funded  project 
while providing support in enabling smooth functioning of financial transactions is necessary.  
  Familiarity with applications of accounting software 
49 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Appendix 2: Programme logframe 
Logical Framework 
Results 
Hierarchy 
Outreach 
Indicators 
Name 
Baseline  Mid-Term 
End 
Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Means of Verification 
1.b  Estimated corresponding total number of households 
members 
Household members - 
Number of people 
1.a  Corresponding number of households reached 
Women-headed 
households  - Number 
Non-women-headed 
households - Number 
Households - Number 
1,600  
400  
1,200  
4,800  
31,800  
implementing 
partners' records 
and project 
records 
implementing 
partners' records 
and project 
records 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU 
PIU 
2,000  
6,000  
1  Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the 
project 
Females - Number 
implementing 
partners' records 
and project 
records 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU 
Males - Number 
Young - Number 
1,060  
3,180  
940  
400  
2,820  
1,200  
Total number of persons receiving services - Number of people 
Male - Percentage (%) 
Female - Percentage (%) 
Young - Percentage (%) 
47% 
53% 
20% 
47% 
53% 
20% 
implementing 
partners' records 
and project 
records 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU 
50 
Assumptions 
The programme 
achieves its 
geographic and 
HH outreach 
targets and 
small farmers 
participate in 
programme 
activities 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
70% of project supported HHs reporting a 20% increase in their 
income 
Number of HHs 
400  
4,200  
% of HH reporting improved food security 
% of HHs 
30% 
80% 
# of small farmers reporting access to improved agricultural 
support services 
# of female farmers 
# of male farmers 
# of young farmers 
318  
282  
2,544  
2,256  
120  
960  
PIU 
PIU 
PIU 
surveys of 
households, 
qualitative 
assessment of 
participating HH 
at baseline, 
mid-term 
and 
completion. 
surveys of 
households, 
qualitative 
assessment of 
participating HH 
surveys of 
households, 
qualitative 
assessment of 
participating HH, 
technical studies 
at baseline, 
mid-term 
and 
completion. 
at baseline, 
mid-term 
and 
completion. 
Small farmer 
HHs undergo 
the process of 
behavior 
change in 
agriculture and 
livelihoods 
Gov. consistent 
policies, 
strategies and 
interventions for 
sustainable and 
climate-resilient 
agriculture 
Project Goal 
Sustainably 
increased 
incomes, food 
security and 
nutrition status 
of small farmer 
households 
Project 
Objective 
Enabling 
environment 
for sustainable 
and climate 
resilient 
agriculture 
Component 
1:  Enabling 
environment 
for 
sustainable 
agricultural 
development  
51 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Outcome 1. 
Institutional 
capacity is 
strengthened 
through 
upgrading the 
Research and 
Development 
Centre in 
(name of 
island) and 
train staff of 
MACO 
enabling 
quality service 
to be 
developed and 
disseminate 
for adoption by 
small holder 
farmers 
Otput 1.1 
Policy 
knowledge 
products on 
sustainable 
and climate-
resilient 
agriculture 
Output 1.2 
Upgraded 
capacity of 
generating 
knowledge 
and 
technologies 
# of new and improved services in the agricultural institutional 
support system 
Sector studies, 
evaluations, 
programme M&E 
system, progress 
report, periodic 
surveys 
At baseline, 
mid-term 
and 
completion. 
Annual 
records and 
reports 
MOFMRA, 
MACO, all 
implementing 
parties 
# of services 
4 
10 
Effective 
interventions in 
conducive 
policy 
framework, 
instutions 
technical 
service support 
system 
strengthened 
and successful 
introduction and 
adoption of new 
and better 
technologies, 
knowledge and 
inputs 
# of policy-relevant knowledge products completed (research, 
study, strategy, bylaw) 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU and 
participating 
agencies 
# of policy products 
1 
3 
Types of facilities and equipment for generating knowledge and 
technologies (ARC in North) 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU, ARC and 
participating 
agencies 
# of facilities and 
equipment 
5 
9 
52 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Output 1.3. 
Packages of 
recommendati
ons developed 
for enhancing 
economic 
return for 
small holder 
farmers 
Output 1.4 
New 
technologies, 
quality inputs 
transferred to 
smallholder 
farmers 
Output 1.5 
 Agriculture 
Information 
and 
Communicatio
n Technology 
(AICT) Service 
Established 
Component 
2: Production 
enhancement 
Outcome 2 
Better/New 
# of new production techniques developed and tested 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU, ARC and 
participating 
agencies 
# of new and improved 
technologies 
35 
75 
# of extension linkage farmers trained in production practices 
and/or technologies 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU, ARC and 
participating 
agencies 
# of persons  
6,000  
# of farmers receiving high quality inputs and technologies  
2,000  
# of female farmers 
# of male farmers 
212  
188  
2,544  
2,256  
# of young farmers 
# of service platform on agricultural information and 
communication technology established 
# of service platform 
established 
1  
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU, MACO 
and 
participating 
agencies 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU, MACO 
and 
participating 
agencies 
% of HHs reporting adoption of new/improved inputs, 
technologies or practices 
Sector studies, 
evaluations, 
Annual 
PIU 
Effective 
training of small 
53 
farmers on 
enhanced and 
organized 
production, 
production 
forums formed 
and working 
with adopted 
technologies 
and GAPs, and 
increased 
access to 
agriculture 
financing 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
technologies, 
inputs adopted 
and 
productivity 
improved 
Output 2.1 
Beneficiaries 
trained on 
production 
practices 
and/or 
technologies 
Output 2.2 
Farmer 
production 
forums 
organized 
% of HHs 
20% 
70%  programme M&E 
system, progress 
report, periodic 
surveys 
# of farmers trained on production practices and/or 
technologies 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU 
# of males 
# of females 
# of youth 
940  
2,820  
1,060  
3,180  
400  
# of farmer forums organized and supported 
1,200  
# of forums established 
and supported 
50 
75 
# of farmers participating in production forum 
# Females 
# Males 
# Youth 
# Women in cluster 
leadership position 
980 
420 
280 
10 
1470 
630 
420 
15 
54 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Output 2.3 :  
Increased 
access to  
agriculture 
financing for 
small farmers 
Component 
3: Market 
connection 
Outcome 3 
Production 
decisions 
respond to 
market 
opportunities 
Output 3.1  
Supply 
contracts 
established 
between 
producers and 
private 
companies 
incl. 
commercial 
islands 
# of farmers accessing to agriculture financing  
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU, SDFC, 
MFLC 
#  of female farmers 
# of male farmers 
# of young farmers 
245  
1,176  
105  
70  
504  
336  
# of supported agribusiness enterprises reproting increase in 
profit 
Evaluation studies  Semi-annual 
PIU 
and annual 
reports 
# of agribusiness 
5 
15 
# of supply contracts increased 
# of supply contracts 
# of farmers engaged in supply contract or contract farming 
5 
15 
# of males 
# of females 
# of youth 
490 
210 
140 
735 
315 
210 
Porgramme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
Programme M&E 
system, periodic 
reports 
Semi-annual 
and annual 
reports 
PIU 
PIU 
PPP operational 
and supply 
contracts or 
contract farming 
established with 
effective 
marketing 
support 
55 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Appendix 3:  Proposed M&E formats 
3-1: AWPB/Progress report cost tables examples: 
Table 2.1-1: Detailed cost table by component and by financier 
Table N          Component N… 
Reporting Unit ...             Reporting Date:   xxx         Currency Unit: xxx        Implementing Period: xxx - xxx 
Implemented by: 
Unit 
Total project 
target 
Cumulative Achievement 
Achiev. Current Period 
Financing plan for the planning period 
Quantity  Cost 
Quantity 
Amount 
Quantity 
Amount 
IFAD 
Financier X 
Gov. 
Benef 
Quantity 
% of 
target  Value 
% 
of 
total  Quantity 
% of 
total 
Amount 
% of 
total 
Currency 
Currency 
Currency 
Currency 
Outputs/Activities 
Output/Activity 1 
xxx 
Sub-total 
Output/Activity 2 
xxx 
Sub-total 
Total 
56 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Table 3.1-2          AWPB/progress report xxxx, Summary by Components   
Reporting Unit: xxx             Reporting Date :xxx         Currency Unit: xxx      Implementing Period: xxx - xxx 
Cummulative 
Achiev. 
Achiev. Current Period 
Finance Resources of current year 
Components  
Total target 
values 
% of 
targets 
values 
% of targets 
IFAD 
Financer X 
Government 
Benef. 
Total 
Currency 
Currency 
Currency 
Currency  Currency 
Component 1  
Sub component 1.1 
… 
… 
… 
Sub-total 
Component 2 
Sub component 2.1 
… 
Sub-total 
GRAND TOTAL 
57 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Table 3.1-3          AWPB/progress report XXXX, Summary by Expenditure category   
Reporting Unit: xxx             Reporting Date :xxx         Currency Unit: xxx      Implementing Period: xxx - xxx 
Cummulative Achiev. 
Achiev. Current Period 
Finance Resources of current year 
values  % of targets 
values 
% of targets 
IFAD 
Financier X 
Government 
Benef. 
Total 
Currency 
Currency 
Currency 
Currency 
Currency 
Expenditures 
Total 
target 
Expenditure I 
Expenditure II 
Expenditure III… 
GRAND TOTAL 
BY 
EXPENDITURE 
58 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
3.2: Monitoring table of beneficiary participation and state of benefit (outreach) 
M&E Table：Annual Incremental/Cumulated Beneficiary Households and Activity Participants (Reporting: Semi-Annual and Annually) 
Report Unit：         
Reporting period：Date/Month/Year -- Date/Month/Year            
Components/Activities 
No. of 
islands 
No. of 
forums 
Number of beneficiary households* 
Number of direct participants (persons)  
Total  Poorest 
Poor  MI  Rich 
Total 
Male  Female 
Youth 
Production 
and 
Physical 
Works 
A 
B 
C 
D 
Total 
a 
b 
c 
Technical 
Training 
Total 
Total Programme 
59 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Appendix 4:  Outlines of first AWPB 
Component 1. Enabling Services 
  Sub-compnent 1.1. Knowledge and Technology 
No 
1 
1.1 
1.1.1 
Description of Activiites 
Category 
Outputs 
Budgeted 
2020-2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 000'USD 
IFAD 
Grant 
Govt 
Budget 
IFAD 
Loan  
Upgrading Agriculture R&D Center (North) 
Equipment and Goods 
Upgrading laboratory facilities (to measure water quality for irrigation, fertility 
of soils, plant tissue nutrition and identify plant diseases) 
I 
1 lab 
152 
137 
1.1.2 
1.1.3 
1.1.4 
1.1.5 
1.1.6 
1.1.7 
Improved greenhouse fitted hydroponic planting gutter space (for humid and 
hot climate, movable gutter to make space for operation lanes optimizing the 
use of floor space) 
Closed vertical production using artificial light /d 
Net houses against insects and shade fitted with hydroponic systems /e 
Net houses against bats /f 
Concrete apron for compost making 
Compost equipment /g 
Open field hydroponic production bucket system using drip (set covers 100 
m2) 
1.1.8 
1.1.9 
Reagents, fertilizer, pest control agents (chemicals and biological) 
1.1.10  Tools like refractometer, tissue and soil nutrition analysis meter, insect catch 
plates and microscope 
1.1.11  Open field drip irrigation 
1.1.12  Grafting equipment 
1.1.13  HDPE drain cell rainwater storage tank dug in to the soil 
1.1.14  Rainwater polythene collection sheet with pump sump 
1.1.15  Photovoltaic solar system (10 Kw) 
1.1.16  Battery backup (9 KW) 
Policy studies 
2 
Knowledge and Technology (AR&DC) 
3 
3.1  Adaptive research (inputs) 
3.1.1 
3.1.2 
3.1.3 
Identification of best varieties (various crops) 
Establishing best hydroponic fertilisation for greenhouse, closed system and 
field systems 
Establishing best drip fertigation for open fields (annual crops) 
II 
II 
60 
350m2 
100m2 
500m2 
100m2 
200m2 
1 unit 
5 units 
lumpsum 
lumpsum 
5 units 
5 units 
200m2 
500m2 
1 unit 
1 unit 
1 study 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
44 
35 
4 
1 
28 
25 
0 
5 
5 
13 
3 
30 
1 
14 
8 
30 
4 
4 
4 
40 
28 
3 
0 
23 
20 
0 
4 
4 
10 
2 
24 
0 
11 
6 
- 
3 
3 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
30 
- 
- 
- 
15 
4 
7 
1 
0 
6 
5 
0 
1 
1 
3 
1 
6 
0 
3 
2 
- 
0 
1 
1 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
3.1.4 
3.1.5 
3.1.6. 
3.1.7 
3.1.8 
Establishing best drip fertigation for open fields (perrenial crops) 
Identification of compost amounts for crop production in open field 
Development of IPM recommendations for the various crops in greenhouse, 
closed system and open field 
Development of organic pest recommendations for the various crops in 
greenhouse, closed system and open field 
Preparation of farm budget based on field records for each 
recommendations developed 
3.1.9 
Preparation of promotion material videos, pamphlet, prospectus for different 
systems  
3.2  Materials 
3.2.1 
4 
Planting material 
Knowledge and Technology Transfer 
4.1.1 
4.1.2 
4.1.3 
4.1  Technical assistance (UNOPS) 
Chief Technical Advisor 
Unspecified TA 
UNOPS management fee 
4.2  Technical assistance - extension 
4.2.1 
4.2.2 
4.2.3 
Development of the MGAP protocols for various crops produces 
Development of hand book for MGAP implementation 
Development of produce standards guided by FAO's Codex Alimentarius 
4.3  Technical assistance - other 
4.3.1 
Establishment of Agriculture Information and Communication Technology 
(AICT) platform 
4.3.2 
Illustrated training material 
4.4  Training and workshops 
4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.3 
4.4.4 
Project awareness on participating island 
Assisting farmers to form institutional frame work e.g. farmers' forum for 
decision making on production 
Assisting the Farmers' Forum to select an extension-linkage farmers (farmer 
to farmer) 
Training of selected link farmers (LF) 
Total 
Xxx 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
1 research 
10 products 
lumpsum 
1 consultant hired 
1 consultant hired 
1 consultant hired 
1 protocol 
1 handbook 
1 consultant hired 
1 platform 
established 
10 brochures 
prepared 
6 islands covered 
6 islands covered 
6 islands covered 
12 LFs 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
146 
66 
12 
10 
5 
22 
32 
15 
3 
3 
3 
6 
756 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
- 
3 
- 
- 
- 
10 
5 
22 
32 
15 
3 
3 
3 
6 
443 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
146 
66 
12 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
254 
- 
- 
60 
I 
II 
II 
II 
II 
61 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Xxx 
No 
Component 1. Enabling Services 
Sub-compnent 1.1. Input Supply 
Description of Activiites 
MACO institutional capacity building 
Equipment and goods 
1 
1.1 
1.1.1  Walking tractors and implements 
1.1.2  Rain water harvesting and storage systems 
1.1.3  Stock of inputs for MACO's supply retail outlet 
1.1.4  Provision of climate resilient planting materials 
Initial stock of greenhouses, closed vertical production units and net 
houses 
1.1.5 
1.1.6  Reusable plastic crates 
1.1.7  Solar/photovoltaic systems 
1.1.8  Drip fertigation system and delivery systems 
1.1.9 
1.2 
Initial stock of solar driven cold storage 
Training 
1.2.1  Training of shop keepers/agriculture extension staff 
1.3 
Technical assistance 
1.3.1  Agronomist/extension 
Total 
Category  Outputs 
Budgeted 
2020-2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 000'USD 
IFAD 
Loan 
Govt 
Budget 
MACO 
I 
II 
II 
10 units 
1 unit 
lumpsum 
lumpsum 
60 units 
lumpsum 
1 unit 
1 unit 
5 units 
3 
courses 
6 
persons 
25 
253 
122 
122 
314 
30 
57 
66 
177 
23 
228 
109 
109 
282 
27 
51 
59 
159 
30 
30 
3 
25 
12 
12 
31 
3 
6 
7 
18 
- 
102 
1,298 
102 
1,181 
- 
117 
0 
Component 2. Climate Smart Production 
No 
Description of Activiites 
Category 
Outputs 
1 
Financial products 
II 
1.1  Development of financial products 
1.2  Use of financial products 
Understanding and interpretation of agriculture business 
plans 
1.3 
Total 
1 consultant 
hired 
1 consultant 
hired 
1 consultant 
hired 
62 
Budgeted 
2020-2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 000'USD 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
MACO  SDFC 
Govt 
Bud 
6 
6 
6 
17 
6 
6 
6 
17 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Xxx 
No 
1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.1-
3.2 
Component 3. Market Connection 
Description of Activiites 
Category 
Outputs 
Training 
Food safety and quality (training to vendors at regional market hubs) 
Contract farming /b 
MGAP for CAI advisers 
Contract farming for CAI advisers 
Technical assistance 
Development of transparent pricing systems 
Provision of logistical management support to transport produce to 
Male 
 Market infrastructure investments 
Matching grants: duplication of production systems at the R&DC (to 
selected CAI at 20% of investment costs) 
Matching grants: upgrading  cold storage  on transport vessels (to 
selected CAI at 20% of investment costs) 
Contribution of CAI for market infrastucture investments 
Total 
II 
II 
III 
1 course 
1 course 
1 course 
1 course 
1 consultant 
hired 
lumpsum 
lumpsum 
1 cold storage 
Budgeted 
2020-
2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 000'USD 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Private 
Invest 
Govt 
Budget 
0.253 
0.25 
5.06 
6.08 
0.253 
0.25 
5.06 
6.08 
6 
1 
9 
30 
156 
213 
6 
1 
6 
20 
- 
43 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
11 
- 
14 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
156 
156 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
63 
Component 4. Programme Management 
Description of Activiites 
Category 
Outputs 
Budgeted 
2020-2021, 
000'USD 
Financing Source, 
000'USD 
IFAD 
Grant 
Govt 
Budget 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
No 
1 
2 
2.1 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
4 
4.1 
Equipment and Goods 
Technical Assistance 
Internal audit 
Staff Training 
Project management 
Business management 
Gender focus 
Innovation enhancement 
Study tours 
Integrated M&E and KM 
 Studies and impact assessment 
4.1.1  Development of MIS system 
4.1.2  Baseline study 
4.1.3  Thematic studies 
4.2 
KM 
Information dissemination seminars and workshops (start-
up) 
4.2.1 
Salaries 
5 
Project Director 
5.1 
Planning and admin officer 
5.2 
Policy and institution specialists 
5.3 
Agriculturalist/extension 
5.4 
Business development specialist 
5.5 
Gender and targeting officer 
5.6 
M&E and KM officer 
5.7 
Financial management specialist 
5.8 
Accountant 
5.9 
5.1 
Accountant assistant 
5.11  Procurement officer 
5.12  Support staff 
Performace-based incentives (about 20% of base salary 
based on staff performance) 
Allowances 
Operational expenditures 
6 
7 
8 
25 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
10 
10 
20 
3 
3 
24 
21 
21 
21 
21 
21 
19 
21 
19 
12 
19 
49 
36 
8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10 
20 
3 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
36 
- 
25 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
10 
- 
- 
- 
- 
24 
21 
21 
21 
21 
21 
19 
21 
19 
12 
19 
49 
- 
8 
I 
II 
II 
II 
II 
IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 
lumpsum 
contract 
1 course 
1 course 
1 course 
1 course 
1 tour 
MIS 
established 
1 study 
conducted 
1 study 
conducted 
lumpsum 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
1 person hired 
5 persons hired 
PBS 
established 
per annum 
64 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Office running costs (including for PSC meetings, 
meetings of tender committees, travel and stationeries) 
Office rent 
8.1 
8.2 
Total 
lumpsum 
office rented 
11 
5 
414 
- 
- 
72 
11 
5 
342 
65 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Appendix 5:  First procurement plan  
66 
ConsultantsCountry/Organisation : MALDIVES/PIU-MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, MARINE RESOURCES & AGRICULTUREProject/Programme : MALDIVES AGRO-BUSINESS PROJECTLoan/Grant  # : PROCURMENT PLAN (CONSULTANTS))Procurment Period :May 2020 to October   2021BASIC DATABid DocumentsBidding PeriodBid EvalutionContract FinalizationDescriptionComponent Lot NumberIssue # of Invitaion for BidsEstimated Amount IN USD ('000)Prourement MethodPrior or   Post         ReviewPlan Vs. ActualDate proposedDate No-ObjectionBid Invitaion  DateBid Closing OpeningBid Evalution ReportNo ObjectionContract Amount In US $Date Contract AwardDate Contract SignatureTime line Policy StudiesI MAP/cons/ 2020-21/0130.00                   Individual ConsultantPrior reviewPlan N.AJun-20ActualAdaptive Research Studies - 8 NosI MAP/cons/ 2020-21/0228.00                   Individual Consultants Post ReviewPlan N.AJun-20ActualTA- Chief Technical Advisor- UNOPSI MAP/cons/ 2020-21/03146.00                  Single SourcePrior ReviewPlan N.AJul-20ActualTA- Unspecified- UNOPSI MAP/cons/ 2020-21/0466.00                   Single SourcePrior ReviewPlan N.AJul-20ActualDevelopment of produce standards guided by FAO's Codex AlimentariusI MAP/cons/ 2020-21/0522.00                   Individual Consultant Prior ReviewPlan N.ASep-20ActualAgronomist/ Extension - 6 personsIMAP/cons/ 2020-21/06102.00                  Individual Consultants Post ReviewPlan N.AJul-20ActualDevelopment of Financial Products - 3 personsIIMAP/cons/ 2020-21/0718.00                   Individual ConsultantsPost ReviewPlan N.AOct-20ActualDevelopment of Transparent Pricing SystemIIIMAP/cons/ 2020-21/086.00                     Individual ConsultantPost ReviewPlan N.AOct-20ActualBaseline StudyIVMAP/cons/ 2020-21/0920.00                   QCBSPrior ReviewPlan N.AJul-20ActualMIS DevelopmentIVMAP/cons/ 2020-21/1010.00                   QBSPost ReviewPlan Jun-20ActualThematic StudiesIVMAP/cons/ 2020-21/113.00                     Individual ConsultantPost ReviewPlan N.AJul-20ActualInternal AuditIVMAP/cons/ 2020-21/123.00                     QBSPost ReviewPlan N.AJul-20ActualTotal Cost454.00                   
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
67 
Goods / WorksCountry/Organisation : MALDIVES/PIU-MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, MARINE RESOURCES & AGRICULTUREProject/Programme : MALDIVES AGRO-BUSINESS PROJECTLoan/Grant  # : PROCURMENT PLAN (GOODS)Procurment Period :May 2020 to October   2021BASIC DATABid DocumentsBidding PeriodBid EvalutionContract FinalizationDescriptionLot NumberIssue # of Invitaion for BidsEstimated Amount in USD'000Prourement MethodPrior or   Post         ReviewPlan Vs. ActualDate propsedDate No-ObjectionBid Invitaion  DateBid Closing OpeningBid Evalution ReportNo ObjectionContract Amount In US $Date Contract AwardDate Contract SignatureTime line Equipment & Goods for Research LabMAP/Goods/2020-21/1152.00                National Competitive BiddingPrior ReviewPlan JunJunJunJulJulJulJul-20ActualEquipment for Green HouseMAP/Goods/2020-21/2215.00                National Competitive BiddingPrior ReviewPlan JulJulJulAugAugAugAug-20ActualPlanting MaterialMAP/Goods/2020-21/34.00                   Direct ContractingPost ReviewPlan N.AN.AN.AN.AN.AN.AAug-20ActualTractors & implements- MACOMAP/Goods/2020-21/425.00                 National Competitive BiddingPrior ReviewPlan AugAugSepSepSepSepSep-20ActualRainwater Harvesting and storage systems- MACOMAP/Goods/2020-21/5253.00                National Competitive BiddingPrior ReviewPlan AugAugSepSepSepSepSep-20ActualInputs & planting materials- MACOMAP/Goods/2020-21/6243.00                National Competitive BiddingPrior ReviewPlan SepSepOctOctOctOctOct-20ActualGreenhouses & equipment-MACOMAP/Goods/2020-21/7467.00                National Competitive BiddingPrior ReviewPlan SepSepOctOctOctOctOct-20ActualSolar driven Cold storage-MACOMAP/Goods/2020-21/8177.00                National Competitive BiddingPrior ReviewPlan OctOctNovNovNovNovNov-20ActualDuplication of Production systemsMAP/Goods/2020-21/99.00                   Local ShoppingPost ReviewPlan N.AN.AN.AN.AN.AN.ADec-20ActualUpgrading Cold storageMAP/Goods/2020-21/1030.00                 Local ShoppingPrior ReviewPlan N.AN.AN.AN.AN.AN.ADec-20ActualOctOctNovNovDecDecTotal Cost1,575.00             
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Appendix 6: Detailed cost tables by component 
68 
Table 1. Knowledge and TechnologyDetailed Costs(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies ('000)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5Total I. Investment CostsA. Upgrading Agriculture Research Center (North) /a1. Equipment and GoodsUpgrading laboratory facilities /blumpsum1----1150.000152----152Improved greenhouse fitted hydroponic planting gutter space /cm2350----35012544----44Closed vertical production using artificial light /dm2100----10034535----35Net houses against insects and shade fitted with hydroponic systems /em2500----50074----4Net houses against bats /fm2100----10061----1Concrete apron for compost makingm2200----20014028----28Compost equipment /gset1----125.00025----25Open field hydroponic production bucket system using drip (set covers 100 m2) /hset55---103500---0Reagents, fertilizer, pest control agents (chemicals and biological)lumpsum1111155.5006666629Tools like refractometer, tissue and soil nutrition analysis meter, insect catch plates and microscopelumpsum1----15.0005----5Open field drip irrigationset5----52.50013----13Grafting equipmentset5----55003----3HDPE drain cell rainwater storage tank dug in to the soilm3200----20015030----30Rainwater polythene collection sheet with pump sumpm2500----50011----1Photovoltaic solar system (10 Kw)set1----113.80014----14Battery backup (9 KW)set1----17.8008----8Subtotal Equipment and Goods3686666392B. Policy studieslumpsum1111-430.00030313233-126C. Knowledge and Technology (ARC)1. Adaptive research (inputs)Identification of best varieties (various crops)lumpsum1111153.5004444419Establishing best hydroponic fertilisation for greenhouse, closed system and field systemslumpsum1111153.5004444419Establishing best drip fertigation for open fields (annual crops)lumpsum1111153.5004444419Establishing best drip fertigation for open fields (perrenial crops)lumpsum1111153.5004444419Identification of compost amounts for crop production in open fieldlumpsum1111153.5004444419Development of IPM recommendations for the various crops in greenhouse, closed system and open fieldlumpsum1111153.5004444419Development of organic pest recommendations for the various crops in greenhouse, closed system and open fieldlumpsum1111153.5004444419Preparation of farm budget based on field records for each recommendations developedlumpsum1111153.5004444419Preparation of promotion material videos, pamphlet, prospectus for different systems /ilumpsum1111153.5004444419Subtotal Adaptive research (inputs)32333434351682. MaterialsPlanting material /jlumpsum1111153.5004444419Subtotal Knowledge and Technology (ARC)3536373839186D. Knowledge and Technology Transfer1. Technical assistance (UNOPS)Chief Technical Advisorpers-month1212---2412.000146149---295Unspecified TApers-month55---1013.0006667---133UNOPS management feepers-month1212---24Subtotal Technical assistance (UNOPS)223229---4522. Technical assistance - extensionDevelopment of the MGAP protocols for various crops produceslumpsum11---210.0001010---21Development of hand book for MGAP implementationlumpsum11---25.00055---10Development of produce standards guided by FAO's Codex Alimentariuspers-month2----211.00022----22Subtotal Technical assistance - extension3716---533. Technical assistance - otherEstablishment of Agriculture Information and Communication Technology (AICT) platformlumpsum11---232.0003233---66Illustrated training material /klumpsum11---214.5001515---30Subtotal Technical assistance - other4748---954. Training and workshopsProject awareness on participating islandisland61010--26500355--14Assisting farmers to form institutional frame work e.g. farmers' forum for decision making on productionisland61010--26500355--14Assisting the Farmers' Forum to select an extension-linkage farmers (farmer to farmer)island61010--26500355--14Training of selected link farmers (LF)1LF/island122020--5250061011--27Subtotal Training and workshops152627--68Subtotal Knowledge and Technology Transfer32331927--668Total75639210277451,372 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
69 
_________________________________\a To undertake adaptive and collaborative climate smart research\b To measure water quality for irrigation, fertility of soils, plant tissue nutrition and identify plant diseases\c For humid and hot climate, movable gutter to make space for operation lanes optimizing the use of floor space.     Unit cost cover installation of foundation, floor, packaging, bath and toilet facilities worth about $7000.\d Unit cost cover installation of foundation, floor, packaging, bath and toilet facilities worth about $7000.\e To be used for research cultivation spices and herbs and forestry products including chilli, different herbs, agro forestry products like nuts and fruits and other identified forest product which can be cultivated. /It will also be used to determind     spacing of trees intercroped with field crops.\f For frutis research production including mango, papaya, pasion fruit, banana, Noni.\g Compost equipment including small orchard tractor and full set of implement, trailer and compost making equipment-chopper and turner.\h For different crops and fruits\i Prepare promotion material videos, pamphlets, prospectus for different systems i.e. greenhouse, closed system, open fields and agro forestry. All material should include simple benefit cost analysis and for capital investment more detailed financial     analysis. The prospectus will include scenarios for small farmers using own equity, purchase-hire, and/or debt financing or a mix of the different type of financing.\j This work should make use of planting material avaliable form international research institutions and from the commercial market. Identifying and developing hybrid coconuts will receive special attention.\k Also for use in the AICT 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
70 
Table 2. Input SupplyDetailed Costs(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies ('000)Disb.UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalAcct. I. Investment CostsA. MACO institutional capacity building1. Equipment and goodsWalking tractors and implementslumpsum10----102.50025----25EG_DARain water harvesting and storage systemslumpsum1----1250.000253----253EG_DAStock of inputs for MACO's supply retail outletlumpsum1----1120.000122----122EG_DAProvision of climate resilient planting materialslumpsum1----1120.000122----122EG_DAInitial stock of greenhouses, closed vertical production units and net houses /alumpsum1----1310.000314----314EG_DAReusable plastic crateslumpsum1----130.00030----30EG_DASolar/photovoltaic systemslumpsum1----156.00057----57EG_DADrip fertigation system and delivery systemslumpsum1----165.00066----66EG_DAInitial stock of solar driven cold storagelumpsum1----1175.000177----177EG_DASubtotal Equipment and goods1,165----1,1652. TrainingTraining of shop keepers/agriculture extension staffcourse333--910.000303132--93TRW_DA3. Technical assistanceAgronomist/extension /bpers-month84848484844201.200102105107110113536TA_DATotal1,2981361391101131,795_________________________________\a 60 units\b The ARC hire and train 6 agronomist/extension staff (eventually to be staff of MACO when established. The project will finance 100% Y1, 90% Y2, 80% Y3, 70% in Y4 and 50% in Y5. 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
71 
Table 3. Climate Smart ProductionDetailed Costs(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies ('000)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5Total I. Investment CostsA. Training of farmersIPM training and use&handling of chemical crop protection agentscourse-122020-52250-355-14MGAP and group certificationcourse-122020-52250-355-14Management of fertilizer usecourse-122020-52250-355-14Pruningcourse-122020-52250-355-14Compost makingcourse-122020-52250-355-14Rain harvestingcourse-122020-52250-355-14Use and management of field drip irrigationcourse-122020-52250-355-14Use and management of field hydroponiccourse-122020-52250-355-14Graftingcourse-122020-52250-355-14Mulchingcourse-122020-52250-355-14Refresher trainingcourse--12202052250--35614Subtotal Training of farmers-3156606153B. Financial productsDevelopment of financial productspers-month0.50.5---111.00066---11Use of financial productspers-month0.50.5---111.00066---11Understanding and interpretation of agriculture business planspers-month0.50.5---111.00066---11Subtotal Financial products1717---34C. Production investmentsMatching grants /alumpsum-11--2350.000-350350--700SDFC financinglumpsum-2611,6501,6501,7005,261Subtotal Production investments-6112,0001,6501,7005,961Total176592,0561,7101,7066,148_________________________________\a Up to 20% of the investment value. To substitute farmers equity for investments if deem necessary. The project will provide matching grants amounting to about USD 700K or approx 500 investment proposals in the first 2 years of the MAP to promote energy saving and climate change adaptation technologies.\a Up to 20% of the investment value. To substitute farmers equity for investments if deem necessary. The project will provide matching grants amounting to about USD 700K or approx 500 investment proposals in the first 2 years of the MAP to promote energy saving and climate change adaptation technologies. 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
72 
Table 4. Market ConnectionDetailed Costs(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies ('000)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5Total I. Investment CostsA. Market Connection1. Equipment and goodsValue-chain infrastructure: cold storage (MACO)lumpsum-1111435.000-363738391512. TrainingFood safety and quality /acourse1333313250011113Contract farming /bcourse17816-322500224-9MGAP for CAI adviserscourse1111-45.0005555-21Contract farming for CAI adviserscourse11---26.00066---12Subtotal Training12148111453. Technical assistanceDevelopment of transparent pricing systemspers-month0.50.5---111.00066---11Provision of logistical management support to transport produce to Malelumpsum121--4Subtotal Technical assistance681--154. Market infrastructure investmentsMatching grants: duplication of production systems at the ARC /clumpsum1491-159.000936819-135Matching grants: upgrading  cold storage  on transport vessels /dlumpsum11111530.0003030303030150Contribution of CAI and MFLS for market infrastucture investmentslumpsum1562644441561201,140Subtotal Market infrastructure investments1953305551951501,425Total2133886022441901,637_________________________________\a Training to vendors at regional market hubs\b Support for Commercial Agriculture Islands (CAI) to engaged farmer from other island in contract farming\c To selected CAI at up to 20% of investment costs.\d To selected CAI at up to 20% of investment costs. 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
73 
Table 5. Programme ManagementDetailed Costs(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including Contingencies ('000)UnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5Total I. Investment CostsA. Equipment and Goodslumpsum1----125.00025----25B. Technical Assistance1. Internal auditlumpsum1111153.00033333162. Short-term TA /alumpsum--11135.000--55616Subtotal Technical Assistance3399932C. Staff TrainingProject managementlumpsum11---23.00033---6Business managementlumpsum11---23.00033---6Gender focuslumpsum11---23.00033---6Innovation enhancementlumpsum11---23.00033---6Study tourslumpsum1-1-1310.00010-11-1132Subtotal Staff Training221211-1157D. Integrated M&E and KM1. Studies and impact assessmentDevelopment of MIS systemstudy10----10Baseline studystudy20----20Mid-term reviewstudy--16--16Project completion reportstudy----2828Thematic studiesstudy111--33.000333--9Subtotal Studies and impact assessment33319-28842. KMPublications and printing /blumpsum-111143.000-333313Information dissemination seminars and workshops /clumpsum1111153.0003333316Subtotal KM3667729Subtotal Integrated M&E and KM36926735113Total Investment Costs8725451555227 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Table 5 continued 
74 
II. Recurrent CostsA. SalariesProject Directorpers-month1212121212602.0002425262627128Planning and admin officerpers-month1212121212601.7002121222223109Policy and institution specialistpers-month1212121212601.7002121222223109Agriculturalist/extensionpers-month1212121212601.7002121222223109Business development specialistpers-month1212121212601.7002121222223109Targeting gender officerpers-month1212121212601.7002121222223109M&E and KM officerpers-month1212121212601.6001920202121102Financial management specialistpers-month1212121212601.7002121222223109Accountantpers-month1212121212601.6001920202121102Accountant assistantpers-month1212121212601.000121213131364Procurement officerpers-month1212121212601.6001920202121102Support staffpers-month60606060603008004950515254255Subtotal Salaries2672742812882951,405B. Performance-based incentives /dlumpsum11111536.0003636363636180C. Allowancesper annum1111158.0008899943D. Operational expendituresOffice running costs /elumpsum11111510.000111111111256Office rentlumpsum1111155.0005566628Subtotal Operational expenditures161617171884Total Recurrent Costs3273353423503581,711Total4143603873654121,938_________________________________\a On a need basis (gender, youth, IT, environmental issues, climate change, KM, etc.)\b Content will be developed under Component 1.\c Includes start-up, completion and annual workshops, M&E, and exchange of project experiences.\d About 15% of base salary based on staff performance (professional staff).\e Including for PSC meetings, meetings of tender committees, travel and stationeries 
Republic of Maldives 
Maldives Agribusiness Programme (MAP) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
76 
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Overall Summary
1/7
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Substantial
Substantial
No risk envisaged
Moderate
Low
No risk envisaged
High
Moderate
High
Low
No risk envisaged
Policy Development and Implementation
Moderate
Low
Environment and Climate Context
High
Substantial
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Substantial
High
Low
High
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Budgeting
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Internal Controls
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
Low
Low
No risk envisaged
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Accounting and financial reporting
High
Substantial
External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
Moderate
Low
No risk envisaged
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Substantial
Low
Biodiversity Conservation
No risk envisaged
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Moderate
Low
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
Risk Category / Subcategory
2/7
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
There is full political commitment for MAP
Governance
Risk:
Weak agriculture sector governance and institutions may undermine
implementation.
Mitigations:
1. institutional strengthening 2. Island Farmer Forums 3.
FM/procurement compliance 4. internal/external audit
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
Low
Low
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
No risk envisaged
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
No risk envisaged
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Macroeconomic
No risk envisaged
MAP will have a very positive macroeconomic impact by reducing the
current account deficit
Fragility and Security
Risk:
High
High
High
High
The global spread of coronavirus will substantially reduce tourism
income, with adverse effects on the Government budget. The fiscal
deficit will expand sharply in the short term.
Mitigations:
This risk is exogenous and cannot be mitigated. However, MAP will
increase national food production and help to reduce the current
account deficit.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Moderate
Low
No risk envisaged
MAP is fully aligned with Government policy
3/7
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Government policy for agri. sector is evolving. Weak implementation
of Agriculture Development Master Plan.
Mitigations:
1. policy strengthening 2. sector incentive framework 3. investment
across sector 4. modernisation/commercialisation 5. Master Plan
alignment 
6. RBA partnerships
Environment and Climate Context
High
Substantial
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Low
Low
Groundwater over-extraction, misuse of fertiliser and pesticides,
coastal erosion are risks.
Mitigations:
1. rainwater harvesting 2. water treatment protocols 3. balanced
fertiliser use 4. IPM/biological control 5. resilient planting materials 6.
intercropping with legumes 7. improved soil productivity 8. improved
soil water retention
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
High
High
High
High
Maldives is vulnerable to unpredictable rainfall, global warming, sea
level rise, extreme weather events.
Mitigations:
1. drought tolerant cropping 2. vertical hydroponic systems 3. enclosed
greenhouses 4. water harvesting 5. drip irrigation/efficiency 6. island-
level integrative approach 7. flood-proofing of infrastructure 8. solar
energy systems 9. CC institutional awareness
Project Scope
Project Relevance
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
MAP is well aligned with the strategic objectives of the CSN and with
all relevant national policies and strategies, such as the Agricultural
Development Master Plan and the National Spatial Plan.
Technical Soundness
No risk envisaged
The project will adapt and introduce climate smart technological
solutions suitable for the Maldives, which overcome land/soil
constraints and mitigate against climate change, which are well-tested
and available globally.
4/7
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
MOFMRA has weak programme implementation capacity.
Mitigations:
1. PIU with strong appointed staff 2. UNOPS providing robust TA 3.
intensive IFAD oversight/support
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Low
Low
Low
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
No risk envisaged
MAP M&E will benefit from strong Technical Assistance
Financial Management
Organization and Staffing
Risk:
Risk of Inadequate FM staff in MoFMRA. 
Familiarity with IFAD processes and reporting formats.
Mitigations:
• Adequate finance staff with clear job description and accountability
lines. 
• Specific training. 
• Comprehensive, user-friendly software and PIM.
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Budgeting
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk of not adherence to timely AWPB preparation with activities by
components, financiers and cost categories and monitoring physical
and financial progress.
Mitigations:
• To ensure proper process of preparation of AWPB using the bottom-
up approach and regular review of the physical and financial progress 
• Budgets will be developed by each implementing agency using the
agreed work planning templates and as defined in the Financial
Management Manual. 
• The project cost tables will serve as a reference for the preparation
of AWPBs. 
• The PIU will need to provide their own annual work plan supporting
budgets. These will be used to develop the cash flow of the project.
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Possible delays in providing funds by the Govt and the PIU to the
implementing partners
5/7
Mitigations:
• The PIU will ensure that the fund flow for the project is timely. The
FM staff of the PIU will carry out review of the implementing partners
for fund requirement
Internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The risk of Inadequacy of internal controls for the type of activities to
be carried out by the project
Mitigations:
• Segregation of fiduciary -sensitive duties; 
• Periodic reconciliations; 
• Restricting access to accounting files and documents; 
• Periodic count of inventories and fixed assets.
Accounting and financial reporting
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Accounting: The risk that accounting systems – including polices and
standards – are not integrated and reliable, leading to inaccuracies in
financial records. 
Reporting: The financial reporting is to be comprehensive and timely
and facilitate decision making. The lack of appropriate financial
information reduces its utility for monitoring implementation of
activities.
Mitigations:
• Accountant will need to be proficient in the use of the accounting
software; 
• Back-up of accounting records; 
• Use of registry of fixed assets; 
• Project Implementation Manual (PIM) to detail reporting and
monitoring requirements and rules; 
• Use of financial statements templates consistent with IFAD reporting
requirements.
External Audit
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that independent and competent oversight of the Project
financial statements is not in place or performed timely leading to
possible misrepresentation of the financial results and/or suspension
or other remedies due to compliance breaches.
Mitigations:
• The auditor will be the Office of the Auditor General, Maldives 
• Ensure reporting as required by IFAD Guidelines 
• Prompt implementation of auditor’s recommendations.
6/7
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
No risk envisaged
Moderate
Low
No risk envisaged
Accountability and Transparency
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
MOFMRA and PIU have limited procurement capacity. Standard
bidding documents not available for all procurement methods. Bid
submission timelines differ from those required by IFAD.
Mitigations:
1. full-time procurement specialist 2. strengthened PIU capacity 3.
strong TA support from UNOPS 4. use IFAD standard bid documents
5. use IFAD bid submission timelines 6. intensive IFAD
oversight/support
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Public Procurement Processes
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Substantial
Low
Biodiversity Conservation
no risk envisaged
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
The programme may damage fragile groundwater aquifers.
Mitigations:
1. rainwater harvesting 2. water treatment protocols 3. balanced
fertiliser use 4. IPM and biological control 5. discourage groundwater
extraction
Cultural Heritage
no risk envisaged
Indigenous People
No risk envisaged
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
No risk envisaged
No risk envisaged
no risk envisaged
7/7
Labour and Working Conditions
No risk envisaged
no risk envisaged
Community Health and Safety
No risk envisaged
no risk envisaged
Physical and Economic Resettlement
No risk envisaged
no risk envisaged
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
No risk envisaged
no risk envisaged
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Risk:
The programme may increase the exposure of farming to climate
variability and hazards due to the increasing impacts of climate
change.
Mitigations:
1. drought tolerant cropping 2. vertical hydroponic systems 3. enclosed
greenhouses 4. water harvesting 5. drip irrigation/efficiency 6. island-
level integrative approach 7. flood-proofing of infrastructure 8. solar
energy systems 9. CC institutional awareness
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Insufficient consultation with stakeholders may undermine
implementation and achievement of objectives.
Mitigations:
1. inclusive targeting 2. intensive stakeholder involvement 3.
consultation in planning/execution 4. Island Farmer Forums 5.
participatory nature of ELFs 6. intensive IFAD oversight/support 7.
annual institutional assessments 8. outsourced evaluations
Stakeholder Grievances
no risk envisaged
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
No risk envisaged
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit strategy and sustainability 
Exit strategy. The programme’s exit strategy is to systematically ensure the financial, 
sectoral,  institutional,  nutritional,  technical  and  environmental  sustainability  of  its 
activities, to the point where programme interventions are no longer required. 
Sustainability.  The  design  of  MAP  integrates  substantial  elements  to  assure  the 
financial,  institutional,  nutritional,  technical  and  environmental  sustainability  of  the 
programme. 
  Financial sustainability. The underlying commercial business relationships to be 
fostered  among  input  supply,  extension,  financing,  production  and  markets, 
supplemented  by  enhanced  logistics,  provide  a  solid  foundation  for  financial 
sustainability. Once profitable business relationships among value chain actors 
are  structured  and  operational,  programme  interventions  will  no  longer  be 
required. The market is significant and assured, considering that 95% of food 
is currently imported, that local demand is rising rapidly as incomes increase, 
and  that  the  tourism  sector  imports  substantial  volumes  of  agricultural 
commodities. 
  Sectoral  sustainability.  MAP  will  contribute  to  developing  a  structured  policy 
environment  and  incentive  framework  for  the  agriculture  sector  led  by 
MOFMRA, a strengthened institutional support system through MACO and ARC, 
and  group-based  ELF  extension  through  ARC  and  commercial  islands.  The 
entire  agriculture  sector  will  thus  be  upgraded,  with  nationwide  benefits 
outlasting the programme. 
 
Institutional  sustainability.  The  representation,  advocacy  and  operational 
functions of Island and Regional Farmer Forums will ensure the sustainability 
of  the  strengthened  interface  of  farmers  with  MOFMRA  and  with  services, 
financing,  logistics  and  markets.  Once  these  Forums  have  developed 
relationships across the value chain, incremental programmatic support will not 
be required. 
  Nutritional  sustainability.  MAP  will  introduce  and  modernise  nutritionally-
sensitive value chains for vegetables, fruits and root crops, all of which provide 
improved  nutrition  and  reduce  micronutrient  deficiencies,  combined  with 
nutrition  awareness  raising.  Once  these  value  chains  are  well  established  at 
production and market levels, external intervention will no longer be required, 
also  considering  that  many  consumers  are  demanding  food  products  with 
better nutritional characteristics. 
  Technical sustainability. Climate-smart technological solutions suitable for the 
Maldives,  which  overcome  land/soil/water  constraints  and  mitigate  against 
climate change, are available globally. Once they are tested, adapted to local 
conditions, and successfully demonstrated, their sustainability is not perceived 
to be a risk. 
  Environmental  sustainability.  MAP 
to  be 
environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient across the board. Indeed, in 
many  cases,  the  soil/water/chemicals-efficient  production  technologies  to  be 
introduced will replace current activities that are ecologically unsustainable and 
damaging. 
investments  are  designed 
Maldives
Maldives Agribusiness Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
12 - 29 November 2019
Document Date:
22/06/2020
Project No.
2000002416
Report No.
0000
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/2
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$3,264,000
N/A
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$3,264,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
2/2
The Project satisfies all the criteria to be gender transformative. The Theory of Change and Situational Analysis are robust with detailed pathways and funds allocated
to produce gender transformative outcomes.
Nutrition
The Project meets all the criteria to be a nutrition sensitive project with a potential to produce nutritional outcomes for target groups. The Project has also allocated the
necessary funds and human resources to address the nutritional challenges in the project areas.
Youth
The Project does not meet all the criteria to qualify as a youth sensitive project.
 No social inclusion themes
