Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date:  12-Oct 2017 
Project No. 
Report No: 
2000001175 
4530 MZ  
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
B.  Rationale 
II.  Project description 
A. 
Project area and target group 
B.  Development objective and impact indicators 
C.  Outcomes/Components 
D. 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
III.  Project implementation 
A. 
Approach 
B.  Organizational framework 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
D. 
E. 
Financial management, procurement and governance 
Supervision 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A. 
B. 
Project costs 
Project financing 
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.  Sustainability 
iii 
iii 
iv 
vi 
vii 
xiii 
1 
1 
4 
6 
6 
10 
10 
18 
22 
22 
22 
23 
24 
26 
26 
28 
28 
29 
29 
28 
i 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: 
Appendix 2: 
Appendix 3: 
Appendix 4: 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Appendix 7: 
Appendix 8: 
Appendix 9: 
Appendix 10: 
Appendix 11: 
Appendix 12: 
Appendix 14: 
Appendix 15: 
Country and rural context background 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Detailed project description 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Procurement 
Project cost and financing 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Draft project implementation manual 
Compliance with IFAD policies 
Contents of the Project Life File 
Financial Management Assessment Questionnaire (FMAQ) 
31 
45 
65 
69 
107 
113 
119 
133 
139 
157 
195 
197 
211 
212 
ii 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
List of Tables 
Table 1: REFP Risks, Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
Table 2: Project components by financiers 
Table 6: An Illustration of Physical Implementation Progress Reporting Template 
Table 7: An illustration IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) 
Table 8: Summary of FM Risks and mitigating actions 
Table 9: FM Actions Summary 
Table 10: Summary of Procurement Risks /Findings and Actions (Risk Mitigation Matrix)134 
Table 11: Thresholds for Procurement and Review Methods 
Table 12: Inflation and Exchange rates for COSTAB 
Table 13: REFP breakdown components and financiers 
Table 15: Expenditure accounts by financier 
Table 17: Expenditure accounts by components – Totals including contingencies 
Table 19: Project Components by Year - Base costs 
Table 20: Project Components by Years - Investment/Recurrent Costs 
Table 21: Detailed cost table - sub-component 1.1 
Table 23: Detailed cost table - sub-component 1.3. 
Table 25: Detailed cost table – component 2.2 
Table 27: Detailed cost table - component 3 (continued) 
Table 29: Detailed cost table - component 3 (continued 3) 
Table 31: Income analysis 
Table 32: Loan structure and IFAD contribution 
Table 34: Sensitivity Analysis 
Table 35: REFP Economic Analysis 
Table 36: Full sensitivity analysis 
Table 38: Tomato shade net, 0.1ha – Economic analysis 
Table 39: Cassava small processing unit – Financial budget 
Table 41: Cassava farm, 1ha – Financial budget (without project) 
Table 43: Cassava farm, 1ha – Economic analysis 
Table 45: Livestock – Financial budget (with project) 
Table 47: Fishery model – Financial budget (without project) 
Table 48: Fishery model - Financial budget (with project) 
Table 50: Naval carpenter – Financial budget 
Table 52: Aquaculture - Production model 
Table 53: Aquaculture – Financial budget 
Table 54: Aquaculture – Economic Analysis 
Table 56: Small barbershop - Economic Analysis 
Table 58: Maize crop model 
Table 59: Crop pattern - maize and beans farm 
Table 60: Maize and beans farm - Financial budget 
Table 62: Soya beans crop model 
i 
26 
29 
115 
117 
124 
129 
136 
139 
140 
141 
143 
145 
146 
147 
149 
151 
153 
155 
160 
161 
162 
164 
165 
167 
168 
170 
172 
174 
176 
177 
179 
181 
182 
183 
185 
187 
187 
188 
190 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Table 63: Sesame crop model 
Table 64: Sesame and soya crop pattern 
Table 65: Sesame and soya beans farm - Financial budget 
191 
191 
192 
ii 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
USD1.0 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 000 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
Mozambique Metical (MZN) 
60.0 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
iii 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
African  Development Bank 
Associaçao Moçambicana dos Operadores de Microfinanças (Mozambique Microfinance 
Accumulating Savings and Credit Association 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Banco de Moçambique 
Country Strategy and Project Evaluation 
Country Strategic Opportunities Paper 
Confederation of Business Associations of Mozambique 
Division of Agricultural Research, Statistics and Policy 
Provincial Directorate of Economy and Finance 
Development Policy Operation 
European Union 
Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations 
Fundo de Apoio a Reabilitçao da Economia 
Sociedade de Gastao e Financiamento para a Promocao de Pequenas Projectos de 
ADB   
AMOMIF 
Association) 
ASCA  
AWPB 
BOM   
BNI              Banco Nacional de Investimento 
CBO   
Community Based Organization 
CHAPANI  Coastal HIV/Aids Prevention and Nutrition Improvement Project 
CSPE  
COSOP 
CTA   
DARSP 
DPEF  
DPO   
EU 
FAO   
FARE  
GAPI   
Investimentos sarl 
GoM   
HH 
ICB 
ICO 
IIAM   
INE 
IOE 
IOF 
KM 
LOC   
mCel   
MG 
M.I.S.  
MASA 
MEF   
MSME 
MTR   
MZN   
M&E   
PAFIR 
PARP  
PCR   
PEDSA 
PFI 
PIM 
PMU   
PNISA 
PQG   
PRODIRPA  Securing Artisanal Fishers' Resource Rights Project 
PROMER  Rural Markets Promotion Programme 
ProParceria  Community Investor Partnership Project 
PROPESCA Artisanal Fisheries Promotion Project 
PROSUL  Pro-Poor Value Chain Development Project in the Maputo and Limpopo Corridors 
PQG   
PSC   
Government of Mozambique 
Household 
International Competitive Bidding 
IFAD Country Office 
Mozambique National Institute for Agricultural Research 
National Statistics Institute 
Independent Office of Evaluation (IFAD) 
Innovation and Outreach Facility 
Knowledge management 
Line of Credit 
Mobile phone operator 
Matching grant 
Management Information System 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security 
Ministry of Economy and Finance 
Micro, small and medium enterprises 
Mid-Term Review 
Metical (domestic tender) 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Programa de Apoio às Finanças Rurais 
Poverty Reduction Action Plan 
Project Completion Report 
Plano Estratégico para o Desenvolvimento do Sector Agrário 
Participating Financial Institution 
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Management Unit 
National Agricultural investment plan 
Plano Quinquenal de Governo 
Mozambique 5 Year Plan 
Project Steering Committee 
iv 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Results and Impact Management System 
Request for Proposal 
Regional Project Management Unit 
Rural Financial Intermediation Support Project (engl. translation of PAFIR) 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
Strategic objective  
RIMS  
RFP   
RPMU 
RFSP  
SECAP 
SME   
SO 
SOCREMO  Sociedade de Gastao e Financiamento para a Promocao de Pequenas Projectos 
SoE 
SP 
ToT 
TUP   
USD   
WHH   
Statement of Expenditure  
Service Provider 
Training of trainers 
Targeting the Ultra Poor (graduation programme) 
United States Dollar 
Women headed household 
v 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Map of the project area 
vi 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Executive Summary1 
Strategic Context – Mozambique combines superior potential in agriculture and fisheries with ready 
domestic and regional markets for its produce. There is an abundance of the key production factors of 
land  and  labour:  some  799,380  square  kilometres  of  land  and  26.5  million  population.  On  the  other 
hand,  access  to  technical  support,  and  the  availability  of  adapted  finance  for  capital  to  expand  and 
intensify rural micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), for example, fisheries and agricultural 
production  have  over  recent  years  become  increasingly  critical  constraints  that  IFAD’s  target  group 
has  raised  during  a  number  of  supervision  support  missions  for  PROMER,  PROSUL,  PROAQUA, 
PROMER, PROPESCA, PRODIRPA projects.   
Some  70  per  cent  of  the  population  of  Mozambique  resides  in  rural  areas;  the  lack  of  effective 
technical  support  coupled  with  access  to  affordable  finance  has  had  the  biggest  negative  socio-
economic  impact  on  the  national  populace.  Unemployment  is  a  pressing  concern  that  underpins 
IFAD’s intervention within the rural agricultural economy. According to the National Statistics Institute 
(2014/15)  unemployment  in Mozambique stood at 38.4 per cent nationwide and even higher for the 
female (39.8 per cent) and youth populations (41.4 per cent). In a country with a population growth of 
2.8 per cent and consequently, a high share of  young women and men constituting 52.8 per cent of 
the  population,  rural  women  and  rural  youths  are  in  permanent  danger  of  being  left  behind  in  the 
process of rural transformation and socio-economic development. 
The  policy  environment  in  Mozambique  is  based  on  the  five  –year  Plan  of  the  Government  of 
Mozambique  (Plano  Quinquenal  de  Governo,  PQG-2015-2019).  This  National  Strategy  2015  – 
2019 is the government’s key document setting the strategic context for the developmental state. This 
strategic  policy  document  focuses  on  creating  a  balanced  and  sustainable  macro-economic 
environment  that  enables  the  primary  sector  to  enhance  productivity  and  improve  the  rural  income 
base2.  The  Third  Priority  in  the  National  Strategy  demands  an  increase  in  the  production  and 
productivity  of  all  sectors  dealing  with  agricultural  production3.  This  should  be  achieved  through 
facilitating  the  access  to  finance  for  agricultural  producers,  and  in  particular  for  smallholder  farmers 
and family-owned farms4. 
However,  operational,  capacity  and  liquidity  constraints  of  the  financial  sector  -  triggered  by  a  debt 
crisis in the banking sector - made the sector unable to meet the demand for financial services from 
smallholder  farmers,  agricultural  entrepreneurs,  and  non-agricultural  entrepreneurs  in  all  sectors  of 
Mozambique, and especially felt hard in rural areas. In addition to significant capital demand for large 
infrastructure  projects,  the  crisis  had  adverse  results  on  access  to  finance  of  a  large  section  of  the 
population.  Thus,  as  a  recovery  strategy,  the  central  bank  had  to  apply  unusual  monetary  policy 
measures  to  stabilize  a  strongly  declining  exchange  rate  with  historically  high  interest  rates.  These 
recent  developments  have  reduced  debt  financing  of  smaller  and  rural  based  economic  units 
considerably.  These  detrimental  effects  are  likely  to  prevail  over  the  coming  years  and  are  not 
expected to ease until after the national elections in 2019.  
The  five–year  Plan  of  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (Plano  Quinquenal  de  Governo,  PQG-2015-
2019),  which  setup  the  macroeconomic  enabling  environment  and  policy  stability  is  augmented  by 
specific  agricultural  sector  policies.  Firstly,  the  Plano  Estratégico  para  o  Desenvolvimento  do 
Sector  Agrário  (PEDSA),  the  Strategic  Plan  for  Agriculture,  focusing  on  a  transformation  of 
1 Mission composition: The Mission was led by Robson Mutandi, Country Director, with the participation of the following team 
members:; Jonathan Agwe, IFAD Lead Advisor, Richard Batamanye, Financial Management, Alaudio Chingotuane, Economic 
and Financial Analysis; Rufino Duvane, M&E and Knowledge Management, Motsoasele  Leballo, Enterprise and  Business 
Development and lead writer, Ilario Rea, Climate Change& Safeguards, Tiffany Minjauw, Climate Change & Safeguards,  
Biswan Mohanty, Financial Regulation Policy and Supervision, Joylyn Ndoro, Targeting, Gender and Youth,Wolday Amha*, 
Financial Intermediaries Strengthening, Beatrice Sabana, ASCAs and Graduation Promotion, Custodio Mucavele. Alternate 
Mission Leader; Marian Odenigbo, Senior Technical Specialist, Nutrition, Francesco Rubino Land & NRM; Rauno Zander, 
Financing Instruments , and Emerson Zhou, Cost-sharing and matching grant mechanisms.  
2 Imprensa Nacional de Mocambique, sections 5 and 6. 
3 Section 38 (i). 
4 Section 40 (b). 
*Dr. Wolday Amha tragically passed away in a vehicle accident on 06 September 2017.during the finalisation of this REFP 
design. 
vii 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
agriculture towards a modern, commercial and inclusive primary sector. The PEDSA 2010‐2019 refers 
to  secure  access  to  sufficient  quantities  of  nutritional  food  as  a  fundamental  human  right.  The 
document  gives  emphasis  to  producing  and  diversifying  food,  especially  basic  foods,  in  order  to 
improve citizens’ nutritional status and reduce the level of chronic malnutrition. Secondly, the National 
Agricultural Investment Plan 2014-2018 (PNISA) as an investment instrument, aligned with PEDSA, 
embraces the idea of supporting smallholder farmers to cultivate a wide variety of nutritious foods and 
to research, introduce and widely disseminate bio-fortified varieties of staple foods. 
The  debt  crisis  precipitated  an  already  deteriorating  economy;  Mozambique’s  Gross  Domestic 
Product (GDP) dropped to 3.3% in 2016, down from 6.6% in 2015. The World Bank’s growth forecast 
for  2017  has  been  revised  downwards  from  5.2%  to  4.8%  to  factor  in  the  effects  of  likely  fuel 
shortages  and  the  continued  effects  of  restrictive  monetary  policy.  Official  figures  highlight  a 
substantial  slowdown  in  growth  for  most  sectors;  tight  monetary  policy  (as  a  response  to  the  debt 
crisis) and high prices also contributed to growth deceleration.  
However, there are signs that external pressures are easing. The Mozambican Metical appreciated by 
10%  against  the  U.S.  dollar  between  October  2016  and  February  2017  as  reduced  liquidity  and  an 
adjusting trade balance began to take effect. Inflation, driven by exchange rate variations, has started 
to  decelerate.  Central  bank  reserve  levels  increased  in  the  three  months  to  end-January  2017  with 
effects of policy measures introduced in the last quarter of 2016 materializing.  
Development Challenges 
Mozambique’s rapid economic expansion over the past decades has had only a moderate impact on 
poverty reduction, and the geographical distribution of poverty remains largely unchanged.  According 
to  the  2016  Human  Development  Report  of  United  Nations,  55  per  cent  of  the  population  in 
Mozambique live below the poverty line;  whilst severe poverty affects 44 per cent of the population.  
However, overall poverty has declined at a much slower pace since 2003, falling by only 4 percentage 
points  to  reach  52  per  cent  in  20095.  Between  1997  and  2009,  population  growth  outpaced  poverty 
reduction,  increasing  the  number  of  Mozambicans  living  in  extreme  poverty  by  400,000  to  a  total  of 
11.2 million. As a result Mozambique still ranks as one of the countries with the highest poverty levels 
(69 at the USD1.9 PPP)6. In some rural provinces, poverty levels can be as high as 70 per cent.  
The government of Mozambique should be commended as they are currently implementing domestic 
policies  and  strategies  that  are  designed  to  address  these  challenges  in  a  sustained  and  planned 
manner.  Actions  required  to  combat  poverty  are  reflected  in  the  Poverty  Reduction  Action  Plan 
(PARP  2011-14).  The  PARP  concentrates  on  increasing  agricultural  production,  promoting  the 
development  of  MSMEs  and  an  investment  in  human  and  social  development.  Poverty  is  still 
predominantly  a  rural  phenomenon  in  Mozambique,  where  67  per  cent  (2016)7  of  poor  households 
are located. As a result, the country continues to face challenges in food and nutrition insecurity and 
80  per  cent  of  the  population  cannot  afford  the  minimum  cost  for  an  adequate  diet.  Half  a  million 
children aged 6-23 months are undernourished and 34 per cent of the population is chronically food 
insecure. The country is still a net importer of cereal and livestock products.  Mozambique’s stunting 
prevalence  for  children  under  the  age  of  five  is  high  at  43  per  cent,  with  higher  prevalence  in  rural 
areas. These  problems  are  further  aggravated  by  HIV  (10.5  per  cent  of  the  population  are  affected, 
the country is ranked 8th globally), and chronic exposure to weather-related hazards. Two out of three 
people live in the coastal areas and are vulnerable to disasters such as storms, cyclones, and flash 
floods. The El-Niño induced drought in 2014/16 left an estimated 2 million people in the  Central and 
Northern parts of the country acutely food insecure. 
Rationale – Mozambique has a substantial potential for growth in the agriculture and fishery sectors. 
A  number  of  sub-sectors  and  value  chains  are  presently  not  delivering  the  uniform reliable  qualities 
and  quantities 
in  need  of  upgrading, 
commercializing and of further integrating the single value chain layers into a robust and predictable 
set of agricultural and fisheries supply chains.  
the  market  requires.  Production  systems  are 
that 
The Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP), a national project, is also fully aligned to the GoM’s 
national  policies  and  strategies  on  rural  development  and  poverty  eradication  and  especially  as 
5 World Bank (2016) Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities 
6 World Bank (2016) Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities 
7 World Bank data (2016) http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?view=map 
viii 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
outlined  in the Government’s Agenda 2025. This Project is a direct response to  the following  issues 
identified in the Agenda 2022 policy document: a) low access to adapted (appropriate, affordable, and 
innovative)  financial  capital  for  smallholder  farmers;  and  b)  lack  of  improved  technologies  that  has 
hindered rapid development of the agricultural sector. This initiative will contribute to GoM’s desire to 
ensure  that  rural  households  generate  80%  of  their  income  directly  from  agricultural  activities,  and 
only the remaining 20% from economic activities related to other sectors 
The current IFAD portfolio in Mozambique has prioritized agricultural and fishery sector development 
through  different  area-based  projects.  These  projects  have  produced  significant  numbers  of 
beneficiaries which are better trained and equipped. However, access to adapted finance remains the 
major constraint for enlarging their agriculture, aquaculture and non-agricultural  businesses. Against 
this background, and in part as a consequence of the concerns highlighted by the October 2016 GoM 
National  Conference  on  Microfinance  and  Rural  Finance;  focus  has  been  placed  on:  a)  GoM  and 
other  development  partners  should  establish  lines  of  credit  for  the  financing  and  refinancing  of  the 
entire agricultural value chain; b) financial literacy is key for the inclusion of rural populations into the 
formal  financial  sector;  c)  the  dissemination  of  mobile  banking  and  other  innovative  technologies 
should be expanded and intensified in rural areas; d) in the context of vulnerability to climate change, 
agricultural  insurance  should  be  key  to  shared  risk  of  smallholder  farmers  to  cope  with  adverse 
weather events.   
To this end, the Directorate of Treasury of the Ministry of Economy and Finance has been requesting 
a focused project with rural finance in the centre of activities and not just as a complementary focus. 
The  Government  wants  to  respond  to  the  current  crisis  scenario  in  rural  finance  by  promoting  a 
stimulus with alternative financing mechanisms that can result in higher client volumes and thus help 
to  kick-start  the  rural  financial  sector  out  of  its  current  sub-optimal  state.  IFAD  is  responding  to  this 
request with the development of the REFP. Project development proceeded in close collaboration and 
mutual sharing of experiences between the Fund and the Directorate of Treasury.  
Given  the  relevance  of  innovative  financing  mechanisms  for  the  rural  sector  in  general  and  in 
particular for the fledgling micro and small enterprise sector, the focus of this project is proposed to be 
national; thus ensuring that the current scattered and isolated activities in the different IFAD supported 
projects  would  be  coordinated,  harmonized  and  fine-tuned  so  as  to  emphasise  and  leverage 
complementarities and promote economies of scale at implementation level.  
Project  Area  –  Although  a  national  project,  it  is  proposed  to  start  the  REFP  in  provinces/districts 
where  other  IFAD  projects  have  generated  a  potential  pool  of  applicants  for  financial  services  that 
would  usefully  be  managed  first  by  a  new  national  rural  financing  project.  From  there,  REFP  would 
then sequentially move towards other areas on a demand basis and at the end, cover all 10 provinces 
in the country. 
Beneficiaries and Target Group –The number of direct beneficiaries is estimated at 287,700 
individuals engaged in agriculture, fisheries and non – agriculture MSMEs.  
The  Project  direct  beneficiaries  would  be  inclusive  of  poor  men  and  women  involved  in  agriculture, 
fisheries  and  non-agricultural  MSMEs  as  a  source  of  livelihood  and  income.  The  project  will  also 
target youth (young boys and girls). REFP will implement an inclusive targeting strategy to ensure that 
benefits  are  distributed  to  a  large  number  of  smallholder  poor  farmers,  and  poorer  and  vulnerable 
members  of  the  communities.  Women  will  account  for  at  least  50  per  cent  of  the  target  REFP 
beneficiaries and youth not less than 20% (of which 50% will be young girls). The focus on the poor 
and  disadvantaged  will  ensure  that  coverage  of  REFP  services  will  reach  out  remote,  underserved 
communities and financially excluded population. 
Targeting  strategy:  A  strategy  for  gender  mainstreaming  and  the  social  and  economic  inclusion  of 
youth  and  other  vulnerable  and  marginalised  groups  has  been  designed  to  achieve  the  following 
objectives. 
  Ensure that men, women, youth and vulnerable/marginalised groups participate and benefit 
equitably under the Project. 
  Reduce  the  gender  gap  and  discrepancies  across  different  social  groups  by  improving 
economic development, human status, as well as social and economic empowerment.  
ix 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
  Build  awareness  about  gender  mainstreaming,  and  social  and  economic  inclusion  among 
all  Project stakeholders: men,  women, community members, Service Providers (SPs) and 
Provinces. 
The  strategy  will  be  operationalized  along  three  pillars  of  activity  to:  (i)  provide  direct-targeted 
interventions (i.e. financing instruments viable for all target groups with focus on more vulnerable and 
financially  excluded)    and  investments  to  women,  youth  and  the  most  vulnerable  to  boost  their 
economic development status  and social capital; (ii) ensure full representation of men, women, youth 
and all social groups in community-level institutions and decision-making processes; and (iii) provide 
targeted information, education, capacity building to all stakeholders regarding gender awareness as 
well as on HIV, nutrition and related social aspect. 
Both components will benefit men, women and youth and financing instruments as well as dedicated 
activities  will  be  tailored  to  the  different  groups  and  vulnerability  level.  Under  component  1  it  is 
expected  that  direct  beneficiaries,  among  men,  women  and  youth,  will  benefit  from  the  Crowding  in 
Fund (20,000), while other beneficiaries (20.000) will be assisted under the Graduation Promotion and 
Outreach  Programme  resulting  in  (i)  Increased  incomes  and  assets  through  establishment  of 
profitable enterprises facilitated by access to financial services (ii) Increased savings by beneficiaries 
(iii) Improved food security (iv) Improved health and nutrition.  The latter being particularly relevant for 
women  and  young  women  in  reproductive  age.  Another  169,400  direct  beneficiaries  (men  and 
women) are expected to access the Line of Credit.  
Women  constitute  a  large  percentage  of  ASCAs’s  member  and  they  will  receive,  through 
subcomponent  2.1,  better  financial  services  and  stronger  local  institutions.  An  average  of  100,000 
beneficiaries, of which 50,000 women will be capacitated through financial literacy trainings. Given the 
presence of young men and women as part of ASCAs, this activity will also benefit youth. In addition, 
7,000 ASCA members will benefit from the training on climate resilient technology and nutrition related 
activities.  It  is  expected  that  under  subcomponent  2.2  about  63,  370  agri-enterprises,  fishing 
enterprises and non agricultural enterprises  will  benefit from  Business Development  Services (BDS) 
Support  and  non-financial  services  provided  to  Target  Beneficiaries,  in  partnership  with  PROMER, 
PROSUL, PROPESCA and BAGC; The project will also include activities exclusively directed to men 
and women: 5,000 women and youth will participate as incubate start up agri-entreprenuers and non 
agri-entreprenuers.  
Project  Goal  and  Development  Objective  –  The  Project  Goal  is  to  contribute  to  rural  household 
livelihood improvement. The specific Project Development Objective is to increase the availability of, 
access to, and use of adapted (appropriate, affordable, and innovative) inclusive sustainable financial 
services, and technical support services in rural areas.   
The project development objective will be achieved through  interventions of REFP in the form of the 
following two main components: a) improved access to and usage of adapted financial products and 
services for rural (smallholder farmers and non-farmer) entrepreneurs for investment, and b) capacity 
building  and  support  to  rural  smallholder  farmers,  non-farmer  entrepreneurs  and  institutions  that 
support them. As a result, REFP is expected to impact on the household income and asset levels of at 
least 287,700 direct beneficiaries and influence the Government of Mozambique planning and funding 
programmes  on  agricultural,  non-agricultural,  agri-preneurial  and  non  agri-preneurial  investments 
related  to  successful  models  particularly  and  increased  level  of  uptake  of  inclusive  and  sustainable 
financial services programmes in rural areas for the resource poor. 
Project  Components  –  The  Project’s  development  objective  will  be  achieved  through  the  effective 
implementation of two operational components. 
Component 1: Improved access to adapted financial services for rural entrepreneurs 
This  component  offers  a  menu  of  alternative  financing  instruments  that  are  adapted  to  the  different 
financial  capacities  and  requirements  of  the  targeted  smallholder  farmers  and  fishers  and  rural 
agricultural enterprises, non-agricultural enterprises, agri-preneurs and non agri-preneurs. .  
Subcomponent  1.1.  A  Graduation  Promotion  and  Outreach  Programme    will  accelerate  the 
processes  of  (i)    bringing  in  very  poor  people  (i.e.  the  last  mile  or  the  bottom  end  of  the  income 
pyramid) to a level where they are creditworthy and can be integrated into mainstream rural financial 
x 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
services, and (ii)  innovating digital delivery channels (DFS) for agricultural and rural finance products 
and services, providing a platform to link the poor to a wide range of FSPs and other stakeholders to 
strengthen their innovation initiatives. Both elements of this sub-component will be implemented with 
assistance  from  a  dedicated  technical  assistance  arrangement  and  where  feasible,  recruited  from 
qualified local service providers  
Subcomponent 1.2. A Crowding-in Fund (CIF) will offer a tripartite cost-sharing with matching grant 
mechanism to enable loan applicants with bankable propositions that are not able to attract full private 
sector financing to get access to part loan financing under the project.  
Subcomponent  1.3:  Establishment  of  adapted  innovative  refinancing  instruments  to  finance  rural 
enterprises  –  This  subcomponent  will  be  linked  closely  with  subcomponent  1.1  and  will  involve  the 
establishment of a Line of Credit (LOC). The LOC will function as a classic financing and refinancing 
arrangement  between  the  financial  institutions  and  the  rural  agricultural  and  non-agricultural 
entrepreneurs  who qualify  to address their liquidity challenges. Qualifying rural  agricultural  and  non-
agricultural  entrepreneurs  will  access  the  LOC  funds  under  market-based  pricing  conditions,  after 
fulfilling criteria set with the Financial Intermediaries, in particular the Fund Manager (BNI).  
Component  2:  Capacity  building  and  support  for  institutions  and  rural  entrepreneurs  –  This 
component will provide training to rural agricultural and non-agricultural entrepreneurs and support to 
institutions  working  with  rural  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  entrepreneurs.  Activities  will  be 
complementary to component 1 activities and be organized in two operational sub-components. 
Subcomponent  2.1:  Support  to  essential 
local  institutions  –  The  complementary  capacity 
development in REFP will focus on the following priority areas: (i) skills and knowledge development 
for staff of financial institutions to provide improved and adapted financial services to the IFAD target 
groups;  (ii)  assisting  the  financial  institutions  in  designing  policies  and  developing  financial  tools  or 
products to meet the needs of the rural agricultural and non-agricultural enterprises and MSMEs; (iii) 
exposing and linking the financial institutions to good practices including, particularly but not limited to,  
smallholder  agricultural  finance  and  finance  for  fisheries;  (iv)  enhancing  the  mobility  of  the  staff  of 
financial institutions to serve the rural agricultural and non-agricultural financially excluded population 
through  opening  branches  or  using  other  innovative  approaches  (such  as  mobile  money  ,  agency 
banking and other digital financial services – DFSs) and expand their outreach in remote districts; (v) 
conducting a mapping study of ASCAs and providing a linkage route for 7,000 most mature ASCAs to 
formal financial institutions; (vi) supporting the establishment of a profit-based Union for ASCAs; (vii) 
establishment of a database for MFIs and promote their social performance management through the 
Mozambique  Association  of  MFIs  (viii)  provide  institutional  and  technical  support  to  transform  the 
FARE fund into a sustainable institution; (ix) assist the microfinance regulatory department of Bank of 
Mozambique  to  establish  sustainable  MFIs  and  promote  financial  literacy  and  consumer  protection; 
and (x) establishing and strengthening the "Development Finance Coordination" secretariat under the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance the Ministry of Economy and Finance is one of the key players in 
implementing Mozambique's National Financial Inclusion Strategy. The project will seek to strengthen 
the capacity of the ministry to develop and monitor the implementation of rural finance policies. 
Subcomponent  2.2:  Business  development  support  –  will  be  delivered  with  a  main  menu  of  BDS 
options  and  a  special  BDS  initiative  for  disadvantaged  rural  women  and  rural  youths.  Smallholder 
farmers, fisheries and rural micro and small enterprises will receive their support based on a Needs 
Assessment  for  BDS  among  the  REFP  specific  target  groups.  Based  on  this,  the  BDS  process  will 
likely provide training, facilitation of access to inputs, facilitation of access to financial services offered 
through component 1 of REFP, marketing support and advice in value addition activities and services. 
Suitably qualified and experienced BDS service providers will assist with implementation of this sub-
component.  This  arrangement  should  be  monitored  for  sustainability  and  revisited  at  MTR  to 
determine if extra measures are required to ensure sustainability and ability of clients to meet the cost 
of this service when external project funding comes to a close.  
Direct  action  for  priority  women  and  youths  target  groups:  REFP  will  directly  target  5,000  youths 
aged  18-35, and 5,000  women from all the provinces for income generation trainings. Similar to the 
Graduation  Promotion  and  Outreach  Programme  activities  in  component  1,  this  will  provide 
accelerated support to segments of the population that are particularly disadvantaged and in need of 
special  support. Through  partnering  with  current  IFAD  assisted  projects,  and  government  initiatives, 
the  target  group  for  BDS  training  could  easily  be  doubled.  REFP  will  implement  Incubator  start-up 
xi 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
agri/aquapreneurial  and  entrepreneurial  national  youth  and  women  programmes 
to  create 
agribusiness,  agripreneurial  and  non-agricultural  opportunities  for  5,000  beneficiaries’  constituting  of 
youth (2,500) and women (2,500) in rural areas. 
.Component 3: Project Management 
This  component  will  provide  for  and  strengthen  the  capacity  at  central,  provincial  and  district  level, 
covering the costs of a central and three regional PMUs.  
Approach  – REFP  will  build on the experience of PAFIR/RFSP, a national rural finance programme 
supported  by  IFAD  and  the  African  Development  Bank  that  was  closed  in  2014.  It  also  builds  on 
emerging  lessons  learned  from  other  IFAD  supported  projects  that  are  implementing  rural  finance 
components  in  their  projects  areas.  REFP  will  further  provide  a  hub  for  all  aspects  of  development 
finance also to these current IFAD projects and has the potential to consolidate and streamline current 
rural finance activities that sometimes overlap and duplicate approaches. 
Organisational Framework – REFP will be integrated into the Ministry of Economy and Finance and 
operate  with  a  semi-autonomous  PMU  housed  within  BNI,  the  Banco  Nacional  de  Investimento. 
Three regional offices will support the functions of the central   proposed to be in Maputo. At province 
level,  REFP  will  receive  the  support  of  local  and  provincial  government  staff  and  of  field  staff 
associated with BNI and FARE (if available) as well as locally based service providers. 
Project Costs and Financing – Total project costs including price and physical contingencies, duties 
and taxes  are estimated  at USD  72.5 million. Of this  amount, USD  55.9 million is foreign exchange 
content,  and  around  USD  13.1  million  corresponds  to  duties  and  taxes.  The  project  will  be 
implemented  over  a  period  of  six  years.  The  costs  are  distributed  as  follows  between  the  three 
components: (i) Component 1: Improved access to adaptive financial services for rural entrepreneurs, 
totalling  USD 51.4 million;  (ii)  Component  2:  Capacity  building  and  support  for  institutions  and  rural 
entrepreneurs,  USD  10.6  million;  and  (iii)  Institutional  Support  and  Programme  Management, 
USD 10.5 million. 
Benefits and Beneficiaries – REFP is expected to benefit 287,700 direct beneficiaries; both for the 
financial  support  and  for  the  capacity  development  core  components  of  BNI,  special  accelerated 
initiatives for priority target groups will be initiated: A Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme 
window  for  very  poor  rural  people  will  be  established  so  as  to  bring  them  up  to  a  level  where  they 
become creditworthy with bankable propositions and reached through digital financials services from 
participating  financial  service  providers  –  FSPs,  (e.g.,  rural  micro  finance  institutions  -  MFIs,  mobile 
network operators – MNOs, financial NGOs  - FNGOs, commercial banks, etc.). For component 2, an 
incubator programme for rural women and unemployed youth will ensure that the most productive will 
receive  technical  training  and  skills  development  support  in  order  to  furnish  them  with  the  skills  to 
sustain themselves from the income generating activities.  
xii 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Logical Framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Goal:  To contribute to rural 
household livelihood 
improvement 
Indicator Name8 
Proportion (%) of rural 
households with improvement in 
asset ownership index 
(RIMS/ORMS 3rd level) 
Baseline 
TBD 
Mid-term 
20% 
End Target 
60% by YR6 
TBD 
Number of direct beneficiaries 
accessing adapted financial 
services 
Development Objective: to 
increase the availability of, 
access to, and use of 
adapted (appropriate, 
affordable, and innovative) 
inclusive sustainable financial 
services, and technical 
support services in rural 
areas 
Component 1:Improved access to adapted financial services for rural entrepreneurs 
120,000 
287,700 direct 
beneficiaries of which 
57,540 are youth (28,770 
male and 28,770 female) 
and 230,160 are both 
male (115,080) and 
women (115,080)by Yr 6 
Source 
National statistics, 
impact surveys, 
baseline and PCR 
Frequency 
Baseline and 
PCR 
Responsibility  Assumptions 
National 
implementing 
institutions and 
PMU 
The economy will continue 
to grow and the political 
enabling environment will 
remain stable  
Project progress 
reports, impact 
surveys, baseline and 
PCR 
Baseline, 
Project 
progress 
reports and 
PCR 
National 
implementing 
institutions and 
PMU 
 Economic and weather 
conditions prevail 
favourable 
Macro-economic indicators 
will remain favourable 
Outcome 1: Increased 
accessibility to diverse inclusive 
financial products and services 
has improved  the livelihoods 
and resilience of rural 
smallholder farmers, agro-
entrepreneurs, non-agricultural 
entrepreneurs and enterprises. 
Output 1.1.  Graduation 
Promotion and Out-reach 
Programme established and 
operationa 
% of persons/households 
reporting using rural financial 
services  
TBD 
50%  
100% 
Project progress 
reports  
Semi-annual, 
Annually 
PMU, fund 
manager 
Rural entrepreneurs willing 
and participate actively in 
implementation of financial 
services 
 0 
Number of persons in rural areas 
who have completed the 
graduation programme and are 
actively involved in income 
generating activities 
(RIMS/ORMS) 
4,000direct 
beneficiaries 
 20,000 direct 
beneficiaries of which  
4,000 youth (2,000 male 
and 2,000 women),  and 
16,000 are both male 
(8,000) and female 
(8,000) 
Financial Institutions 
reports, Supervision 
Mission reports 
Semi-annual, 
Annually 
 PMU, IP 
Ultra-poor people able and 
willing to participate in the 
programme  
8 Indicators refer to Project area. 
xiii 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Output 1.2 Crowding-in Fund 
established and operational 
Indicator Name8 
 Number of rural Entrepreneurs 
supported by the Crowding-in 
Fund disaggregated by gender 
with at least 50% women and 20 
% youth ( RIMS/ORMS) 
Baseline 
0 
Mid-term 
4,000 direct 
beneficiaries/ 
entrepreneurs 
Output 1.3 Line of credit 
established 
Number of rural Entrepreneurs 
accessing targeted LOC 
(RIMS/ORMS)  
 0 
30,000 direct 
beneficiaries 
Component 2: Capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 
Sub -component 2.1 : Support to essential local institutions 
End Target 
 20,000 direct 
ibeneficiaries/entreprene
urs of which  4,000are 
youth (2,000 male  and 
2,000 female) and 
16,000 are both male 
(8,000) and women 
(8,000) 
169, 400 direct 
beneficiaries of which, 
33,880 are youth (16,940 
male and 16, 940  
female), and 135,520  
are both male (67,760) 
and female (67,760). 
Source 
Financial Institutions 
reports, Supervision 
Mission reports  
Frequency 
Semi-annual, 
Annually 
Responsibility  Assumptions 
 PMU, IP 
 Rural entrepreneurs willing 
and attracted by the 
available Crowding-in fund 
Financial Institutions 
reports Supervision 
Mission reports 
Semi-annual, 
Annually 
 PMU, IP 
Rural entrepreneurs willing 
and attracted by the 
available LoC 
(Number) percentage of partner 
financial service providers with 
financial self-sufficiency above 
100% (RIMS/ORMS)  
 0 
25%   
75% 
Financial Institutions 
reports 
 Annually 
 PMU, IP 
MFIs are interested in 
extending services in rural  
Number of persons in rural areas 
trained on financial literacy 
(RIMS/ORMS)  
7.469 million  
(77%) of the 
rural adults  
are financially 
excluded9 
20,000 direct 
beneficiaries in 
financial literacy 
training 
100,000 direct 
beneficiaries of which  
20,000 are youth (10,000 
male and 10,000 female) 
and 80,000 are both 
male (40,000) and 
female (40,000) 
 40 FIs 
Financial Institutions 
reports 
 Annually 
 PMU, IP 
MFIs are interested in 
extending services in rural 
Financial Institutions 
reports 
 Annually 
 PMU, IP 
 MFIs are interested in 
extending services in rural 
Output 2.1.2 Financial 
institutions strengthened 
Number of financial institutions 
supported (RIMS/ORMS) 
TBD 
 15 
Outcome 2:  Institutional 
capacity enhanced of FIs 
delivering sustainable and 
appropriate financial support 
for rural smallholder farmers, 
agro-entrepreneurs and non-
agricultural entrepreneurs. 
Output 2.1.1 Capacity 
building on financial literacy 
and business planning 
training provided ii 
9 FinScope study of Mozambique  (2014) 
xiv 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Output 2.1.3  Sustainable 
ASCAs strengthened 
Indicator Name8 
Number of active/ functional 
ASCAs with leadership 
disaggregated by gender 
RIMS/ORMS 
Output 2.1.4 Community 
based institutions (ASCAs 
members) strengthened on 
climate resilient technology 
and nutrition related activities 
Number of ASCA group 
members supported to 
sustainably manage natural 
resources and climate-related 
risks 
Number of persons/households 
provided with targeted support to 
improve their nutrition 
Baseline 
20,29210 
Mid-term 
22,292 (an 
incremental of 
2,000 ASCAs) 
End Target 
27,292 ASCAs (an 
incremental of 7,000 
ASCAs) 
Source 
Project progress 
reports and Annual 
Survey report  
Frequency 
 Annually 
Responsibility  Assumptions 
 PMU 
Rural entrepreneurs willing 
and attracted by the 
available services 
0 
0 
2,000 ASCAs 
membersiii 
7,000 ASCAs members 
2,000 ASCAs 
members  
7,000 ASCAs members  
Project progress 
reports and Annual 
Survey report 
Project progress 
reports and Annual 
Survey report 
Annually  
PMU 
Annually  
PMU  
Subcomponent 2.2: Support to business development services and market linkages 
Output 2.2.1:  Study on 
Business Development 
Services 
Output 2.2.2:  Business 
Development Services (BDS) 
Support/ non-financial 
services provided to Target 
Beneficiaries, in partnership 
with PROMER, PROSUL, 
PROPESCA and BAGC 
Output 2.2.3: Identification of 
target group members to 
participate as incubate start-
up agri-entrepreneurs and 
non agri-entrepreneurs 
Reporting on number of 
Business Development Services 
(BDS) activities being 
undertaken by Development 
partners and GoM 
(RIMS/ORMS) 
Number of agri-enterprises, 
aqua-enterprises & non-
agricultural enterprises 
accessing facilitated non-
financial services 
(RIMS/ORMS) 
Number of target beneficiaries 
with incubated start-up agri- and 
non-agri entrepreneurs. 
Component 3: Project Management  
TBD 
1 
1 Status of BDS in 
Mozambique Survey 
report 
DFIs, IPEME, 
Financials Institutions, 
other survey reports 
 Once-off 
 PMU 
TBD 
24,000 
63,370 
Project progress 
reports and Annual 
Survey report  
 Bi-Annually 
 PMU 
TBD 
2,500 
5,000 
Project progress 
reports and Annual 
Survey report 
 Bi-Annually 
 PMU 
Outcome 3 : Capacity of 
PMU strengthened at central, 
provincial and district levels 
Number of  central and regional 
PMUs established 
0 
1 central PMU 
and 3 regional 
PMUs 
1 central PMU and 3 
regional 
Project progress 
reports, food survey 
and Supervision 
Mission reports 
 Annually 
 PMU 
10 Facts on FSDMoç Saving Groups Study shared with FARE as per July 2017.  
xv 
Member of ASCAs and rural 
entrepreneurs willing and 
attracted by the available 
information services 
Member of ASCAs and rural 
entrepreneurs willing and 
attracted by the available 
information services 
DFIs and Financial 
Institutions willing to share 
information and activities 
within BDS 
Identification of Rural 
entrepreneurs willing and 
attracted by the available 
non-financial services 
Target beneficiaries are 
interested in becoming 
incubated agri-
entrepreneurial and non- 
agri-entrepreneurial trainees 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
*Up to 15 indicators including a few optional RIMS indicators. In addition to these, RIMS mandatory indicators must be added. **The distribution of indicators 
is illustrative ***Intermediate targets for the Goal and Outputs are optional. 
xvi 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
1. 
Political  and  Economic  Context.  Mozambique  has  over  the  last  two  decades 
experienced  an  average  economic  annual  growth  rate  of  above  7  per  cent,  sustained  by 
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms, massive public investment in infrastructure and 
large flows of foreign direct investment. Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of USD 59011 in 2015 
was up from USD 296  in  2005. The real Gross Domestic Product (GDP)  per capita  grew from USD 
313  to  about  USD  529  from  2005  to  2015.  The  real  GDP  in  2015  was  composed  of  53.2  per  cent 
services, 25.2 per cent agriculture and 21.5 per cent industry12. 
Financial  Sector  Context  Mozambique  is  currently  faced  with  an  economic  crisis.  This 
2. 
was  triggered  by  a  debt  burden  of  USD  9.89  billion,  representing  over  90  per  cent  of  the  country's 
GDP  in  201613.  It  also  results  from  a  crisis  in  the  banking  sector  with  the  liquidation  of  one  smaller 
bank  and  emergency  capitalization  out  of  public  resources  of  one  of  the  medium-sized  commercial 
banks. These two factors, coupled with significant capital demand for large infrastructure projects, had 
adverse results on the access to finance of a large section of the population. This was because liquid 
resources in the sector are in much shorter supply; this scarcity of funds, coupled with the fact that the 
central bank had to apply  monetary  policy measures to stabilize  a strongly declining exchange rate, 
have resulted in historically high rates of interest. These are due to a high central bank reference rate 
by comparison, and to well-known efficiency challenges of prevailing commercial banks that result in 
high real spreads levied on debt transactions. It is important to note that in the specific country context 
of  Mozambique,  these  detrimental  effect  are  likely  to  prevail  over  the  coming  years  and  are  not 
expected  to  ease  until  after  the  national  elections  in  2019.  The  central  bank,  the  Banco  de 
Moçambique  (Bank  of  Mozambique  or  BOM)  continues  to  try  to  manage  the  fiscal  and  monetary 
policy  challenges;  and  to  has  succeeded  in  stabilizing  the  foreign  exchange  rate  of  the  domestic 
currency, the Metical (MZN).  
In  terms  of  financial  inclusion,  Mozambique  is  ranked  23rd  out  of  55  developing 
3. 
countries under the Economist Intelligence Unit’s 2015 Microscope index. Approximately 60 per cent 
of  the  population  are  financially  excluded,  while  16  per  cent  use  informal  financial  service  providers 
and only 20 per cent use the formal banking system14. The financial sector is underdeveloped and still 
bank-dominated,  while  access  to  adapted/affordable/inclusive  financial  services  is  lower  in  rural 
areas. Mozambique has however recently developed a new Financial Inclusion Strategy, designed to 
increase access to financial services from 24 to 60 per cent of the population by 2022. 
4. 
Poverty and Rural Development Context – Mozambique's estimated population in 2015 
was 27.9 million and is growing at an annual average rate of 2.8 per cent (2015)15. Rural population 
annual growth was measured at about 2.4 per cent and urban growth about 3.6 per cent. Overall, the 
quality of life in both rural and urban areas has relatively improved, with a life expectancy increasing 
from 48.7 years in 2000, to 55  years in 2014. The country’s HDI increased marginally from 0.209 in 
1990  to  0.418  in  2015,  ranking  Mozambique  at  181  out  of  188  countries16.  Despite  this  relative 
progress on human and social development, poverty and its causes remain a persistent challenge to 
overcome. About 68.7% and 54.7% of the population live below the international poverty line of USD 
1.90 per day and the national poverty line of USD 0.5 per day, respectively.  
5. 
Agriculture  and  Smallholder  Farming  Context  –  With  a  total  surface  area  of  779,380 
km2,  36  million  hectares  of  which  is  arable  land,  Mozambique  offers  considerable  agricultural 
potential. The country has ten different agro-climatic zones in ten Provinces, and only 10 per cent of 
its  36  million  hectares  of  arable  land  as  well  as  2  per  cent  of  its  irrigation  potential  is  currently 
utilized17.  The  agricultural  and  fisheries  sector  in  Mozambique  are  largely  represented  by 
11Atlas method – World Bank data 
12World Bank data: http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&country=MOZ 
13The Royal Institute of International Affairs 2016 – How can Mozambique manage its debt crisis?  
14 African Economic Outlook - Mozambique 2016, 
15Ibidem 
16UNDP – Human Development Report, 2016 
17Agenda 2025 – Government of Mozambique - http://www.mpd.gov.mz/index.php/documentos/instrumentos-de-gestao-
economica-e-social/agenda-2025/83-agenda-2025/file?force_download=1 
1 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
smallholders, who represent about 99 per cent of the sector. Agriculture and fisheries therefore remain 
one  of  the  principal  sources  of  income  for  rural  communities,  representing  a  livelihood  source  for 
almost 81 per cent of the in-country labour force. Agriculture generates 80 per cent of the income of 
rural households, which account for 94 per cent of the country’s agricultural production. However, the 
sector suffers from very  low productivity and limited access to markets: less than 10 per cent of the 
households  market  their  surpluses.  The  major  constraints  to  agricultural  development  that  affect 
smallholder farmers in particular  include:  limited access to improved inputs, extension (support) and 
finance; as well as poor market linkages18.  
6. 
Agricultural  market  conditions  have  improved  over  the  last  few  years,  with  significant 
increases in demand for both food products and export crops. The number and diversity of agricultural 
market agents are increasing, from farmers' associations, small/medium size traders to larger trading 
companies and agri-businesses, some of which provide support to smallholder farmers.  
7. 
Gender  and  Women's  Empowerment  –  Women  in  Mozambique  are  disproportionately 
represented in both rural and urban areas. However, they constitute a little under 53 per cent of the 
population  and  are  the  majority  of  rural  producers.  Over  95  per  cent  of  rural  women  work mainly  in 
subsistence agriculture, compared to 66 per cent of rural men. About 70 per cent of the women are 
illiterate as compared to 40 per cent of the men. In agriculture, women are mainly engaged in food-
crop farming and are mainly responsible for household food security  and  wellbeing.  Men  tend to be 
engaged  in  cash-crop  farming  and  non-agriculture  employment  which  also  increases  their  migration 
patterns,  leaving  women,  children,  the  sick  and  elderly  in  the  villages. As  a  consequence,  women’s 
work load has dramatically increased over the past few  years. The situation is exacerbated by other 
factors  which  affect  women’s  low  productivity  in  the  sector  such  as  the  small  size  of  agricultural 
holdings and unequal access to affordable/adapted services and infrastructure. 
Food  Security  and  Malnutrition  – The  country  continues  to  depend  on  food  imports  to 
8. 
satisfy  a  large portion of its domestic needs,  particularly  edible  oils and staple food crops; about  35 
per cent of total food imports originate from South Africa. In 2015, food imports accounted for 12 per 
cent of the national imports19. Mozambique continues to experience food insecurity and malnutrition. 
According to the World Food Programme 2016 report on malnutrition in Mozambique, 43 per cent of 
children under 5 are stunted, with higher prevalence in rural areas20.  
9. 
IFAD Country Programme – Altogether, IFAD has been active in Mozambique since 1983 
and  has  invested  more  than  USD  200  million  financing  a  total  of  12  Projects/Programmes  that  are 
four  active 
benefiting  2,193,489  households.  The  current 
Projects/Programmes:  a)  the  Rural  Markets  Promotion  Programme  (PROMER  –  USD  48.4  million.); 
b)  the  Pro-Poor  Value  Chain  Development  in  the  Maputo  and  Limpopo  Corridors  (PROSUL  –  USD 
44.95 million.); c) the  Artisanal Fisheries  Promotion  Project (ProPESCA  – USD 57.9 million); and d) 
the PRONEA Support Project (PSP – USD 26.77 million) without rural finance activities programmed. 
Alongside  these,  the  country  portfolio  also  has  two  active  grants,  namely  the  Promotion  of  Small 
Aquaculture  Project  (PROAQUA  –  USD  3.3  million)  and  the  Strengthening  Artisanal  Fisheries 
Resource Rights Project (PRODIRPA – USD 0.94 million). 
IFAD  portfolio  comprises 
IFAD  Rural  finance  experience.  IFAD  has  a  long  history  of  supporting  interventions  in 
10. 
rural finance in Mozambique. The Rural Finance Support Programme (PAFIR) was implemented from 
2005  to  2013.  The  goal  of  PAFIR  was  “to  contribute  to  economic  growth  and  poverty  alleviation  by 
improving  the  livelihoods  of  rural  households  and  viability  of  enterprises  in  rural  areas  of 
Mozambique”. Its development objective was to “improve the sustainable access to financial services 
by individuals, groups and enterprises in rural areas and create a positive and conducive institutional 
and policy environment for the development and sustainable provision of rural financial services”. One 
of  the  most  visible  successes  of  PAFIR  is  the  performance  of  Accumulating  Savings  and  Credit 
Associations  (ASCAs)  that  were  supported  through  the  project.  The  success  under  this  component 
enabled  the  AfDB  to  continue  to  provide  financial  support  to  scale  up  some  of  the  results  of  this 
initiative but targeted specifically  at  women in five provinces. In addition, PROSUL and  PROPESCA 
also have components addressing provision of financial services to project beneficiaries. PROSUL is 
performing satisfactorily and is one of the more successful projects of the Mozambique programme. It 
18 IFAD IOE: Country Programme and Strategy Evaluation, Mozambique; February 2017. 
19USDA Foreign Agricultural Service – Mozambique 2015 Agricultural Economic Fact Sheet. 
20World Food Programme Country Review 2016. 
2 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
was  rated  satisfactory  at  Mid-Term  Review  in  2016.  Similarly,  PROPSECA  is  also  performing 
satisfactorily. PROMER had an additional USD 25 million financing approved by the IFAD December 
Board in 2015 
11. 
PROMER  –  The  Rural  Markets  Promotion  Programme  (PROMER)  aims  at  increasing 
small-scale  farmers’  incomes  from  agriculture  by  assisting  them  in  marketing  their  surpluses  more 
profitably.  The  programme  became  effective  in  April  2009,  and  had  4  original  components:  (i) 
developing more dynamic market intermediaries; (ii) enterprise-led value chain initiative; (iii) improving 
the market environment; (iv) policy & institutional support and management. In 2013, an Amendment 
to the IFAD Loan Agreement was signed to accommodate 11.3 million USD as additional funds from 
an  EU  grant,  under  the  MDG  programme.  Two  additional  components,  Nutritional  Education 
(component  v)  and  Institutional  Support  of  National  Directorate  of  Investment  and  Cooperation 
(component  vi),  and  one  subcomponent,  support  to  the  development  of  community  based  financial 
services were introduced. The programme additional financing was approved by the December 2015 
IFAD Executive Board and is now expected to close in 2020. 
12. 
PROSUL  –  Pro-Poor  Value  Chain  Development  in  the  Maputo  and  Limpopo  Corridors 
(PROSUL), this project has the goal of improving livelihoods of small farmers in selected districts of 
the  Maputo  and  Limpopo  corridors.  With  outcomes  of  i)  Increased  income  for  farmers  producing 
vegetables  in  the  project  areas  through  increased  productivity-  volumes  and  quality  -  of  vegetables 
reaching both traditional and modern market segments; ii) Increased income for farmers in the project 
areas  out  of  cassava  production,  based  on  proof-of-concept  business  models  for  the  profitable 
production  and  marketing  of  cassava-based  products;  iii)  Increased  income  for  goat  and  cattle 
breeders in the project areas through improved production and better organized markets; iv) Selected 
value  chain  stakeholders  have  a  timely  and  adequate  access  to  a  diversified  range  of  affordable 
financial products, through existing or newly created financial and non-financial service providers; and 
v)  the  Centre  for  the  Promotion  of  Agriculture  (CEPAGRI),  and  specifically  its  delegation  for  the 
southern provinces, is supporting inclusive value chain development. 
13. 
PROPESCA – Artisanal Fisheries Promotion Project (ProPESCA) aims at i) supporting the 
development  of  higher  value  fish,  through  the  facilitation  of  sustainable  increases  in  production  and 
marketing  of  higher  value  fish,  as  well  as  the  facilitation  of  the  development  of  the  value  chain  for 
higher  value  fish,  from  catch  to  the  final  market,  based  on  an  interactive  assessment  of  the 
constraints, potentials and opportunities. ii) improving economic infrastructure, for a better access to 
fishing centres and increased availability of electricity from the national grid to support cool chains and 
fish processing on site,  iii) developing financial services, in order to enhance the quality of livelihoods 
of the target group by improving the delivery, outreach, appropriateness and sustainability of financial 
services in artisanal fishing communities, the component would work with both the informal and formal 
sectors,  combining  the  expansion  and  strengthening  of  rotating  savings  and  credit  associations 
(PCRs)21  with  new  measures  to  facilitate  delivery  of  financial  services  by  formal  financial  sector 
institutions. The strategy would be to expand the number of PCRs and also further develop the PCR 
model, through the establishment of new PCRs; capacity building of service providers/NGOs; support 
to formal community-based financial service providers; Financial Support to Value Chain Investments 
supports  the  attraction  of  financial  institutions  to  fishing  areas,  a  Risk  Mitigation  Fund,  Matching 
Grants  for  Innovation  and  Infant  Industry,  Innovation  Fund  for  Women’s  Enterprises;  and  a 
Specialised Business Development Services, to complement the Risk Mitigation Fund; and Technical 
Assistance for Financial Services, which is including Rural Financial Expertise, to be responsible for 
both  informal  and  formal  financial  services;  and ASCA  Development  Specialist  to  bring  specialized 
experience  from  other  countries.  iv)  Institutional  Strengthening,  Policy  Initiatives  and  Project 
Management. 
14. 
International  development  partners.  Co-funding  is  present  in  the  majority  of  the 
Projects/Programmes.  The  European  Union 
four 
for 
Projects/Programmes  (PROPESCA,  PSP,  PROMER  and  PROAQUA); 
International  Development  (OFID)  co-finances  PROPESCA  with  USD 13.53  million;  PROSUL  is  co-
financed by the Spanish Trust Funds (STF) with EUR 16.3 million and by the IFAD-ASAP contribution 
amounting  to  USD 4.9 million  and  PRODIRPA  benefits  from  EUR 500,000  grant  provided  by  the 
Belgian Fund for Food Security (BFFS). 
is  co-financing  EUR 27.64 million 
the  OPEC  Fund 
in 
21 ROSCAs or Poupança e Crédito Rotativo. 
3 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
B.  Rationale 
15. 
National  policies.  In  April  2013,  the  Government  of  Mozambique  approved  the 
‘Mozambican Financial Sector Development Strategy (FSDS) - 2013-2022’ with the main objective 
of  overcoming  identified  challenges  in  financial  inclusion  and  allowing  faster  development  of  the 
financial  sector.  The  FSDS  focuses  on  maintaining  financial  stability,  improving  access  to  financial 
services,  and  increasing  the  supply  of  long-term  private  capital  to  support  the  development  of  the 
economy.  Subsequent  to  the  adoption  of  this  strategy,  the  World  Bank  approved  the  ‘2014-16 
Development  Policy  Operation  (DPO)’  aimed  at  supporting  financial  reforms  in  areas  of  financial 
stability,  inclusion  and  long-  term  financial  market.  DFID  launched  in  May,  2014  the  ‘Mozambique 
Access  to  Finance  Programme  (MAFIP)’  which  was  joined  by  other  donors  and  was  designed  to 
initiate financial activities aimed at improving financial inclusion.  
Based on this, the Government of Mozambique adopted the National Inclusion Strategy 
16. 
(2016-22). This strategy is focused on three pillars: (pillar 1) Access to and use of financial services; 
(pillar  2)  Strengthening  of  financial  infrastructure;  and  (pillar  3).  Financial  consumer  protection  and 
financial  literacy.  As  the  implementation  of  this  strategy  has  commenced,  it  is  expected  to  create 
necessary conditions for accomplishment of its goals:  It is planned that by 2022, 100 per cent of the 
districts  will  have  at  least  one  formal  access  point  to  financial  services  and  75  per  cent  of  the 
population will have one financial services access point within 5 kilometres of their place of residence 
or work. Mozambique is expected to increase access to financial services from 24 per cent to 40 per 
cent by 2018 and 60 per cent of population by 2022.  
17. 
IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  Government  in  its  focus  on  a  transformation  of 
agriculture towards a modern, commercial and inclusive primary sector. The most recent example of 
close alignment with the Plano Estratégico para o Desenvolvimento do Sector Agrário (PEDSA) 
has been the value chain focus in PROSUL.  
18. 
Recent  financial  sector  policies  reflect  the  need  to  respond  to  the  crisis  in  2015  with  a 
more  restrictive  monetary  policy  regime  and  resulting  high  rates  of  interest.  These  are  expected  to 
remain  higher  than  the  long-term  average  until  after  the  next  national  elections  scheduled  for  2019. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  central  bank  has  been  promoting  a  variety  of  rural  financial  institutions  and 
policies  that  are  focused  on  increasing  outreach  and  service  penetration  of  financial  institutions  into 
the rural sphere.  
19. 
Responding to emerging policy challenges. The Directorate of Treasury of the Ministry 
of  Economy  and  Finance  directly  coordinates  the  IFAD  Country  Programme.  Based  on  IFAD  global 
rural finance experience and specific emerging requirements in the Mozambique country context, the 
Directorate  has  been  requesting  a  focused  project  with  rural  finance  as  its  central  activities  and  not 
just  as  a  complementary  focus.  The  Government  wants  to  respond  to  the  current  crisis  scenario  in 
rural finance by promoting a stimulus with alternative financing mechanisms that can result in higher 
client volumes, and thus help to kick start the rural financial sector out of its current sub-optimal state. 
IFAD is responding to this request with the development of the Rural Enterprise Financing Project 
(REFP).  Project  development  proceeded  in  close  collaboration  and  mutual  sharing  of  experiences 
between the Fund and the Directorate of Treasury. 
20. 
National  focus.  Given  the  relevance  of  innovative  financing  mechanisms  for  the  rural 
sector in general, and in particular for the fledgling micro and small enterprise sector, the focus of the 
REFP is purposely designed to be national in reach. An all-country focus would also ensure that the 
current  scattered  and  isolated  activities  in  the  different  IFAD  supported  projects  would  be  more 
effectively coordinated, harmonized and fine-tuned as required through a national PMU.  
21. 
Smallholder  farmers  and  artisanal  fishermen.  The  demand  for  financial  inclusion  in 
rural  Mozambique  is  affected  by  the  level  of  agricultural  production  and  productivity  in  both 
agricultural,  fisheries  and  non-agricultural  enterprises,,  the  poverty  level,  access  to  education, 
financial  literacy  status,  availability  of  finance  institutions  (financial  service  providers)  in  rural  areas 
providing  demand  driven  financial  products/tools,  and  commitment  of  government  to  champion  the 
implementation  of  the  national  financial  inclusion  strategy.  Rural  households  and  MSMEs  in 
Mozambique are likely to be financially excluded compared to urban dwellers and larger businesses. 
Financial  access  is  relatively  lower  in  the  Northern  provinces  compared  to  the  rest  of  the  regions. 
There is also a considerable gender difference in financial inclusion  between rural and urban areas. 
About 92 per cent of women in rural Mozambique were financially excluded compared to 31 per cent 
4 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
in  urban areas.  Moreover,  financial  inclusion  is extremely low  in rural and remote areas,  among the 
entrepreneurs and MSEs and poorer people in the country 
Rural micro and small enterprises. In the context of Mozambique, small enterprises are 
22. 
classified as those with less than ten employees and medium enterprise with employees between 11 
and 50. Large enterprises operate with more than 50 employees. 98.6 per cent of Mozambican firms 
are composed of micro and small enterprises. Informal businesses can be very small (usually single 
proprietors, and often on a part time basis). The MSME sector already contributes a significant 20 per 
cent to the country’s revenues22. Several studies argue that the urban structure of the financial sector, 
awareness  of  funding  opportunities,  lack  of  adequate  guarantees  or  collateral,  and  the  absence  of 
small  business  support  services  constitute  the  main  specific  challenges  that  small  firms  in 
Mozambique have to face. In spite of this, some 80 percent of the national population and 75 percent 
of  the  MSEs  in  Mozambique  are  excluded  from  accessing  loans  from  the  formal  banking  sector. 
Lending  to  rural  entrepreneurs  and  MSEs  is  considered  by  banks  as  risky.  Nearly  nine  of  ten  MSE 
owners are based in rural areas.  Policy makers now prioritize the development of the MSME segment 
also  in  rural  areas,  since  experience  shows  that  a  durable  and  robust  development  path  is  more 
securely  based  on  a  large  number  of  smaller  actors,  rather  than  on  a  few  key  industries  with  their 
dependence of respective world markets and developments.  
23. 
Rural finance institutions. The comparatively small banking sector in Mozambique with 
17 banks and 642  branches in 2017 lends mainly to  corporate customers, particularly to large firms 
engaged  in  trade  activities  in  urban  areas. Agricultural  loans  accounted  for  only  3  per  cent  of  total 
lending of the banking sector; causing a key challenge to inclusive growth of rural agriculturally based 
communities in Mozambique.  Another challenge is the concentration of branch networks in the capital 
city (Maputo) and southern provinces. In 2017, the 33.3 per cent of all bank branches were located in 
Maputo. Out of the 158 districts in the country about half are without bank branches. In view of this, 
the Bank of Mozambique has issued a directive on the location of bank branches. A bank intending to 
expand  its  activities  will  have  to  locate  one  in  three  of  its  proposed  branches  in  one  of  79  priority 
under-banked localities (33 in three Northern provinces, 37 in four Central provinces and nine in two 
Southern provinces). In addition to insufficient outreach, there is also scope for innovation: in terms 
of an entire systems of Rural Banks to form part of an integrated banking/financial services network, 
but also process innovations (digital finance) and product innovations. In the current crisis and post 
crisis  scenario  of  the  financial  sector,  funds  within  the  institutions  themselves  for  research  and 
development  are  curtailed  and  financial  institutions  focus  on  what  they  perceive  to  be  safer  clients: 
larger  and  well  collateralized  repeat  borrowers  from  the  corporate  sector.  A  project  to  generate 
scalable  and  concrete  technical  solutions  in  retail  and  rural  finance  can  thus  potentially  make  a 
contribution to the larger rural transformation process. 
24. 
The  microfinance  sector  involves  11  micro  banks  (with  33  branches  in  2015),  8  credit 
cooperatives,  12  saving  and  loans  organizations,  and  more  than  380  micro  credit  operators,  and 
community  based  financial  organizations  such  as  “Accumulating  Savings  and  Credit  Associations” 
ASCAs.  
25. 
ASCAs are grassroots level community-based financial institutions where member savings 
are  pooled  for  the  purpose  of  lending,  and  thus  affording  members  the  opportunity  to  borrow  as 
needed.  The  primary  focus  in  these  groups  is  on  generating  small  incomes  from  savings.  This  is 
achieved by lending out of the group corpus fund for small amounts and emergency purposes, but for 
comparatively  high rates of interest compared to  interest rates in the formal financial sector. ASCAs 
include the lower end of the rural population that are excluded from accessing financial services from 
the formal financial system. Self-selection of the group members and peer pressure on repayment has 
created a robust basis for the sustainability of the ASCAs. According to a recent (2017) study by  the 
DFID Financial Deepening Trust, in 2017, 20,292 ASCAs operated in 79 per cent of the districts with 
386,731 members, 65 per cent of which were women. The accumulated savings of ASCAs was about 
1.8 billion MZN (29 million USD), while their social fund was about 19 million MZN (305,000 USD). On 
the other hand, any intervention to expand and promote the activities of ASCAs should be based on 
needs  of  members.  Invariably  ASCAs  also  provide  the  economies  of  scale  necessary  to  make  a 
business  case  to  formal  finance  providers.  If  mature  ASCAs  are  linked  and  consolidated  into  a 
network or an  union structure that can  be serviced as one entity,  then they can access larger  loans 
22  Factors  influencing  access  to  finance  by  SMEs  in  Mozambique:  case  of  SMEs  in  Maputo  central  business  district,    H.M. 
Mogaka Osano and  H. Languitone, Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 2016. 
5 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
and other financial and non-financial BDS services; and at the same time becoming more attractive to 
formal  finance  providers.  This  can  be  implemented  with  the  support  of  development  partners  and 
government without bringing unwanted interference. 
26. 
Mobile  money  and  digital  finance.  There  has  been  progress  in  promoting  inclusive 
finance  in  Mozambique  using  mobile  money  and  digital  financial  services  (DFSs).  Unlike  the 
electronic  banking  services  that  enable  access  to  one's  bank  account  (by ATM,  internet  and  mobile 
phone), mobile money does not require a bank account and a physical branch. These services allow 
the  transfer  of  funds  to  individuals  such  as  relatives,  effect  payment  for  goods/services,  businesses 
via mobile phone numbers. Mobile money services are also delivered through authorized agents that 
lower  installation  and  running  cost  compared  to  banks.  Expanding  agent  banking  has  considerable 
potential in Mozambique to increase financial inclusion significantly and reducing the transaction cost 
by  using  retail  and  postal  outlets  or  individual  agents  (including  mobile  money  agents)  to  carry  out 
basic  financial  services  such  as  payment  of  bills,  deposits,  or  withdrawal  of  money,  on  behalf  of  a 
bank. The Bank of Mozambique has approved the legislation on agency banking, which is expected to 
make a breakthrough in reaching the remote areas. The three mobile phone companies in the country 
(Motivel, mCel and Vodacom) have subsidiary mobile money services (e-Mola, mKesh and m-PESA). 
Given the 15.5 million mobile phone owners in Mozambique, there is a potential to expand the use of 
DFSs particularly phone-based payment systems. 
27. 
Project  rationale  and  strategic  considerations  in  summary:  Mozambique  has  an 
exceptionally  high  share  of  financially  excluded  population,  in  particular  in  rural  areas  and  as  far  as 
women are concerned. Together with rural based micro and small enterprises, this has resulted in a 
considerable  pool  of  productive  economic  units  with  financial  services  requirements  that  are  not  yet 
met. On the supply side, the challenges are likewise major. The banking sector has been weakened 
by the financial crisis of 2015, the MFI sector is still small and fledgling, and the large, as yet informal 
group of informal village-based savings groups, the ASCAs need a direction into which it can develop 
and graduate,  
28. 
REFP can strengthen, organise, support and to a certain degree address the demand for 
financial services and increase the flow of financial resources into the rural areas; particularly to rural 
entrepreneurs.  Further,  at  the  same  time  addressing  existing  market  failures  in  rural  finance,  and 
accelerating rural transformation and development. Without the REFP, the current pace of the growth 
of financial service providers would not be possible through internal resources. This would result in an 
unacceptably slow growth in the provision of financial services to rural agricultural and non-agricultural 
entrepreneurs  and  MSMEs.    REFP  will  strengthen  the  financial  delivery  capacity  of  the  financial 
service  providers  and  facilitators  (government  and  private)  in  Mozambique  to  rural  agricultural  and 
non-agricultural  entrepreneurs  and  MSEs  even  after  the  closure  of  the  project.  The  project  will 
deliberately pursue the greater participation of women and youth in economic activities that will lead to 
significant  beneficial  outcome  of  the  project.  On  top  of  building  the  capacity  of  inclusive  financial 
service providers, including ASCAs and the proposed ASCA Union, and the direct beneficiaries of the 
project, the REFP would also build the technical and institutional capacity of government institutions 
mainly  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance,  Mozambican  Association  of  MFIs,  the  Bank  of 
Mozambique,  BNI  (as  the  REFP  executing  agency)  and  FARE  (as  a  strategic  partner  and  Service 
provider to BNI) to sustainably promote and support the delivery of financial services in the rural and 
remoter  areas  of  the  country.  A  combination  of  funding  instruments  to  finance  development  and 
technical assistance is foreseen to create the necessary conditions for building up viable rural based 
institutions and implementing this project successfully and sustainably. 
Project description 
Project  area  and  target  group:  REFP  will  have  national  scope  and  will  be  implemented  in  all  ten 
rural  provinces  of  the  country:  Manica,  Tete,  Niassa,  Cabo  Delgado,  Nampula,  Zambezia,  Sofala, 
Inhambane, Gaza and Maputo Province. Selection criteria for geographic targeting will concentrate in 
provinces with high levels of poverty above 40% starting with the provinces with presence of ongoing 
IFAD-funded interventions (i.e. PROMER, PROSUL, PROPESCA, PSP and PROACQUA), as well as 
the  areas  with  potential  for  MSME  development.  REFP  financial  support  will  be  made  available  to 
project  participants  of  ongoing  projects  that  have  received  training  and  production  and  productivity 
enhancement support in both agricultural and  non-agricultural enterprises. For these, lack of access 
to affordable capital is one of the main constraints for expansion and intensification. The total number 
6 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
of direct beneficiaries receiving support from REFP is 287,700. Outreach, calculated on the basis of 
an  average  number  of  individuals  benefiting  from  the  MSMEs  targeted.  23    The  project  will  target 
57,540 youth of which 28,770 will be young girls, 230,160 among men and women of which 50 % will 
be women (115,080) and 115,080 men. 
29.  Target  groups:  In  Mozambique,  rural  smallholder  households  that  engage  in  agriculture 
fisheries  and  non-agricultural  MSMEs  are  categorised  into  four  broad  categories:24:  (i)  Smallholder 
subsistence  and semi-subsistence producers, (ii) Rural household (self-employed) entrepreneurs (iii) 
Emergent  Farmers  (market  oriented  producers)  and  iv)  Medium  Entrepreneurs  (transit  and  stable). 
The  criteria  for  defining  the  smallholder  farmers  is  based  on  (i)  landholding  size;  (ii)  market 
orientation;  (iii)labour  input;  (iv)income;  (v)  farming  system  ;  (vi)  farm  management  responsibilities;  
(vi) capacity; (vii) legal aspect  and (viii) level of organization.  The primary target group of the  Project 
consists  of  poor  and  disadvantaged  rural  households  involved  in  agriculture,  fisheries  and  MSMEs. 
These will include men, women, women head of household, youth including the vulnerable people. In 
line  with  the  rural  livelihood  assessments  of  the  country,  and  the  ongoing  IFAD  portfolio,  the  main 
characteristics of the target group include i) smallholder farmers (subsistence and semi-subsistence), 
ii) smallholder fisher men and women, iii) other rural household and micro-entrepreneurs. 
30.  The following section highlights the characteristics of each of the smallholder categories25.  
31.  Smallholder  subsistence  and  semi-subsistence  producers:  This  category  will  consist  of 
poor rural households engaged in both agriculture production and fisheries. They have limited access 
to  land,  inputs,  credit,  markets  and  market  information,  representing  about  99per  cent  of  the 
agriculture  sector  producers  in  the  country.  These  are  net  producers  of  staple  crops,  food  insecure 
with no regular  water and  soil fertility management practices. They are  under-covered  by extension, 
and  have  a  longer  learning  curve  in  the  uptake  of  new  technologies  and  approaches.  They  largely 
operate  as  individuals  and  are  highly  vulnerable  and  dependent  on  their  farm  produce.  They  have 
weak bargaining power, poor market linkages and no access to market information.  
32.  Rural  household  (self-employed)  entrepreneurs:  This  category  includes  subsistence 
producers,  engaged  in  various  entrepreneurial  income  generating  activities  off-farm.  They  have 
limited  access  to  finance,  land,  and  live  below  the  poverty  line.  In  addition,  they  have  insufficient 
production,  depletion  of  food  stocks,  and  have  high  risk  exposure  to  rising  food  prices,  thereby  are 
food  insecure,  and  exposed  to  acute  malnutrition  due  to  inadequate  diet.  They  also  have  limited 
resilience  to  climatic  shocks;  therefore  households  are  highly  vulnerable,  live  off  of  farm  produce, 
either  by  consuming,  selling,  or  trading  their  agricultural  labour.  This  is  an  important  target  group 
deserving  promotion  because  of  their  potential  for  income  and  employment  generation.  The 
entrepreneurs are interested to expand their activities but have limited access to financial resources. 
They have limited business and technical skills, however a fully integrated approach providing credit, 
raw materials, technical and business training as well as marketing assistance would be beneficial for 
this group. They also may need small equipment to further support their business enterprises.   
33.  Emergent  farmers  (market-oriented  producers)  are  considered  as  economically  active, 
commercially viable (to an extent) and in a position to benefit from opportunities along the agricultural 
value  chain.  They  will  be  targeted  in  so  far  as  they  bring  experience,  dynamism,  innovation,  and 
services to the poorer subsistence-oriented farmers. These emergent smallholder farmers are already 
involved in value chain production (existing cassava, horticulture, livestock producers and fishermen). 
This group is composed of both poor and non-poor, who have already graduated to market-oriented 
agriculture. This group has successfully increased production, applies fertilizers and some agronomic 
practices,  and  is  interested  in  further  expanding  their  business,  increasing  value-added  and 
developing new activities that support the production and marketing of target crops. 
34.  Small  and  medium  entrepreneurs  (transit  and  stable):  This  category  has  multiple  income 
sources  and  includes  wages  from  occasional  labour,  salary  from  employees,  retail,  agriculture  and 
other  non-farm  income  generating  activities.  The  business  employs  5  to  20  workers  and  monthly 
income  is  between  USD100  –  USD  1000.  The  group  earn  higher  income,  has  resources  for 
23 Tables in appendix 2 indicate the relevance of key development parameters in the 10 provinces envisaged for 
REFP coverage and beneficiaries by province.  
24  US2,50 PPP/day form CGAP (2016) National Survey  & Segmentation of Smallholder in Mozambique. 
25 Draft COSOP for Mozambique 2017 
7 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
addressing  emergencies.  The  household  income  is  split  equally  between  agriculture  and  non-
agricultural  MSMEs.  The  group  has  been  set  up  by  policy  makers,  development  agencies  and 
financial  institutions.  The  business  is  usually  obtained  through  family  inheritance  usually  originating 
from an agricultural base. The group can access credit for the formal financial institutions for funding 
MSEs  operations  as  well  as  buying  new  equipment  to  replace  obsolete  machinery.  The  group  is 
wealthy, more educated and more prepared to tackle emergency situations. 
35.  Women will be directly targeted as they constitute the main constituent engaged in agriculture, 
and  the  majority  of  the  rural  population.  Female-headed  households  are  amongst  the  poorest  and 
their  economic  progression  is  hindered  by  a  combination  of  social  and  structural  constraints.  Their 
access  to  land,  knowledge,  inputs,  finance,  high  value  agriculture  chains  and  capacity  to  generate 
income  is  heavily  curtailed  by  traditional  gender  roles  that  will  undermine  their  participation  unless 
gender  is  mainstreamed  into  all  project’s  components.  Their  participation  will  be  prioritized  and  in 
addition to mobilisation strategy, the programme will  apply  affirmative actions (i.e. quotas) to ensure 
their  equitable  participation  and  benefit 
implementation  and 
management arrangements will be  gender sensitive. Interventions  will be aligned to the Strategy for 
Gender Inclusion in Agriculture (2016-2025) developed by PROSUL for the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Food Security.  
intervention.  Project 
from 
the 
36.  Youth  will  constitute  a  direct  target  group  because  they  are  more  likely  to  be  resource  poor, 
lack control over assets and have limited livelihood options, and their integration into rural economies 
has  long-term  positive  social  and  economic  consequences.  Selection  criteria  will  prioritize  their 
participation whenever possible and a number of activities have been identified that will address their 
needs  and  priorities.  Youth  will  be  mobilised  and  consultation  to  capture  their  view,  aspirations  and 
expectation will be conducted. Interventions will be guided by the Gender, Youth and Social inclusion 
manual.  In  this  regard,  the  project  will  consider  the  heterogeneity  of  the  youth  cohort  i.e.    Gender, 
level of education, interest & aspirations in determining investments. 
37.  Highly vulnerable and marginalized households i.e. HIV/AIDS affected, elderly: This group 
comprise    child  and/or  female  headed  households  and  the  elderly  women  who  assume  the  role  of 
carer  for  orphans  and  the  sick.  They  are  highly  vulnerable  due  to  the  impact  of  HIV/AIDS,  which 
retards  agricultural  production,  and  threatens  food  security,  due  to  the  lack  manpower  at  crucial 
moments of agricultural productivity. They may  also  be  impacted by traditional  land tenure systems, 
where  women  can  lose  access  to  land  All  factors  (HIV/AIDS,  Disabilities,  Elderly)  influence  the 
availability of other household members for productive activities, while they are tending to their needs. 
IFAD  will  consider  cross-cutting  initiatives  to  ensure  that  project  interventions  are  sensitive  to  their 
unique  circumstances,  in  particular  through  training  and  capacity  building  on  production,  business 
skills  to  facilitate  household  /group  enterprise  development,  diversification  of  production,  access  to 
markets.  This  will  also  include  the  inclusion  of  HIV/AIDS  Nutrition,  dietary  diversity  &  food 
management in extension modules.   
Targeting  Strategy:  REFP  will  implement  an  inclusive  targeting  strategy  to  ensure  that  project 
benefits  are  distributed  to  a  large  number  of  poor  rural  households.  The  targeting  measures  will 
include self-targeting geographic targeting, direct targeting, and application of quotas for  youths and 
women rural entrepreneurs. Self-targeting measures will ensure that Project interventions respond to 
the priorities and livelihood strategies of the target groups.  The selected financial services along with 
identification  of  entrepreneurial  opportunities  will  be  suitable  for  all  target  groups.    Direct  targeting 
mechanisms  will  ensure  that  women,  youth  and  specific  vulnerable  and  disadvantaged  groups 
(financially  excluded)  be  assisted  to  access  financial  and  economic  opportunities.    The  Project  will 
introduce  quotas  and  specific  targets  to  ensure  their  inclusion:  women  will  be  50%  of  total 
beneficiaries while youth will be 20%. Specific financial instruments will be set up to serve  the most 
disadvantaged.  
38.  The Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme  will target the smallholder subsistence & 
semi-subsistence  men  and  women  producers.  They  will  be  assisted  in  accessing  micro  loans  to 
engage  in  more  profitable  opportunities  and/or  livelihood  diversification  to  move  out  of  poverty  and 
vulnerability.  Crowing-in  Matching  Grant  Fund,  and  Line  of  Credit  will  serve    rural  smallholder 
8 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
entrepreneurs: men, women,  youth  who are trained on financial literacy and business planning and 
entrepreneurship to access loans to engage in agriculture and non-agriculture MSMEs. 26 
39.  Gender  and  social  inclusion  strategy.    The  Project  gender  strategy  aims  at  equal 
involvement and benefits of women and men in the development of the intervention. Women and men 
of  different  ages  and  socioeconomic  categories,  including  youth,  will  be  given  equal  chances  to 
participate in REFP activities and obtain equal returns.  Increasing social capital among the poor is a 
guiding principle of the  proposed  Project,  which emphasizes the  importance of enhancing economic 
and  social  inclusion  of  vulnerable  and  marginalized  groups  in  targeted  rural  communities.    This  will 
comprise unemployed youth, elderly women and men, widows/orphans, the disabled and people living 
with HIV/AIDS. 
40.  REFP will seek to mainstream gender-informed approaches in its design, implementation, and 
monitoring  of  activities  by  factoring  in  the  different  needs,  constraints,  and  opportunities  of  women, 
men,  girls,  and  boys  across  all  components.    Specifically,  the  Project  will  provide  marginalized 
women,  youth  and  other  vulnerable  groups  with  targeted  interventions  that  recognize  their  different 
skill needs and resources compared to other members of the community. 
41.  This will be achieved through investing in capacity building at all levels, especially introducing 
methodologies  at  household  level  to  support  women  to  share  control  of  income  generated  and 
decision making (that is, selected tools from the Household methodology) and for supporting nutrition 
sensitive related interventions. 
42.  The  Project  will  contribute  to  three  main  outcomes  for  Gender  Equality  and  Women’s 
Empowerment (GEWE): 
  Expand  women’s  economic  empowerment  through  access  to  and  control  over 
productive  and  household  assets.    Women  heading  households  and  women  in  male-
headed  households  will  be  empowered.    Their  financial,  business  and  entrepreneurial  skills 
will  be  strengthened  to  build  small  businesses  and  effectively  engage  in  income  generating 
activities (IGAs). Women will be assisted in  accessing key technologies, equipment, financial 
and non-financial services to increase fish/ agricultural  production and productivity. 
  Strengthen women’s decision-making  role in the  household and  community  and their 
representation in membership and leadership of local institutions.  The use of capacity 
building, including household methodologies, will ensure that women are fully part of decision-
making  in  the  household  and  regarding  economic  related  activities.    Their  participation  in 
ASCAs  (where  women  account  over  50%  of  participants)  will  be  used  to  encourage  their 
membership  and  leadership  in  those  groups  and  organisations  and  key  committees  created 
by the project and existing ones that will be strengthen by the intervention. In particular, the 
project  will  focus  on  strengthening  women’s  leadership  skills  in  ASCAs  and  in  decision 
making positions, by providing training to women-led ASCAs. 
  Achieve  a  reduced  workload  and  an  equitable  workload  balance  between  women  and 
men,  girls  and  boys.  Time  and  labour  saving  technologies  as  well  as  other  type  of 
technologies  will  be  promoted  by  the  project.  Another  main  contributor  for  an  equitable 
workload balance will be the application of HHs methodology at household level.  
43.  The gender and social inclusion strategy will consider lessons from existing IFAD experiences 
in  the  country,  and  will  support  women  farmers/fishers  to  take  advantage  of  financial  services  and 
economic  opportunities  provided  by  REFP.  Moreover,  women  will  be  supported  in  becoming  active 
and  vocal  members  of  relevant  organizations.    It  will  also  support  (i)  women  smallholders’  farmers 
access  to  services,  inputs  and  assets;  (ii)  women  and  youth  inclusion  in  capacity  building;  and 
(iii) nutrition education.  In consideration of women’s (i) low levels of literacy and numeracy, (ii) lack of 
business development and management skills and (iii) limited voice, leadership and decision making 
capacity in organizations and business management, the Project will support the following initiatives: 
1. 
26 Table in appendix 2 provides details on current definitions related to poverty brackets and rural entrepreneurship. 
The different classes of rural smallholder entrepreneurs correspond to different target segments and support 
strategiess within REFP: 
9 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
  Financial literacy and leadership training for women.  The training will work on their capacity 
to  engage  in  business  activities  and  become  leaders.    This  activity  will  support  women 
participation  in  groups,  cooperatives  and  enterprises,  enabling  them  to  engage  in  profitable 
income  generating  activities  and  benefit  from  them.    Training  will  target  women  who  are 
already member of producers’ organizations, cooperatives or private enterprises or those who 
have the potential to be active members of one of those.  The intervention will pay particular 
attention to encourage women in key leadership position. 
  Women  and  youth  producers/processors  will  be  assisted  in  accessing  financial  services  to 
purchase relevant assets and inputs for their economic activities.  They  will be supported in   
applying for financial support. 
  The  Project  will  pay  careful  attention  to  ensure  trainings  respond  to  women’s  needs.    To 
ensure their inclusion (50% participants) the extension agents will consider appropriate time, 
location and childcare facilities will be provided  
  The  Project  will  involve  strategies  to  improve  the  nutritional  status  of  communities  involved.  
At community level, curriculum on nutrition will be developed and integrated in the Subsector 
plans for trainings.  It is also proposed that the activities on specific food promotion, behaviour 
change communication and nutrition education will be implemented at household level using 
the household methodologies approach. 
  Selected  tools  from  the  Household  methodology,  whose  success  has  been  proven  under 
other  IFAD  funded  initiative  in  Mozambique,  will  be  used  during  capacity  buildings  at 
community  level,  to  promote  equal  access  of  men  and  women  to  economic  opportunities, 
decision-making processes and share of workload and also for improved nutrition.  
A. 
 Development objective and impact indicators 
The Project Goal is to contribute to rural household livelihood improvement. The specific 
44. 
Project  Development  Objective  to  increase  the  availability  of,  access  to,  and  use  of  adapted 
(appropriate, affordable, and innovative) inclusive sustainable financial services, and technical support 
services in rural areas. The development objective will be achieved through the interventions of REFP 
as it effectively implements the following two main components: a) improved access to and usage of 
adapted financial products and support services for rural smallholder farmers, agri-entrepreneurs and 
non agri-entrepreneurs for investment, and b) Business development support/capacity building to rural 
smallholder  farmers,  agro-entrepreneurs,  non  agri-entrepreneurs  and  institutions  that  support  them. 
Consequently, REFP is designed to impact on the levels of household incomes and assets of at least 
287,700  direct  beneficiaries.    Thus,  in  the  process  influencing  the  Government  of  Mozambique’s 
planning and funding of sustainable financial projects in rural areas.  
B.  Outcomes/Components 
Outcomes 
45. 
The following are expected to be the main outcomes from REFP27:  
i. 
ii. 
Increased accessibility to diverse inclusive financial products and services has improved  
the livelihoods and resilience of rural smallholder farmers, agro-entrepreneurs, non-
agricultural entrepreneurs and enterprises. 
Institutional capacity enhanced of FIs delivering sustainable and appropriate financial 
support for rural smallholder farmers, agro-entrepreneurs and non-agricultural 
entrepreneurs. 
46. 
The outcome indicators to be assessed against the above  two project outcomes, and the 
impact indicators linked to the project objective are presented in the Log-frame. In the first year of the 
project, quantitative data would be collected during a sample baseline survey, which would be linked to 
27 Refer to the logical framework. 
10 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
the focus  areas  or  pilot  during  the  planning  process. Two  other  questionnaire-based  sample surveys 
(impact)  would  be  conducted,  one  towards  the  middle  of  the  project  (Mid-Term Review)  and  another 
during  the  final  year  (PCR).  The  aim  of  these  surveys  is  to  record  the  improvements  in  the  lives  of 
project beneficiaries. Additionally, outcome monitoring will also be followed up during implementation 
support / supervision missions.  
47. 
REFP Theory of Change (ToC): The project is expected to significantly contribute towards 
the increase of livelihood opportunities for the target beneficiaries through inclusive financial products, 
business  development  services,  and  enhanced  financial  institutions’  capacity  to  deliver  sustainable 
and  appropriate  financial  support.  REFP  outcomes  will  create  the  necessary  pre-conditions  to 
influence long-term change in rural financing in Mozambique. This will be achieved by strengthening 
the rural finance institutions in delivering a new range of products and services thus  enhancing the 
resilience and livelihoods opportunities for the project’s beneficiaries. 
Components 
The objective of component 1  - improved access to adapted financial services for rural 
48. 
entrepreneurs  -  is  to  provide  different  and  novel  routes  of  providing  funding  to  accelerate  the 
development  of 
fisheries  smallholder,  agricultural  and  non-agricultural 
entrepreneurial sectors in rural communities of Mozambique. REFP will operate with a flexible menu 
of instruments, catering to a wide range of the rural productive population. The current dearth in novel 
of  innovative  products,  approaches  and  services  for  the  poor  smallholder  farmers’,  agricultural  and 
non-agricultural entrepreneurs, and fishermen financing will be addressed. 
the  agriculture  and 
Sub-component  1.1  -  Graduation  Promotion  and  Outreach  Programme  (GPO)  will 
49. 
accelerate the processes of (i)  bringing in very poor people (i.e. the last mile or the bottom end of the 
income pyramid) to a level where they are creditworthy and can be integrated into mainstream rural 
financial  services.  GOF  provides  a  graduation  route  for  the  very  poor  rural  households  that  are  not 
bankable in their current financial and socio-economic state. This graduation route will be carved out 
and  supported  through  combining  intensive  handholding  and  technical  training  with  the  provision  of 
small-scale investment funds for a graduation cycle of between18 and 24 months; and (ii) innovative 
digital  financial  delivery  channels  (DFS)  for  agricultural  and  rural  finance  products  and  services, 
providing  a  platform  to  link  the  poor  to  a  wide  range  of  FSPs  and  other  stakeholders  to  strengthen 
their innovation initiatives. This will be carried out through similar technical assistance  arrangements 
as is with the graduation promotional processes. Sub-component 1.2 Crowding-in Fund (CIF) will offer 
a  tripartite  cost-sharing  with  matching  grant  mechanism  to  enable  loan  applicants  with  bankable 
propositions that are not able to attract full private sector financing to get access to part loan financing 
under  the  project.    The  tripartite  cost-sharing  scheme  will  provide  funding  with  the  sub-borrower 
(beneficiary) making a matching contribution, the participating financial institution providing a market-
priced  loan  –  the  interest  rate  to  be  charged  to  the  target  beneficiary  will  take  into  account  that  the 
loan funds are developmental in nature and not one of profit maximisation -, and the REFP providing 
a matching grant. This will finance investments that do not yet have proven commercial viability, and 
will  serve  as  a  demonstration  for  participating  financial  institutions  on  supporting  the  viability  of  that 
specific  type  of  project,  so  that  this  may  be  financed  in  future  on  purely  commercial  terms.  Sub-
component 1.3.  Line of Credit(LoC) will be set up to be accessed and utilized by small scale investors 
who  are  ready  to  expand  and  intensify  their  farming,  fisheries  and  non-agricultural  rural  enterprise 
businesses. With  the  current  pricing  for  funding  on  the  domestic  money  market and  the  squeeze  in 
liquidity,  the  line  of  credit  provides  a  necessary  temporary  arrangement  for  mobilizing  reasonably 
priced funds for the implementing agency.  
The  objective  of  component  2  -  capacity  building  and  support  for  institutions  and  rural 
50. 
entrepreneurs - is to develop the capacities, at institution level (sub-component 2.1), at the level of the 
micro and small enterprise and the small farmer (sub-component 2.2).  Subcomponent 2.1, provision 
of capacity building to financial institutions, complements the line of credit intervention to attract formal 
financial  institutions  in  delivering  financial  services  to  smallholder  farmers,  rural  agricultural 
entrepreneurs and non-agricultural MSEs. Sustainable financial institutions in Mozambique, dedicated 
to  promoting  financial  inclusion,  require  not  only  funds,  but  also  systems,  products  and  innovations 
backed up by skills and capacities. To this end, the sub-component 2.1 has the objective of providing 
capacity building support to banks, MEF, BoM, MFIs, only-credit institutions, and ASCAs,  so as they 
can  expand  their  activities  in  rural  areas  and  address  the  financial  needs  of  rural  enterprises  and 
MSEs, particularly those owned by women and  youth. The  REFP is committed to supporting (where 
11 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
necessary) a for-profit Union which will be an umbrella organization providing a variety of services to 
the ASCAs.  
Subcomponent 2.2 focuses on: (i) providing skills and knowledge to agricultural and non-
51. 
agricultural SMEs. These require non-financial and business development services tariing in order to 
improve their prospects of accessing financial and other technical support. In many cases this support 
is required for assistance in preparing loan applications and business plans. PROMER, PROSUL, and 
PROPESCA  PSP,  BAGC  and  IPEME,  are  all  currently  committing  significant  resources  in  the 
implementation  of  project  activities  of  agricultural,  fisheries  and  non-agricultural  enterprises  and 
entrepreneurial capacity development. Alignment of REFP with these ongoing projects and initiatives 
would likely lead to collective economies of scale through such collaborative actions; and importantly 
for the REFP provide incremental value addition to these other projects. The target group for REFP, 
25,000  direct  beneficiaries  have  the  potential  to  expand  their  market-related  activities,  thereby 
providing  improved  market  opportunities  for  smallholder  farmers.  The  support  by  the  REFP  to 
agribusiness, fisheries and other business development will be achieved through the implementation 
of  a  systematic  planning  and  capacitating  process  or  model,  utilising  business  development 
models/techniques  that  open  channels  for  the  target  group  of  smallholder  farmers,  fishermen  and 
non-agricultural  members  of  the  target  group  to  gain  better  access  to  finance  -  provided  by 
Components  One  of  the  REFP  and  other  IFAD  projects  such  as  PROMER,  PROSUL,  PROPESCA 
and  PROAQUA  -    and  establish  sustainable  market  opportunities.  This  sub-component  will  target 
commodity-based  smallholder 
farmer 
farming  and 
cooperatives,  informal  farmer  and  fishery  organizations,  and  agri-businesses,  at  local,  district  and 
provincial levels. In order to ensure that this intervention is informed by the needs of the target group 
on  the  ground,  prior  to  any  REFP  support  interventions  being  implemented,  a  study  for  mapping 
smallholder farming agribusiness, fisheries, agro and aqua-prenuerial opportunities,  other enterprise 
opportunities along the value chain  in Mozambique  will be commissioned. It  is  made very clear that 
this mapping study is not  designed  to be a  ‘re-invention  of the  wheel’; rather  a  confirmation of  what 
work  in  this  regard  is  currently  being  undertaken  in  Mozambique  and  what  added  value  -  through 
collaboration  and  cooperation  –  can  the  BDS  process  within  the  REFP  provide.    It  is  broadly 
anticipated that this national mapping study will identify BDS capacity development interventions that 
will include, but not limited to the following 
fishery  associations,  registered 
farmers, 
Component  1:  Improved  access  to  adaptive  financial  services  for  rural  entrepreneurs 
(USD 51.4 million – IFAD contribution: USD 43.3 million) 
This  component  will  consist  of  three  sub  components  namely:  Subcomponent  1.1: 
52. 
Graduation  Promotion  and  Outreach  Programme;  Subcomponent  1.2  The  Crowding  In  Fund:: 
Subcomponent 1.3: The Line of Credit  (LOC). 
Subcomponent 1.1. The Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme (GPO) 
53.  The Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme will be established with an initial value of 
USD 12.2  million  and  will  be  implemented  through  two  sub-windows:  (i)  Graduation  Promotion  Sub-
Programme – USD 6.0 million and the (ii) Outreach Expansion Sub-Programme USD 6.2 million. 
54.           (a)The Graduation Promotion Sub-Programme. A Graduation Promotion Programme 
will be instituted to allow a limited number of very poor small and subsistence farmers, fisher folks and 
other rural people to develop their small business skills and entrepreneurship to an extent where they 
can become creditworthy and bankable to access mainstream rural financial institutions at the end of 
the  graduation  programme  cycle.  The  graduation  programme  will  also  support  complementary 
activities  aimed  at  promoting  sustainable 
(i) 
entrepreneurship and business skills training; (ii) financial literacy to equip beneficiaries with skills and 
tools  for  setting  economic  goals,  budgeting  and  management  of    livelihood  risks;  (iii)  promotion  of 
(primarily  existing)  ASCAs  to  encourage  beneficiaries  to  save  in  order  to  manage  risks,  smooth 
consumption and boost their resilience; (iv) linking the beneficiaries of the graduation programme to 
financial institutions to enable them obtain financial services to support their economic activities. The 
sequence of activities  is designed  to  gradually  build  the capabilities  of poor households to the point 
where they have sustainable incomes and asset base, increased resilience to economic shocks and 
ultimately  graduating  to  mainstream  economic  activities.  Experience  from  countries  where  the 
Graduation  programme  has  been  implemented  indicates  that  the  total  cost  of  implementing  ranges 
income-generating  activities, 
in  particular 
12 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
from  USD 330  to  USD 650  per  participant  in  India  to  about  USD 1,900  in  Peru.  This  wide  range  in 
costs reflects the differences in underlying cost structures from country  to country (e.g., local salary 
scale, population density, and status of infrastructure), and from the emphasis placed on each of the 
building blocks (e.g., size and duration of consumption support). In the case of REFP, the graduation 
model  is  costed  at  USD 1,700  per  person,  which  is  within  the  range  of  costs  incurred  to  implement 
similar programmes in other countries. Because of tight supervision and specialized skills required to 
identify,  train  and  lend  to  very  poor  rural  people,  the  graduation  programme  be  carried  out  by  a 
technical  service  provider  specialized  in  carrying  out  graduation  or  targeting  the  ultra-poor  (TUP) 
programmes. The  service  provider  will  be  sourced  through  a  competitive  tendering  process  and  will 
undertake  all  the  graduation  activities.  The  TSP  will  report  to  the  national  PMU  and  he/she  will 
prepare  an  annual  workplan  for  implementing  the  graduation  activities.  He  /she  will  prepare  and 
submit monthly reports to the coordinator  
55.  (b) Outreach Expansion Sub-Programme: The purpose of Outreach programme  is to provide 
support to financial service providers (FSPs) (including MFIs, Microbanks, Commercial Banks, ASCAs 
etc)  to  develop  and  deploy  appropriate  and  innovative  financial  products  and  alternative  delivery 
channels  (DFSs)  that  increase  their  outreach  to  the  very  poor  and  marginalised  groups,  including 
beneficiaries  of  the  graduation  programme.  This  programme  will  specifically  target  the  ASCAs  and 
their  members  as  well  as  for-profit  umbrella  Unions  of  ASCAs.  The  project  will  support  initiatives 
including  development  of  digital  finance  products,  agency  banking,  insurance  products,  contract 
farming,  value  chain  financing,  term-finance  for  agriculture,  weather  index-based  insurance  for 
livestock,  technological  solutions  that  help  reduce  cost  of  service  delivery  such  as  M-Pesa,  use  of 
point  of  sale  devices,  biometric  data  storage,  and  pilot  testing  financial  graduation  approaches  etc. 
The outreach facility will finance (i) Technical assistance to assist FSPs to develop new products and 
alternative delivery channels (ii) a cost-sharing (On a 30-70 basis) to meet the cost of deploying a new 
technology to improve outreach to marginalised areas/groups,  establishing branches in remote areas, 
etc.  The  cost  per  intervention  will  be  capped  at  maximum  of  USD  10,000.  The  programme  will 
encourage  outreach  expansion  solutions  which  leverage  either  additional  donor  funding  or  a  cost 
sharing  arrangement  with  commercial  stakeholders,  such  as  insurance  companies,  telecoms  firms, 
leasing companies, market intermediaries, etc. 
Subcomponent 1.2 The Crowding In Fund.  
56.  The Crowding in Fund aims at improving access to finance for otherwise un-bankable small and 
medium  sized  enterprises  (farmer  groups,  inputs  suppliers,  aggregators  buying  from  smallholder 
farmers/fisherman,  transporters,  processors).  CIF  will  offer  a  tripartite  cost-sharing  with  matching 
grant  financing  tool  to  enable  potential  loan  applicants  with  risky  but  bankable  propositions  to  get 
access to loan finance under the project. The three parties to CIF will be the beneficiary, REFP and 
the  participating  financial  service  provider  (commercial  bank,  MFI,  etc).  The  facility  will  support 
investments in productive assets such as on farm production equipment, post-harvest machinery and 
equipment,  rural  transportation  and  processing  equipment  thereby  allowing  beneficiaries  to 
accumulate assets that they can offer as collateral to access loan finance. Strengthening and growing 
the  agribusinesses through fixed asset  investments and balance sheet reinforcement is expected to 
result in more bankable enterprises and broader access to long-term private capital, which promotes 
SMEs’  ability  to  expand  and  grow  and  become  more  productive  and  profitable.  The  main  value  for 
financial intermediaries is that this ‘blended finance’ approach, i.e. the leveraging of grant funding for 
credit, significantly decreases credit risk and enables financial intermediaries to invest in a customer 
segment they previously were not able to do business with. For investees, the combination of grants 
and  credit  reduces  the  cost  of  traditional  credit  and  enables  access  to  collateral  previously  not 
available 
57.  CIF will be established with an initial value of USD 5 million and be deployed in the form of in-
kind matching grants (procurement of fixed assets for the investees), with a maximum individual grant 
size of USD 5,000 per investment. For each eligible investment, the beneficiary will contribute 20 per 
cent  of  the  cost,  the  participating  financial  institution  40  per  cent  and  the  project  40  per  cent.  It  is 
envisaged  that  due  to  the  nature  of  activities  of  traders,  processors,  farmer  associations  and  other 
non-farm  rural  MSMEs,  most  of  the  grants  will  be  small  within  the  range  of  USD 3,000-USD 5,000. 
The actual grant amount will depend on the requirements of the proposed investment. 
13 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
58.  CIF is one of two sub-windows under the Umbrella Fund. It will be managed by the BNI Fund 
Manager. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Line of Credit (LOC)  
59.  Rationale: 80 per cent of the population is economically connected to agriculture and fisheries. 
On the other hand, credit to the rural sector is limited, covering the financial requirements of only 2.3% 
of  the  farm  holdings  in  the  country  and  25%  of  the  MSMEs.    The  overall  challenge  of  REFP  is  to 
stimulate investments in the rural and agricultural sector and to reduce the gap between the demand 
for  debt  financing  in  rural  areas  and  the  existing  institutional  supply.  The  line  of  credit  will  be  an 
immediate  stimulus  by  improving  the  availability  of  loan  finance  for  agriculture  and  rural  small 
enterprises. In the medium to  long term, financial  institutions  will then  benefit from capacity building 
(TA) measures through REFP to increase outreach of bank services to rural areas. In sum, the project 
supported lending facility can provide immediate relief to the capital starved farm and rural enterprises 
Rates of interest at all intermediation levels will be commercial with positive rates of interest for each 
intermediation level. 
60.  Demand  –  supply  considerations:  Monetary  policy  responses  of  the  central  bank  to  the 
banking sector crisis resulted in sustained high reference rates. As an unwanted side effect, interest 
rates for credit to the private sector became too expensive for potential borrowers. Banks and other 
financial  institutions  at  the  same  time  reduced  their  loan  books  as  a  response  to  the  crisis  and 
preferred  to  invest  liquid  resources  in  the  local  money  markets.  In  this  environment  with  unusually 
high price tags for loans and financial institutions being more averse to risks, an external line of credit 
reached high levels that led to that became extraordinary  current crisis in the financial sector. . This 
credit  facility  under  REFP  will  be  implemented  as  a  demand-based  rural  financing  instrument  for 
leveraging  funds  of  select  commercial  banks  and  MFIs  for  on-lending  to  some  39,700  clients 
comprising individuals, groups, associations and other collectives in remote rural areas of the country. 
This  will  involve  an  intermediary  institution  for  managing  funds,  coordinating  with  PFIs,  appraising 
proposals of PFIs, releasing refinance  and monitoring implementation to ensure  quality of lending  & 
repayment. It  will require  active  participation of PFIs to fulfil the  objectives of the programme, which 
would provide them opportunity to develop experience and knowledge in lending for agri business and 
other activities for rural clients. 
61. 
IFAD  financing  for  REFP  LOC  will  amount  to  USD  27.1  million  and  both  first  and  second  tier 
financial  institutions  contribute  20  per  cent  each  of  the  REFP  loanable  resources  on  a  pari  passu 
basis. The facility will be managed by BNI as the apex financial institution under REFP with on-lending 
to participating financial institutions for sub-loans to  end  borrowers. The size  of loan  will range from 
USD 100 to USD 5,000 per borrower. The REFP credit facility will reach a total of about 62,370 sub-
borrowers. 
62. 
Interest rate levels along the intermediation chain will be in line with the interest rate policies as 
applied  in  PAFIR:  The  apex  financial  institution  lends  at  a  rate    above  the  BOM  reference  rate  and 
participating  financial  institutions  then  adjust  REFP  rates  in  line  with  similar  products  they  offer  to  a 
similar clientele. In view of the exceptionally high interest rate environment that is projected to prevail 
for  some  time,  a  formula  is  proposed  whereby  in  the  Subsidiary  Loan Agreement  with  the  PFI  the 
difference  between  the  PFI  average  costs  of  funds  and  the  (significantly  lower)  lending  rate  of  the 
apex  financial  institution  to  the  PFI  is  stipulated. At  least  70  per  cent  of  the  cost  savings  of  the  PFI 
from  the  access  to  cheaper  REFP  funds  will  then  be  applied  in  reducing  the  sub-borrower  interest 
rates accordingly. The interest rates will be commercial since they are net positive at all levels of the 
intermediation  chain  and  near  market  rates  with  the  savings  of  the  PFI  from  accessing  REFP  loan 
funds carried forward to the end borrower.  
63.  The subsidiary loan agreement  with the participating financial institutions to manage the loan 
funds could include  benchmarks in terms of annual lending  and recovery targets, technical financial 
and  management  reporting  on  performance  of  this  institution  and  the  credit  facilities  placed  in  this 
PFI..  BNI  will  select  PFIs  in  close  collaboration  with  the  PMU.  An  initial  inventory  study  of  the 
microfinance sector in Mozambique is proposed.   
In order for the different rural financing sub-windows to avoid negative environmental and 
64. 
social  impacts  and  strengthen  ENRM  and  climate  resilience  to  benefit  on  the  livelihoods  of  the 
beneficiaries,  REFP  will  set  ENRM  and  climate  resilience  criteria  in  the  selection  process  for  the 
14 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
loans.  The  ESMP  will  make  explicit  reference  to  the  IFC  Exclusion  List28  outlining  investments  not 
eligible for project support. This set of criteria will integrate the country’s own safeguards  regulation29 
where  required  to  avoid  any  activity  known  to  unequivocally  pose  serious  environmental  and  social 
risks. The MFIs supported by REFP should engage in the promotion of environmental awareness and 
eco-efficiency  among  clients  while  simultaneously  limiting  their  exposure  to  lending  risks  caused  by 
social,  environmental  and  climate  issues.  The  MFIs  should  provide  opportunities  to  positively 
influence their clients’ environmental and social performance by engaging in active environmental and 
social  screening.  However,  the  large  majority  of  MFIs  in  Mozambique  do  not  have  in  place  a 
mechanism for environmental screening of credit applications nor for mitigation of environmental risks 
of the financed activities. Thus, the project will capacitate these institutions on this subject and support 
them  also  through  a  senior  environmental  and  social  consultant  hired  on  a  retainer  basis  within  the 
PMU  who  will  be  responsible  for  the  i)  implementation  of  capacity  building  on  climate  and 
environmental  aspects  of  REFP,  and  ii)  the  monitoring  of  social  and  environmental  compliance. As 
specified in the SECAP Review Note (Appendix 13) an increasing lender liability approach adapted to 
the  different  client  characteristics  can  be  adopted  to  mitigate  environmental  and  social  impacts  that 
could be generated by REFP supported activities. This involves the use of financial intermediaries to 
support environmental and social protection agencies in enforcing relevant regulations. One possibility 
is to formalize the enterprises to  ensure compliance  with existing  government regulations  governing 
business registration, taxes, zoning, minimum wage and social security provisions, and environmental 
protection.  This  approach  will  also  benefit  the  National  Directorate  of  Environment  (DINAB)  on 
institutional knowledge and data collection activities.30 
Component 2: Capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 
(USD 10.6 million – IFAD contribution USD 9.4 million) 
65. 
to essential local institutions; Subcomponent 2.2 Business Development Support. 
This component will consist of two sub components namely: Subcomponent 2.1: Support 
Subcomponent 2.1: Support to essential local institutions  
The main outputs of this subcomponent consist in (i) providing skills and knowledge to the 
66. 
staff of the financial institutions to better serve parts of the rural population who do not have  adequate 
access  to  financial  services;  (ii)  assisting  the  financial  institutions  in  designing  polices  and  develop 
financial tools or products to meet the needs of the rural enterprises and MSMEs; (iii) exposing and 
linking  the  financial  institutions  to  good  practices;  (iv)  enhancing  the  mobility  of  the  staff  of  the 
financial  institutions  to  serve  the  rural  financially  excluded  population  through  opening  branches  or 
using other innovative approaches (such as mobile money and agency banking and other DFSs) and 
expand their outreach in remote districts; (v) conducting a mapping study of ASCAs and linking 5,000 
mature ASCAs to formal financial institutions; (vi) supporting the establishment of  for-profit Union for 
ASCAs;  (vii)  establishment  of    a  database  for  MFIs  and  promote  social  performance  management 
through  the  Mozambique  Association  of  MFIs  (viii)  provide  institutional  and  technical  support  to 
transform  FARE  into  a  sustainable  financial  institution  and  (ix)  assist  microfinance  regulatory 
department of Bank of Mozambique to establish sustainable MFIs and promote financial literacy and 
consumer protection. 
67. 
Climate  change  and  Environmental  mainstreaming –  As  highlighted  in  Annex  13 
Mozambique is one of Africa’s most vulnerable countries to climate change. The occurrence of climate 
related hazards such as droughts, floods and cyclones is increasing resulting in loss of livelihood and 
economic  assets.  In  this  regard,  MFIs  represent  a  potential  opportunity  to  promote  adaptation  of 
smallholder  farmers  and  entrepreneurs  and  invest  in  adequate  technologies  required  to  respond  to 
climate variability and change (and consequently enhance loan repayment capacity). While increased 
access  to  finance  and  exposure  to  technologies  will  generate  autonomous  adaptation,  REFP  will 
28 See IFCs Project Exclusion List 
http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ifc+projects+database/projects/aips+
added+value/ifc_project_exclusion_list 
29 Environmental Law (Law no. 20/97). The latest regulation was established in 2015 (Decree 54/2015). 
30 The Environment Directorate (DINAB) within the Ministry of Land, Environment and Rural Development (MITADER) 
is the designated authority for the application of the Environmental Law and the management of the National 
safeguards regulation. 
15 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
encourage  capacity  building  in  climate  change  adaptation  and  sustainable  ENRM. This  includes 
trainings  for  the  MSMEs  in  the  agribusiness  sector,  local  institutions  (including  extension  staff)  and 
farmers and fishermen on climate change adaptation, the promotion of green technologies, etc. and 
the  capitalization  of  climate  risk  management  capacities. This  would  possibly  reduce  the  overall 
vulnerability  of  the  investment  to  climate  related  hazards. A  Senior  Environmental  and  Social 
consultant will be hired to join the PMU on a retainer basis to conduct capacity building exercises as 
well as biannual social and environmental assessments. Access to early warning systems (EWS) and 
reliable  and  timely  weather  information  through  existing  channels  will  finally  compound  the  package 
provided  to  increase  beneficiaries’  resilience  to  adverse  climatic  events.  Moreover,  MFIs  will  be 
capacitated  to  better  assist  REFP  beneficiaries  responding  to  adverse  climate  events  and  avoid 
investments  which  may  result  in  potential  adverse  environmental  impacts. Where  appropriate,  MFIs 
should  also  be  informed  of  the  existence  of  Local  Adaptation  Plans  (PLAs)  elaborated  within  the 
National Climate Change Adaptation and  Mitigation  Strategy framework.31 This may  inform the MFIs 
lending criteria and ensure an effective use of resources at district level. 
68.  Nutrition  Mainstreaming  –  Although  Mozambique  had  made  some  progress  in  reducing 
poverty and undernutrition, the country is still facing food insecurity especially for households living in 
rural areas who are vulnerable to climatic hazards and natural disasters. For instance, the decline in 
fish  supply,  coupled  with  a  growing  human  population  can  result  in  a  70%  decrease  in  protein 
availability  by  2030  as  compared  to  1995.32  The  Mozambican  diet  is  dramatically  low  in  terms  of 
micronutrient  value  and  is  poor  in  protein.  This  project  seeks  to  engage  the  target  beneficiaries 
through the graduation programme interventions on nutrition education and sensitization sessions.  
69.  The  nutrition  initiatives  will  be  implemented  by  extension  workers  with  the  assistance  of 
nutrition experts and in collaboration with identified potential partners. The initiatives entail mentorship 
and  training  with  the  focus  on  vulnerable  households,  malnourished  women  and  children.  The  key 
nutrition-sensitive  activities  will  comprise  of:  i)  increased  food  diversification  with  integrated  nutrition 
education;  ii)  training  on  improved  processing,  storage  and  preservation  of  food;  iii)  support  to 
SETSAN  on  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  in  Nutrition-sensitive  interventions.  REFP  will  leverage 
synergies on nutrition outcomes with the initiatives in other IFAD-supported projects working in same 
locations to maximise the facilities and other resources already in place.  
70.  Policy  Advocacy  and  Strengthening  -  working  with  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Bank  of 
Mozambique, the REFP within the life of the project  will include activities aimed at strengthening the 
policy and regulatory framework including those outlined through desktop and action-research Studies 
to  establish  the  policy  gaps,  promoting  policy  advocacy  forums,  capacity  building  support  for  policy 
formulation and implementation. 
Sub-component 2.2:  Business Development Support – BDS  
fisheries  and  non-agricultural  business  sector  on 
This  sub-component  is  designed  to  support  Mozambique’s  rural  development  in  the 
71. 
agricultural, 
increased 
commercialization  and  rural  transformation.  Sub-component  activities  cover  smallholder  agriculture, 
fisheries and non-agricultural rural entrepreneurs and off-farm micro and small enterprises in general. 
Further ensuring that the capacity development strategies and activities pursued will increase access 
to financial and business development services by the target group.  
its  way 
towards 
REFP  support  for  business  development  services  to  agribusiness,  fisheries  and  other 
72. 
business  development  can  be  achieved  through  the  implementation  of  a  systematic  planning  and 
capacitating  process,  utilising  business  development  techniques  that  open  channels  for  the  target 
group  of  smallholder  farmers,  fishermen  and  non-agricultural  members  of  the  target  group  to  gain 
better access to finance provided by component 1 of REFP. A related objective will also be to make 
existing market linkages at different levels of the chain more durable and predictable. 
73. 
To this end, sub-component activities  will target smallholder farmers, farming and fishery 
associations,  registered  farmer  cooperatives,  informal  farmer  and  fishery  organizations,  agri-
31 Mozambique’s National Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation Strategy (NCCAMS 2013 – 2025). 
http://www.cgcmc.gov.mz/attachments/article/148/National%20Climate%20Change%20Strategy_lowerres.pdf 
32 https://www.rare.org/mozambique 
16 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
businesses,  and  other  rural  non-agricultural  entrepreneurs  at  local,  district  and  provincial  levels  to 
build and strengthen their capacities. A capacity building needs assessment will be carried out first to 
ensure  that  this  intervention  is  informed  by  the  needs  of  the  target  group  on  the  ground,  identifying 
smallholder  farming  agribusiness,  fisheries,  agri-and-aquapreneurial  opportunities,  other  enterprise 
opportunities  along  the  value  chain  in  Mozambique  will  be  commissioned.  Based  on  this  demand 
assessment, the BDS process will likely provide training, facilitation of access to inputs, facilitation of 
access to financial services offered through component 1 of REFP, marketing support and advice in 
value addition activities and services.  
74. 
Direct action for priority women and youths target groups: REFP will directly target 2,500 
youths aged 18-35, and 2,500 women from all the provinces for income generation trainings. Similar 
to the graduation programme in component 1, this will provide accelerated support to segments of the 
population that are particularly disadvantaged and in need of special support. Through partnering with 
current  IFAD  assisted  projects,  and  government  initiatives,  the  target  group  for  BDS  training  could 
easily  be  doubled.  REFP  will  implement  a  national  Incubator  start-up  entrepreneurial  programme  to 
create  agribusiness,  agri-preneurial  and  non-agricultural  opportunities  for  youth  and  women  in  rural 
areas. 
Component 3: Programme Management (USD 10.5 million – IFAD contribution USD 9.5 million) 
75. 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) set up at BNI, will be responsible for overall project 
implementation. The main responsibilities of the National PMU will include: (i) annual work planning 
and budgeting (ii) financial management; (iii) procurement, including contracting of service providers; 
project facilitation in the three regions – through the three regional PMUs -  and (vi) Reporting, 
monitoring, evaluation and knowledge management. The PMU will be composed of a team of 
individual consultants contracted through competitive bidding and managed by a Project Coordinator. 
The PMU will be organised into three units covering the planned target geographical regions. The 
core project management unit will be based in Maputo City. Three regional project management units 
will be established as follows: one unit will be based in Beira and will oversee project implementation 
within the central region covering Manica, Sofala, Zambézia and Tete; another unit will be based in 
Nampula and will be responsible for coordinating project activities in four Northern provinces of 
Nampula, Zambezia, Cabo Delgado and Niassa; a third unit will be based in Xai Xai, Gaza and will be 
responsible for overseeing project activities in the Southern Region consisting of Gaza, Inhambane 
and Maputo Provinces.  It is considered not effective to assign responsibilities for coordinating the 
Southern Region to the National Project Management Unit as the unit may not have adequate time to 
engage stakeholders spread across three provinces in addition to discharging its national 
responsibilities. 
Staff members of the PMU will be recruited as individuals by BNI through a competitive 
76. 
process that complies with national general accepted public sector recruitment processes or those of 
IFAD (whichever is the more appropriate).Physically, the National PMU (NPMU) will be housed at BNI 
offices in Maputo City. Staffing of the unit will include: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator: Serves as the operational head of the PMU with responsibility for 
guaranteeing delivery of planned outputs, planning, monitoring and reporting; 
Finance Manager with overall responsibility for financial management and financial 
reporting 
Procurement Officer: Responsible for developing the annual project procurement plan 
and facilitating all procurement activities 
Accountant to support financial manager in maintaining accounting records and day to 
day management of accounts; 
M&E/Knowledge Management Specialist: designing M&E system, overseeing baseline 
and impact studies and surveys, preparation of progress reports; 
Rural Finance Specialist to oversee implementation of project financial instruments, ; 
capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 
17 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
 
 
Outreach Officer to oversee implementation of graduation and outreach activities; 
capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 
Support Staff (drivers, administrative and clerical) 
The project will also have part time experts that will be recruited and mobilised as 
77. 
required. This will include a senior Environmental and Social (E&S consultant hired on a retainer 
basis within the PMU who will be responsible for the i) implementation of capacity building on climate 
and environmental aspects of REFP, and ii) the monitoring of social and environmental compliance., a 
Gender and Youth Officer to ensure that REFP activities adequately mainstream women and youth 
priorities/targets; and a Human Resources Specialist who will liaise with the BNI Human Resource 
Management and Procurement  on all contracting matters. Provision has been made in the budgets to 
mobilise other unspecified experts that may be required during implementation of the project.  
Regional Project Management Units (RPMUs). These units will be responsible for 
78. 
identifying project investment opportunities as well as monitoring activities under implementation. The 
regional units will also have responsibility for developing mechanisms for ensuring complementarity of 
donor- and NGO-supported rural finance activities in the region. The RPMU will be hosted by the 
Provincial Directorate of Finance in the respective Provincial Governments where they will be 
operating. Each Unit will be made up of: 
 
 
 
 
Regional Coordinator: identification of project investment opportunities, providing 
implementation support to service providers, coordinating REFP activities with other rural 
finance initiatives  
M&E Officer: Collection of regular data and information on the project, preparation of 
regional progress reports, coordinating regional knowledge management activities  
finance/administrative officer: office management, financial management of financial 
resources assigned to the regional office 
Support Staff  (drivers, administrative and clerical) 
C.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
79. 
Lessons  Learned  from  IFAD  supported  projects  and  programmes  –  There  are  a 
number of lessons that can be drawn from the past and ongoing experiences of IFAD investments in 
Mozambique. Both the past experience from the Rural Finance Support Programme (PAFIR), and the 
experiences  from  the  ongoing  ProPESCA,  PROMER  and  PROSUL  Projects/Programmes  offer  a 
robust  basis  for  the  understanding  of  the  challenges  in  rural  finance  in  IFAD  Programmes  in 
Mozambique.  In  particular,  REFP  is  well  placed  to  draw  lessons  from  the  closed  Rural  Finance 
Programme  (PAFIR),  and  to  learn  from  the  on-going  activities  in  the  various  financial  services 
components currently implemented in the ongoing IFAD-supported Projects/Programmes.  
 a)  Well-focused, realistically targeted interventions can add value at sector level. The value 
added  in  the  sector  can  be  seen  from  the  growing  demand  for  the  piloted  financial  services 
interventions that have  performed satisfactorily as evidenced  in  the  2015 PAFIR PCR Report, 
the  latest  2016  MTR  report  for  PROSUL,  the  2016  Supervision  Mission  Report  for 
PROSPESCA  and  the  2016  Supervision  mission  Report  for  PROMER  –  all  of  which  point 
towards a growing and unmet demand for financial services in project areas. This needs to be 
that  measure  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 
followed  with  well-defined 
achievements;  
indicators 
b) 
A  set  of  key  financial  and  technical  performance  indicators  for  rural  finance  institutions 
are  important.  Transparent  reporting  of  these  indicators  through  financial  institutions  that  are 
properly  regulated  and  supervised  can  improve  management  practices  and  overall  project 
performance 
PAFIR  experience  indicated  that  complementary  technical  assistance  can  create  the 
c) 
demand for the services as well as strengthen delivery systems to meet such demand.  
High quality Fund management is key to dispensing successful credit and accompanying 
e) 
grant functions. 
18 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
f) Participating financial institutions at each level and for each component need to be carefully 
screened  and  selected  using  IFAD’s  Rural  Finance  Policy  with  its  Decision  Tools  screening 
procedures  
g)  REFP  design  was  also  closely  guided  by  the  conclusions  and  recommendations  of  the 
recently concluded CSPE by IOE that recommended more focused re-engagement of IFAD in a 
stand-alone  and  more  focused  and  dedicated  rural  finance  programme.  REFP  is  a  direct 
response  to  this  recommendation  and  conceptualized  as  a  first  phase  to  an  envisaged  long-
term engagement as was recommended by the IOE Report. 
80. 
partners in Mozambique 
Lessons  Learned  from  projects  and  programmes  supported  by  other  development 
As stated in the GoM’s Vision 2025, access to rural finance is considered one of the key 
81. 
drivers  in  the  improvement  of  rural  people’s  livelihoods.  Hence  many  development  partners  have 
made  an  effort  to  align  their  projects  and  programmes  with  the  Government’s  goal  of  improving 
economic  development  through  improved  financial  inclusion  also  as  a  means  to  to  stimulate 
agricultural  production”33  and  rural  transformation.  Hence,  alongside  IFAD’s  past  and  ongoing 
projects, REFP will not only contribute to the GoM’s vision, but also benefit from  similar projects and 
programmes currently ongoing on planned for rural Mozambique. Some of the most relevant ones to 
REFP are described below. 
  Mozambique  –  Access  to  Finance  Programme  (MAFiP).  This  program  is  funded  by  the 
U.K.  Department  for  International  Development  (DFID)  and  is  implemented  through 
Development Associates Incorporated (DAI). The project seeks to facilitate financial inclusion 
through  a  number  of  different  financial  services,  with  the  objective  of  reaching  more  than  2 
million people and 650 businesses in rural Mozambique. In doing so it seeks to promote the 
development  of  a  stronger  financial  sector,  by  improving  its  regulation,  infrastructure  and 
supervision,  and  creating  a  favourable  economic  and  social  environment  for  domestic  and 
international investments. The project is ongoing and hand will run through the period 2014-
2019. 
  Financial  Sector  Deepening  (FSDMoç)34.  As  per  the  above,  the  FSDMoç  project  is  also 
funded  by  DFID  and  implemented  through  DAI,  with  the  core  objective  of  being  the  core 
financial inclusion facilitation unit for the households and businesses targeted also by MAFiP, 
with the goal of creating a series of public and private partnerships. 
  SUSTENTA. This a World Bank financed project that will seek to benefit more than 700,000 
farmers  in  northern  Mozambique,  more  specifically  in  the  provinces  of  Zambezia  and 
Nampula (and is expected to possibly extend into Cabo Delgado and Niassa). The project is 
implemented through the Ministry of Land, Environment and Rural Development, and among 
other components, has articulated it design in line with the GoM’s vision to promote integrated 
sustainable rural development, for example through access to  finance and financial services 
(Um  Distrito,  Um  Banco),  one  of  the  five  strategic  points  of  the  Government’s  Programa 
Estrela,  Desenvolvimento  Rural  Integrado  e  Sustentável  (Integrated  Sustainable  Rural 
Development Program), 2015–2019. Hence one of the key program development objectives 
is to “increased access to finance for agriculture and forest-based VCs participants”35. 
  Beira Agricultural Growth Corridor (BAGC)36 initiative (2011-2017). Funded by a number of 
donors  (mainly  DFID),  the  BAGC  has  been  implemented  by  AgDEVCO.  The  initiative  has 
sought  to  provide  appropriate  low-cost  financing  mechanisms  to  fund  investments  for  small 
and  medium  size  farmers, whilst  improving  the  linkages  of  the  latter  with  the  private  sector. 
The project specifically  worked through three types of proposed financial support: (i) patient 
capital; (ii) “social venture capital”; and (iii) working capital facility37. 
33 Vision 2025 – Government of Mozambique.  
34 http://fsdmoc.com/  
35 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/160861467817940751/pdf/PAD1497-PAD-P149620-OUO-9-IDA-R2016-
0161-1-Box396267B.pdf  
36 http://www.agdevco.com/uploads/reports/BAGC_Investment_Blueprint_rpt19.pdf  
37 ibidem 
19 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
  Agro-Empreender38.  This  program  is  funded  by  the  Danish  International  Development 
Agency (DANIDA), and is implemented through GAPI. With a total of MZN320 million, it seeks 
to improve agribusiness and market linkages in Mozambique. More specifically it has worked 
in  trying  to  provide  specific  financial  products  for  agribusinesses,  and  in  addition  a  specific 
line  of  credit  for  youth.  Alongside  this,  it  has  also  supported  and  financed  local  financial 
intermediaries  (micro  banks,  rural  banks,  etc.),  all  with  the  goal  of  improving  rural  markets. 
The three lines of credit include the following: (i) Financial credit for agribusiness; (ii) Financial 
credit  for  young  entrepreneurs  (Agro-jovem);  and  Financial  credit  for  the  re-financing  of 
microcredit for agribusinesses and local financial intermediaries. 
  Feed  the  Future  Agricultural  Innovations  (INOVA).  The  project  has  just  been  launched, 
and  will  run  through  the  period  2017-2022.  It  has  the  goal  of  reducing  poverty  in  rural 
Mozambique  by  (amongst  others)  strategically  leveraging  funds  within  the  project  to  co-
finance  investments  with  the  farmers  and  agribusinesses  targeted.  In  order  to  do  so  the 
project will collaborate directly with financial institutions, village savings and loan associations 
(ASCAs), and other, to provide specific lines of credits to allow smallholder farmers to access 
specific agricultural inputs. The project is a USAID-funded project falling under the Feed the 
Future  program,  and  is  implemented  through  DAI.  It  can  somewhat  be  considered  a 
successor to the previous Innovation for Agribusiness (InovAgro I, II) project (2010-2017), 
which also sought to link farmers with financial institutions and specific lines of credit. 
 In the cases listed above, there is more than just a simple overlap of objectives, but also a 
82. 
geographical overlap and complementing especially in Zambezia and Nampula Provinces. In addition, 
all of the ongoing IFDA supported projects, (PROPESCA, PROMER and PROSUL) bring a set of core 
lessons that have informed REFP’s design. The demand for access to credit lines that are tailored to 
the needs of each stakeholder participating in the value chain has been flagged out not only within the 
projects, but also in the recent CSPE, thereby further validating the Government’s and REFP decision 
to include a line of credit in this project.. Most of the projects already included (smaller) forms of credit 
for smallholders and businesses (eg through. matching grants), and the presence of a national project 
specifically working on improved access to financial services will go a long way to fill this gap. 
Adherence to IFAD Policies 
83. 
Compliance with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016 – IFAD’s fifth Strategic Framework 
covers the period 2016-2025, serving as an overarching policy guideline to provide direction to IFAD’s 
work, and as a key instrument for consolidating IFAD’s development effectiveness. It responds to the 
new  global  environment  and  positions  IFAD  to  play  a  crucial  role  within  it  –  by  enabling  the 
transformation of rural areas in a manner that is both more inclusive and sustainable. The framework 
has three strategic objectives:  
SO1: Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities – investing in rural people to 
84. 
enhance their access to and control over assets and resources. REFP supports this SO by aiming to 
increase people’s access and use of client oriented and sustainable financial services in rural areas.  
85. 
SO2: Increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation – improving the 
engagement  of  poor  rural  people  in  markets  for  goods,  services  and  wage  labour.  REFP  aims  to 
improve  rural  household  livelihoods  through  Subcomponent  2.2:  “Business  Development  Support” 
with business plan validation and by fostering market linkages.  
SO3:  Strengthen  the  environmental  sustainability  and  climate  resilience  of  poor 
86. 
rural  people’s  economic  activities.  REFP  recognizes  the  key  importance  of  environmental 
sustainability to ensure continued profits and improved livelihoods. The integration of capacity building 
activities on climate change adaptation and the environmental sustainability of REFP is detailed in the 
appended SECAP Review Note. 
87. 
IFAD  promotes  policy  engagement  in  projects  in  order  to  reach  two  main  objectives:  (i) 
help  create  an  enabling  environment  for  implementation  and  achieving  the  project's  impact,  and  (ii) 
help  create  the  conditions  for  a  large  number  of  rural  population  to  move  out  of  poverty.  It  is  a  key 
element  of  the  scaling  up  agenda.  IFAD's  role  is  not  intended  to  advocate  for  specific  policy 
outcomes; it is rather to assist Governments to use the experience gained in innovative and change 
38 http://gapi.co.mz/agro-empreender/  
20 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
oriented IFAD supported projects in the design or reform of policies, and to facilitate dialogue among 
national  stakeholders  on  key  policy  issues.  REFP  recognizes  the  importance  of  harmonization  with 
existing  structures  and  places  emphasis  on  utilising  relevant  systems,  where  adequate,  that  are 
already in place. 
88. 
Compliance  with  IFAD  Rural  Finance  Policy  –  This  Policy  (2009)  has  six  guiding 
principles  to  be  applied  at  the  micro-,  meso-  and  macro  levels:  (i)  support  access  to  a  variety  of 
financial services; (ii) promote a wide range of financial institutions, models and delivery channels; (iii) 
support  demand  driven  and  innovative  approaches;  (iv)  encourage  –  in  collaboration  with  private 
sector partners – market-based approaches that strengthen rural financial markets, avoid distortions 
in  the  financial  sector  and  leverage  IFAD’s  resources;  (v)  develop  and  support  long-term  strategies 
focusing on sustainability  and poverty outreach; and (vi) participate in  policy dialogues that  promote 
an enabling environment for rural finance. 
89. 
Consistent with the goals of the Policy, REFP will support a number of demand-driven and 
innovative approaches to rural financial services: including i) developing and validating basic business 
plans,  financial  literacy  and  community-based  microfinance;  ii)  technical  assistance  to  selected 
financial  service  providers  to  strengthen  their  capacity  to  service  smallholder  farmers  as  well  as 
technical  assistance  directly  to  smallholders;  and  iii)  scale  up  ideas  and  actionable  projects  to 
increase  the  reach  of  financial  services  in  rural  areas  and  introduce  novel  approaches..  The  line  of 
credit is applied in concurrence with the Policy. In line with the IFAD Rural Finance Policy that permits 
the use of lines of credit in specific and well defined circumstances and sector environments.  
90. 
Compliance  with  IFAD  Policies  on  Natural  Resources  Management  and  Climate 
Change  Strategy  -  The  goal  of  IFAD’s  ENRM  policy  is  to  enable  poor  rural  people  to  escape  from 
and  remain  out  of  poverty  through  more  productive  and  resilient  livelihoods  and  ecosystems.  REFP 
follows  these  principles  by  aiming  to  render  the  rural  enterprise  activities  more  sustainable  and 
resilient to climate shocks.  
91. 
IFAD’s Climate Change  Strategy notes that IFAD’s goal is to maximize the fund’s impact 
on rural poverty in a changing climate. Climate change has been actively considered in the design of 
REFP,  more  specifically  within  the  SECAP  Review  Note.  REFP  will  aim  to  increase  smallholders’ 
climate  resilience  by  encouraging  the  diversification  of  income  streams  and  promoting  climate 
adaptive practices. 
92. 
Compliance with IFAD’s Targeting Policy – Reaching the Poor (2010) – IFAD‘s policy 
on  targeting  defines  its  priority  target  group  as  the  poorest  rural  people  with  productive  potential. 
REFP  will  apply  a  strong  pro-poor  social  inclusion  strategy  for  the  disadvantaged  categories  in 
particular  women,  women  headed  households and  youths,  as  well as HIV  affected entrepreneurs to 
enable them to participate  in and benefit from capacity  building initiatives and access loans that  will 
empower  them  to  establish  viable  rural  on  and  off  farm  MSEs.  Youth  and  women  beneficiaries  will 
each account for 50 and 20 per cent of the target group and these will benefit from capacity building in 
entrepreneurial  and  business  skills,  access  to  finance  (loans)  to  engage  in  micro  to  small  scale 
enterprises, and the provision of mentorship to these youths.  
93.  Compliance with IFAD’s Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment - REFP is guided by 
the three succinct precepts set out in the IFAD Policy on gender equality and women's empowerment 
(2012): promote economic empowerment to enable rural women and men to participate in and benefit 
from profitable economic activities; enable women and men to have equal voice and influence in rural 
institutions and organizations; and achieve a more equitable balance in workloads and in the sharing 
of economic and social benefits between women and men. Women and women-headed households 
(WHHs)  represent  a  key  vulnerable  group  that  will  receive  direct  targeted  intervention  under  REFP. 
The  project  prioritises  mainstreaming  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment  as  integral  to 
effective approaches to rural financial services.  
94. 
Procedures is available as an appendix to this report. 
SECAP  –  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
21 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
95. 
REFP will build on the experience of PAFIR, a national rural finance  project supported by 
IFAD and the African Development Bank that was closed in 2014 as well as emerging lessons learned 
from  PROMER.  PROSUL  and  PROESCA  that  are  implementing  rural  finance  components  in  their 
projects. As  a  nationwide  project  that  will  be  closely  aligned  with  the  ongoing  area  based  projects, 
REFP will initially build on the human capital created by these projects and provide financing to those 
small  entrepreneurs,  farmers  and  artisanal  fishermen  that  are  ready  to  invest  in  their  undertakings, 
and  then  move  from  this  base  to  ultimately  cover  all  10  REFP  provinces  of  the  country.  REFP  will 
further provide a hub for all aspects of development finance also to these current IFAD projects and 
has the potential to consolidate and streamline current rural finance activities that sometimes overlap 
and duplicate approaches.  
B.  Organizational framework 
The Ministry of Economy and Finance will be responsible for overseeing implementation of 
96. 
the  Project.  The  day  to  day  oversight  will  be  assigned  to  the  BNI  as  the  lead  project  agency 
implementing the project on behalf of the MEF, the borrower.  
97. 
The  project  shall  establish  a  National  Project  Steering  Committee  to  serve  as  the 
governing body of the project. The Steering Committee shall be chaired by the Permanent Secretary 
of  Economy  and  Finance  and  made  up  of  representatives  of  the  Ministries  of Agriculture,  Fisheries, 
Industry and Trade and Labour; Confederation of Business Associations of Mozambique – (CTA), civil 
society organizations, National Union of Farmers, Bankers Association, Central Bank, MFI and FARE. 
This  will  provide  strategic  guidance  towards  the  achievement  of  project  objectives  and  contribute  to 
the higher-level sector policy and strategic goals. It will also be responsible for review and approval of 
Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets,  and  annual  reports.  Regional  Project  Consultative  Groups 
(RPCGs)  would  be  set  up  in  each  of  the  three  regions  of  the  project.  They  would  be  essentially 
resource  bodies  for  the  project  to  allow  the  PMU  and  BNI    confront  issues,  debate  constraints 
affecting  the  project,  reviewing  project  approaches,  strategies  and  AWPBs,  and  act  as  a  forum  for 
coordinating  financial  service  institutions,  government  bodies,  and  other  parties  and  organizations 
operating in the project area. Each RPCG would be chaired by the  Provincial Head of the MEF or a  
representative.  
98. 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) set up at BNI, will be responsible for overall project 
implementation. The  main  responsibilities  of  the  National  PMU  will  include:  (i) annual  work  planning 
and budgeting; (ii) financial management; (iii) procurement, including contracting of service providers; 
project  facilitation  in  the  three  regions;  and  (vi) reporting,  monitoring,  evaluation  and  knowledge 
management.  The PMU  will be organised  into three  units covering the planned target geographical 
regions.  The  core  project  management  unit  will  be  based  in  Maputo  and  supported  by  three  units 
based in Beira, Nampula and Xai Xai. The national PMU will be comprised of a Project Coordinator, 
Financial  Management  Specialist,  Accountant,  Procurement  Officer,  M&E  Officer,  Innovation/ 
Outreach  Officer,  a  Rural  Finance  Specialist  and  support  staff  all  competitively  recruited  and 
employed  on  performance  based  contracts. The  project  will  also  have  part  time  experts  that  will  be 
recruited and mobilised as required. This will include an Environmental and Social (E&S) specialist to 
promote capacity building on climate adaptive practices, a Women/Youth Officer to ensure that REFP 
activities  adequately  address  the  needs  of  women  and  youth  and  a  legal  expert  to  provide  legal 
services on contracts. Provision has been made in the budgets to mobilise other unspecified experts 
that  may  be  required  during  implementation  of  the  project. The  Regional  Management  Units  will  be 
composed of a Coordinator, M&E Officer and Administrative Officer and support staff.  The project will 
have access to funds to finance Technical Assistance where needed. This technical Assistance will be 
delivered  through  public  and  semi-public  sector  strategic  partners  as  well  as  contracted  service 
providers from eth private sector when necessary. To spread delivery risk for the project and minimise 
costs, service providers will be identified based on their regional competence and will be supervised 
by the respective Regional PMUs.  
REFP will also offer a structure to tie the multiplicity of different existing funds under IFAD 
99. 
projects  under  one  consolidated  Umbrella  Fund  in  BNI.  This  umbrella  fund  manager  (BNI)  will 
manage the main technical assistance and support funds under REFP (i) to different types of support 
22 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
to financial institutions, (ii) to sub-borrowers or VC actors, and (iii) to ASCAs and their members but 
also possibly expanding to other areas such as digital finance, etc. Suffice it to say that the PMU will 
be a separate entity from the Find Manager. 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
100. 
The  integrated  participatory  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E),  Learning  and 
knowledge  management  (KM)  system  will  be  developed  in  accordance  with  the  government 
three  main  objectives:  steer  project 
frameworks  and  within 
implementation;  support  economic  decisions  and  policymaking;  and  share  knowledge  and  scale  up 
good practices.  
IFAD  guidelines. 
It  will  have 
Planning 
101. 
Detailed  Planning  and  budgeting  of  REFP  activities  would  be  carried  out  based  on 
the  AW PB involving the PMU, BNI and other implementing agencies/ stakeholders in a participatory 
process  where  the  Provincial  Directorate  of  Economy  and  Finance  (DPEF).  The  PMU  would  be 
responsible for preparing the annual budget and work project for the two main components including 
its  subcomponents.  In  addition,  the  PMU  of  REFP  in  coordination  with  BNI  and  MEF  will  be 
responsible for the overall consolidation of the AWPB.  The PMU will send the AWPB to IFAD 30 days 
prior  to  the  end  of  each  Project  Year  for  no  objection.  The  PMU  will  consolidate  the  Project’s 
quantitative financial  and physical output data  in  the  planner tool template,  which could be an excel 
based Management Information System. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
102. 
The  M&E  system  will  have  a  three-level  structure,  consisting  of  output  monitoring, 
outcome  monitoring  and  impact  evaluation.  Output  monitoring  will  comprise  the  monitoring  of 
physical  and  financial  inputs,  activities  and  outputs,  both  planned  and  actual.  Outcome  monitoring 
will  assess the use  of  outputs and measure their benefits at beneficiary level. Impact evaluation will 
assess  and  measure  the  change  in  selected  variables  between  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the 
Project  or  a  later  selected  date.  The  main  instruments  for  the  impact  evaluation  are  the  Project’s 
Baseline Survey and Project Completion Report. A list of the final indicators will be defined in the start-
up workshop using the log frame as a starting point. This will include relevant first, second and third 
level indicators of IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (now  ORMS) and will be gender 
disaggregated  as  appropriate. AWPBs  will  provide  the  annual  targets  for  first  level  monitoring.  The 
PMU  M&E,  under  the  supervision  of  the  Project  Coordinator  will  have  lead  responsibility  for  the 
coordination of all M&E activities of the Project and consolidating relevant information.  
103. 
The  PMU/REFP  in  collaboration  with  BNI  as  Lead  Implementing  Agency  would  be 
responsible for collecting and storing key M&E data on their activities. These data  would be analysed 
and consolidated by the PMU at HQ  in  collaboration  with  the  regional  PMUs  for  purposes  of  the 
AW PB and Progress Reports. Monitoring of outcomes and impact could be outsourced to consultants 
whose  activities  would  be  coordinated by  the PMU’s  M&E  staff. The  indicators  would  be defined in 
compliance with IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS).  
Learning and knowledge management 
104. 
Learning  and  Knowledge  management  will  be  implemented  as  an  integral  part  of  the 
REFP,  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  Project  will  be  identifying,  testing,  demonstrating  and 
disseminating  approaches  with  innovative  technologies.  The  project  will  support  a  major  learning 
process to overcome some of the conceptual barriers and raise awareness about the piloted models. 
The REFP M&E system will form the foundation of the knowledge management and learning system 
and will be a primary instrument of information capture and storage, based on the indicators detailed 
in the results framework. Tools such as case studies, stakeholder interviews and surveys will be used 
to deepen an understanding of the factors contributing to successes and failures, and to enable full 
documentation of impacts from the field and beneficiaries.  
105. 
The  learning  and  knowledge  management  activities  will  include  (i)  impact  studies 
comprising  a  Baseline  Survey  and  Completion  Report;  (ii)  Thematic  and  Technical  Studies  on  the 
Graduation  Promotion  and    Outreach  Programme  as  well  as  the  Graduation  Programme;  (iii) 
information  dissemination  campaigns  about  the  Programme;  (iv)  preparation  of  publications  and 
23 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
visibility/video  materials;  (v)  in-country  knowledge  networking  through  periodic seminars  and 
workshops; (vi) Progress Reports; and (vii) capacity building activities of PMU/REFP staff. In turn, all 
these are expected to ensure that knowledge being captured by the PMU and implementing partners 
are utilised to generate lessons and best practices to be widely shared with all key players including 
public institutions, the IFAD country team and others.  
106. 
REFP’s sequential approach to scaling up will also follow an in-built learning loop, with 
M&E and knowledge management playing key roles during all stages of the development pathway: 
from the very poor that will be part of the graduation programme to mainstream small farmers and 
emerging  rural  entrepreneurs  that  will  broaden  and  deepen  their  access  to  financial  services. 
Particular attention would be paid to women and youths beneficiaries and their special objectives and 
requirements. The  project  M&E  will  regularly  collect  the  results  and  lessons  learned  in  order  to  fine 
tune  its  approaches,  especially  the  innovative  models.  Once  these  critical  elements  have  been 
effectively operationalised, the project can be scaled up to all 10 provinces of the country. 
107. 
During  the  final  year  of  Project  implementation,  as  part  of  the  preparation  of  the  IFAD- 
required  Project  Completion  Report/Impact  Assessment  (PCR),  the  M&E  data  collected  over  the 
Project  implementation  period  will  be  used  as  part  of  a  d e t a i l e d   assessment  of  Project 
achievements. In particular, this will compare changes in the livelihoods of beneficiaries that relate to 
the  implemented  Project  activities  against  the  situation  documented  in  the  Baseline  Study.  The 
Project Completion Report will share lessons learned and development experience.  
The  Project  will  carry  out  some  feasibility  studies  of  possible  developments  of 
108. 
geographical  areas  for  which  local  communities  have  requested  Project  interventions.  The  studies 
would investigate the  viability of  business enterprises or entrepreneurship  interventions and  identify 
the  types  of activities that can be supported through component 2 (Capacity building and support for 
institutions and rural entrepreneurs).  
109. 
Progress  Reports  will  have  two  primary  objectives:  (i)  to  record  the  progress  of 
implementation, for  the  period  under  review,  compared against  the  targets  and  objectives  including 
key  selected  indicators  from  IFAD’s Results and  Impact Management System (RIMS)  set  out  in  the 
Design Project Document and  the  AW PB; and (ii)  to  confirm  the degree to  which  the  Borrower is  in 
compliance  with  the  conditions  of  the  financing  agreement.  The  key  quantitative  tables  of  the 
Progress Reports will be generated using a simple excel templates.  
D.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
110.  Financial  Management.  A  National  Project  Management  Unit  (NPMU)  will  be  established 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Banco  National  de  Investimento/  National  Bank  of  Investment  (BNI), 
comprised of, among others a Project Coordinator, Financial Management Specialist, an Accountant 
and  a  Procurement  Officer  competitively  recruited  and  employed  on  performance  based  contracts. 
The  NPMU  will  be  supported  by  three  regional  project  management  units  will  be  established  as 
follows:  one  unit  will  be  based  in  Beira  and  will  oversee  project  implementation  within  the  central 
region;  another  unit  based  in  Nampula  for  the  Northern  provinces  and  a  third  unit  based  in  Xai  Xai 
responsible for overseeing project activities in the Southern Region. Fundo de Apoio a Reabilitçao 
da Economia/ The Economic Rehabilitation Support Fund (FARE), has been identified as an potential 
implementing  agency  for  activities  related  to  ASCAs.  Fiduciary  assessments  of  the  two  GoM 
institutions  have  been  carried  out  returning  a  high  risk.  The  design  of  the  financial  management 
arrangements have taken this into consideration and mitigating measures provided for. 
IFAD  project 
On the basis of the above, accounting will be a hybrid system that has elements from the 
111. 
GoM’s  Financial  Management  procedures  mixed  with 
financial  management 
requirements  where  GoM  procurements  are  found  inappropriate  especially  for  the  products  and 
implementation modalities  envisaged under the  project. TOMPRO accounting software  which  will be 
procured  and  configured  at  project  start-up  to  meet  IFAD  reporting  requirements  will  be  used.  BNI, 
with the authority of Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will open a separate designated account 
at the Bank of Mozambique solely to receive IFAD loan funds. Funds will flow into a project operating 
account  held  at  a  commercial  bank  acceptable  to  both  GoM  and  IFAD  from  which  payments  for 
services/goods  and  transfers  to  Regional  Project  Management  Units  (RPMUs)  and  implementing 
partners will be done. Financial management activities at the Regional Management Units will be kept 
lean with most/major payments centralised at the NPMU and the Umbrella Fund Manager. 
24 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
112. 
The project will be implemented on the basis of approved Annual Work Plans and Budgets 
(AWPBs).  The  budgeting  process  will  be  done  jointly  by  BNI/NPMU  and  implementing  partners. 
NPMU  will  consolidate  the  budget,  present  it  for  approval  by  the  Project  Steering  Committee  and 
submit the estimates to MEF for inclusion in the National estimates. A No Objection from IFAD will be 
required  for  each AWPB  during  the  implementation.  Budget  submission  to  IFAD  will  be  by  60  days 
prior to commencement of each fiscal year/budget year as required by the IFAD General Conditions. 
113. 
The  BNI  Internal Audit  will  provide  internal  audit  services  to  the  Umbrella  Fund  and  the 
NPMU. The  BNI  internal  audit  department  will  include  REFP  in  their  internal  audit  plan  and  internal 
audit reports or implementation action plan of internal audit recommendations will be required by IFAD 
at least once a year. External audits will be done in accordance with IFAD audit guidelines and audit 
reports and the related management letters will be submitted no later than six months after the end of 
each  fiscal  year.  The  external  audit  will  be  carried  out  by  a  private  audit  firm  as  IFAD  continues  to 
engage  with  the  Tribunal  Administrativo  (TA)  -Mozambique’s  Supreme  Audit  Institution  for 
consideration of taking up of the audits. 
114. 
Exception  to  General  Conditions:  The  design  mission  proposes  that  as  a  mitigating 
measure against the failure by GoM to provide counterpart financing and in consideration of a request 
from GoM, an exception to Section 11.01(a) of the General Conditions  be granted. IFAD loan should 
cover taxes and duties but this would be reviewed during implementation or at a joint IFAD/GoM Mid-
Term Review of REFP, to determine whether the loan should continue to cover taxes. Provision under 
Section  11.01(c)  of  the  General  Conditions  will  be  applicable;  thus,  the  use  of  any  proceeds  of  the 
financing to pay for taxes  will be subject  to IFAD’s  policy of requiring  economy and efficiency in the 
use  of  its  financing. Therefore,  if  IFAD  will  determine  that  the  amount  of  any  such  tax  is  excessive, 
discriminatory  or  otherwise  unreasonable,  the  fund  may  by  notice  to  the  borrower  reduce  the 
percentages of eligible expenditures to be financed under the financing agreement.  
115. 
The  PMU  will  develop  and  implement  a  Project  Implementation  manual  (PIM)  which  will 
include  a  comprehensive  financial  management  section.  Separate  detailed  manuals  for  the  different 
financing windows will also be developed to address specific implementation modalities. The financial 
management  arrangements  including,  staffing,  budgeting,  accounting,  funds  flow,  disbursements, 
financial reporting, internal controls and auditing are detailed at appendix 7. 
116. 
Procurement  –  Procurement  will  be  governed  by  public  procurement  regulations  under 
Decree number 5/2016 of 8 March, 2016. This regulation guides the tendering of public works, supply 
of  goods  and  provision  of  services  to  the  state. The  decree  requires  that  public  procurement  fulfil  a 
number of criteria including legality, public interest, transparency, openness, equality, competitiveness, 
impartiality and good financial management. The overall procurement responsibility under REFP  will 
rest with MEF with  delegated powers to  BNI in accordance  with thresholds.  In accordance  with the 
IFAD Procurement Handbook, international competitive bidding (ICB) will be carried out in accordance 
with  the  World  Bank  guidelines.  As  far  as  practicable,  all  procurement  will  be  done  competitively. 
Details of procurement arrangements of REFP are in appendix 8. 
117. 
Governance – The project shall establish a National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) 
chaired  by the  Permanent  Secretary of the Ministry of Economy  and Finance (PS/MES) to serve  as 
the  governing  body  of  the  project.  The  Steering  Committee  shall  be  made  up  of  representatives 
including the Ministries of  Agriculture, Fisheries, Industry and Trade and Labour; a director from the 
Confederation  of  Business Associations  of  Mozambique  –  (CTA)  representing  the  private  sector,  a 
director proposed by civil society organizations, a director proposed by the National Union of Farmers, 
representative  of  Bankers  Association  and  an  MFI  representative,  BNI  and  any  other  relevant 
organisations working for the achievement of objectives of REFP. 
118. 
At regional level, Regional Project Consultative Groups (RPCGs) would be set up in each 
of the three regions of the project. They would be essentially resource bodies for the project to allow 
the  NPMU  and  BNI  to  confront  issues,  debate  constraints  affecting  the  project,  reviewing  project 
approaches, strategies and AWPBs, and act as a forum for coordinating financial service institutions, 
government  bodies,  and  other  parties  and  organizations  operating  in  the  project  area.  As  BNI  does 
not have representation at Regional level, the PS/MES will nominate Regional chair for each.  
119. 
The  National  Steering  Committee  (NPSC)  will  provide  strategic  guidance  towards  the 
achievement of Project objectives and contribute to the higher-level sector policy and strategic goals. 
25 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
This will also be responsible for review and approval of Annual Work Plans and Budgets, and annual 
reports. 
E.  Supervision 
120. 
REFP will be jointly supervised by IFAD and the Government of Mozambique. Emphasis in 
the  supervision  will  be  on  a  joint  learning  and  assessment  of  achievements  and  opportunities  for 
scaling  up  against  the  overall  objective  of  an  effective  project  implementation.  In  addition  to  the 
annual  supervision  missions,  there  will  be  six-monthly  implementation  support  missions  and,  if 
warranted,  these  could  be  fielded  also  more  frequently  with  a  view  to  identify  and  directly  address 
early any emerging issues with a potential to negatively impact on the project implementation. To the 
extent  possible,  there  will  be  a  continuity  in  the  composition  of  the  supervision  and  implementation 
support  missions  in  order  to  increase  mission  effectiveness.  The  most  important  skill  sets  to  be 
represented  on  IFAD  supervision  and  implementation  missions  will  include  (i)  a  local  government 
specialist, (ii) project organization and management specialist, (iii) finance technical specialist, (iv) an 
experienced  financial  management  specialist,  and  (v)  a  socio-economic,  environmental  and  climate 
assessment (SECAP) specialist.  
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
121. 
REFP  is  ambitious  in  its  scope,  objectives  and  orientation  towards  parts  of  the  rural 
population  that  make  up  the  IFAD  target  group.  Risks  and  uncertainties  can  be  related  to  climate, 
institutions, the general economic and specific financial sector environment as well as to governance 
administration and infrastructural issues in a large country such as Mozambique. The main risks are 
presented hereunder:  
Table 1: REFP Risks, Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
Risk 
Impact and Probability 
Mitigation Measures 
GENERAL 
The  first  project  phase  coincides 
with different elections culminating 
in national elections in 2019 
Political  considerations  may  result 
in  undue 
the 
interference 
project implementation 
into 
All selected institutions need to be 
financially  and  technically  strong 
and  robust  and  operate  at  arm’s 
length from political interference 
TARGETTING 
Elite capture of project benefits  
Poor  households  may  not  benefit 
from the project. 
Project  targeting  approach  not  or 
local 
incorrectly  understood  by 
communities 
Community-based 
targeting 
approaches  create  conflict  and 
stigma within the community. 
Graduation Promotion and Outreach Project 
After  the  graduation  cycle,  the 
supported  household  will  not 
manage to maintain income status 
Fall  back  into  extreme  poverty 
once 
financed 
investment assets are exhausted 
project 
the 
the 
the 
Participatory  monitoring  of 
intended 
project 
to  ensure 
the 
target  group  benefits 
project.  The  project  will  use  bio 
metric registration of beneficiaries 
Raise community awareness on the 
methodology  and  objective  of  the 
exercise 
from 
The  project  cycle  needs  to  be 
adequately  long  (18  –  24  months) 
and 
provider 
specialized and experienced 
service 
the 
Calls for proposals for the DFS for 
the poor (outreach) may not result 
in proposals with adequate quality 
Rejection  because  of  inadequate 
proposal quality 
be 
detailed 
and 
REFP 
to 
explanatory  with 
indication  of 
sources of assistance for applicants 
compiling proposals 
Crowding-In Fund 
26 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Risk 
Ability to mobilize participating 
financial institutions 
Impact and Probability 
Inadequate  number  of  financial 
to 
service  providers 
(FSPs) 
the 
implement  activities  under 
facility 
Capacity of beneficiaries to raise 
required matching contribution 
Insufficient  financial  strength  will 
result  in  only  better  financially 
endowed people to use the facility 
Line of Credit 
Participating Financial Institutions’ 
(PFIs) limited   outreach 
constraining them to provide 
financial services to the target 
population. 
Projects financed through the 
externally financed loans would 
finance only applicants close to 
branches and in semi-urban 
environments. 
Capacity Building to Financial Institutions 
High  inflation rates (about  22% in 
2017) pushed the lending interest 
rate  of  finance  service  providers 
to 
in 
unsustainable levels.  
rural  areas  up 
the 
ASCA support in particular for the 
for-profit  union  at  district  level  or 
local level will take a lot of time 
the  stability  of 
The  high  lending  interest  rate  will 
impact  on 
the 
financial  institutions  as  well  as 
loan demand and loan repayment 
performance 
Informal  and  complex  structure 
within and between the ASCAs do 
not  allow  for  progress  with  the 
their 
required 
pace 
professionalization 
and 
consolidation.  
for 
27 
Mitigation Measures 
The market has a number of local 
financial service providers with 
experience in these types of 
product. The respective  Managers 
of these sub-funds under the 
Umbrella Fund,  will have 
responsibility for mobilising the 
FSPs to participate 
The LOC provides a financial 
window for support to micro, small 
and medium enterprises that will be 
channelled through selected 
participating Institutions. This 
should act as a further incentive to 
participate 
The beneficiary matching 
contribution has been let at a low 
level of 10% which should be within 
reach of bankable MSM 
enterprises. The uptake levels will 
need to be closely monitored during 
implementation to determine if 
these levels turn out to be a barrier 
to participation. 
Where possible, loans would be 
channelled to off-takers in 
contractual arrangements 
beneficiaries. The off-takers will  
retain the proceeds among smaller 
sub-borrowers. Credit delivery 
innovations through technology 
adoption would be encouraged. As 
far as possible, loans will be 
disbursed to enterprises who are 
part of/who can be part of 
structured value chains 
Technology improvements (Digital 
financial services – DFSs) 
promoted by REFP and the 
transformation from credit-led to 
saving-led institutions can shield 
against adverse effects as can the 
putting in place an efficient 
management and governance 
system. 
ASCA support should be 
conceptualized with a medium to 
long term focus beyond the 
duration of REFP. The sustainability 
of the  depends on the strength of 
member ASCAs and the value 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Risk 
Impact and Probability 
Mitigation Measures 
addition of the for-profit Union to 
members 
Business Development Support 
Target beneficiaries and non-
agriculture rural value chain 
participants are not appropriately 
informed, and thus do not access 
appropriate BDS technical 
assistance in a timely manner. 
The special focus on more remote 
rural  communities  and  artisanal 
fishermen 
niche 
markets needs  to be a priority for 
the PMU and district level staff 
other 
and 
Climatic variation and change and Environmental issues 
Destructive climate related events 
could affect beneficiaries’ 
potential to pay back loans. 
Given  the  Mozambican  climatic 
characteristics  the  probability  of 
extreme  and  adverse  climatic 
events  to  occur  and  negatively 
financed 
impact 
on 
interventions 
be 
to 
considered high. 
project 
has 
Environmental impact of small-
scale infrastructure (i.e. clearance 
of vegetation, loss of habitat, 
water run off disruption, improper 
waste management etc.) 
The  potential  negative  impacts  of 
each  intervention  are  expected  to 
be  minor 
the 
and 
accumulation  of  negative  impacts 
will pose a significant risk. 
only 
The PMU, with the support of the 
strategic partners in the NPSC, 
must undertake a coordinated and 
well-planned outreach and 
information dissemination process 
in all 10 districts, so as to inform 
communities about the value of the 
REFP. Also, the PMU will 
undertake outreach (sessions to 
inform rural communities how to 
access the provisions of the REFP. 
REFP will emphasize planning for 
long term financial service 
provision. Proposed financial 
service mechanisms will be 
rigorously tested and business 
models/ pro-forma estimates will be 
purposely modest to accommodate 
climate driven or macro-economic 
impacts. REFP will aim at 
increasing households’ resilience in 
the short run, by increasing 
financial buffers. Over time, 
increased savings and incomes 
driven by investments will reduce 
exposure to extreme weather 
events. 
The MFIs supported by REFP will 
engage in the promotion of 
environmental awareness among 
the project beneficiaries while 
limiting their exposure to lending 
risks caused by social, 
environmental and climate issues 
(avoiding supporting business plans 
that have potential adverse 
environmental impacts). 
Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project costs 
122. 
estimated at USD 72.5 million. The project will be implemented over a period of six years.  
Total  project  costs  including  price  and  physical  contingencies,  duties  and  taxes  are 
28 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
123. 
REFP investments will be spread between three components: (i) Component 1: Improved 
access  to  adaptIve  financial  services  for  rural  entrepreneurs,  totalling  USD  51.4  million;  (ii) 
Component 2:  Capacity  building  and  support 
rural  entrepreneurs, 
USD 10.6 million; and (iii) Institutional Support and Programme Management, USD 10.5 million 
institutions  and 
for 
Table 2: Project components by financiers 
Project financing 
124. 
REFP  will  be  financed  by:  an  IFAD  loan  (USD 62.1  million,  85.7  per  cent  of  total  project 
costs), Government of Mozambique (USD 4.3 million, 5.9 per cent of total project costs), the Private 
Sector,  which  includes  Banks  and  Microfinance  Institutions  (USD 5 million,  6.9  per  cent  of  project 
costs) and the project beneficiaries (USD 1.1 million, 1.5 per cent of total project costs). Based on the 
IFAD’s  single  currency  framework  the  IFAD  loan  will  be  provided  in  USD  on  highly-concessionary 
terms, subject to the availability of USD resources. REFP will absorb the entire allocation of the PBAS 
cycle 2018-2021 for Mozambique (USD 62,148,581). Finally, the IFAD loan will finance taxes.  
125. 
related costs of its own staff participating and supporting the implementation of REFP  
The Government of Mozambique will finance the salaries (on a pro-rata basis) and other 
Table 3: Project categories of financing by financier 
Summary benefits and economic analysis 
1. 
Project  profitability  indicators.  The  overall  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  of  the 
Project  is  estimated  at  17.2%.  The  Economic  Net  Present  Value  (ENPV)  is  MZN 4,101  million,  or 
USD 68.3 million, based on a Social Discount Rate (SDR) of 10%, as per the World Bank chosen rate 
for the evaluation of its investments. As ENPV is positive and the EIRR is above the Social Discount 
Rate (10%) the project is deemed economically viable and acceptable for investment.  
2. 
Sensitivity  Analysis.  The  sensitivity  analysis  evaluated  the  robustness  of  the  proposed 
interventions. Proxies analysed were: reduction of project benefits (due, for example, to failure of the 
capacity building initiatives of the project), increase in project costs, delays in project implementaton 
(of 1 and 2 years), as well as an increase of the failure rate of the loans. 
29 
Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Improved access to adaptive financal services for rural entrepreneurs1. The Graduation and Outreach Programme10,188.783.5997.58.2100.00.8915.27.512,201.416.82. The Crowding in Fund6,000.251.04,002.534.01,000.08.5758.46.411,761.116.23. Line of Credit27,087.398.6----382.91.427,470.237.9Subtotal43,276.284.15,000.09.71,100.02.12,056.54.051,432.770.9B. Capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs1. Support to essential local institutions6,469.194.5----378.55.56,847.59.42. Business Development Support2,882.676.9----868.123.13,750.75.2Subtotal9,351.788.2----1,246.511.810,598.214.6C. Programme Management9,520.790.6----985.29.410,505.914.5Total PROJECT COSTS62,148.685.75,000.06.91,100.01.54,288.35.972,536.8100.0IFADPrivate SectorBeneficiariesGoMTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Equipment & Materials426.8100.0----0.0-426.80.6Vehicles775.4100.0-----0.0-775.41.1Consultancies14,507.975.2997.55.2100.00.53,686.019.119,291.426.6Credit, Guarantee Funds32,537.386.74,002.510.71,000.02.7--37,539.851.8Training5,380.6100.0----0.0-5,380.67.4Workshop1,282.8100.0----0.0-1,282.81.8Salaries & Allowances6,018.398.4----98.71.66,117.08.4Operating Costs1,219.670.8----503.629.21,723.22.4Total PROJECT COSTS62,148.685.75,000.06.91,100.01.54,288.35.972,536.8100.0IFADPrivate SectorBeneficiariesGoMTotal 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
3. 
The sensitivity analysis also assessed the result in the delay of overall project benefits by one 
or  two  years  (all  production  models).  The  results  of  the  analysis  show  that  the  reduction  of  project 
benefits of up to 15% do not endanger the economic suitability of the project. However, were benefits 
accrued from the project to drop to around 20%, ENPV would drop to negative values, with the EIRR 
becoming lower than SDR, rendering the project no longer economically viable. 
An  increase  of  project  costs  of  a  maximum  of  30%  would  not  seriously  imperil  the  project. 
4. 
ENPV remains positive and EIRR is well above the SDR.  
5. 
An increase in the failure rate of the loans of up to 35% (from its base value of 20%) would still 
maintain ENPV above zero, and EIRR above the SDR. However, were the failure rate to reach 40%, 
ENPV would drop below zero and EIRR  would become lower than the SDR, rendering the projet no 
longer economically viable. 
Finally,  a  delay  in  accrual  of  project  benefits  of  up  to  2  years  would  render  the  project 
6. 
economically inviable.  
Sustainability 
126. 
Economic/Income Sustainability – the main focus of REFP is to strengthen the income 
generating  base  of  households  targeted  by  REFP  as  well  as  those  targeted  by  ongoing  other  IFAD 
supported  projects  through  (i)  provision  of  external  financing  to  strengthen  investments  and  enable 
working capital purchases, as well as (ii) support for capacity building measures to bring potential sub-
borrowers up to a level where they can productively absorb external loans and generate their incomes 
more predictably.  
Environmental  Sustainability  –  The  environmental  sustainability  of  REFP  depends  on 
127. 
(a)  ensuring  that  FSPs  do  not  support  entrepreneurial  activities  that  degrade  the  environment  and 
natural  resources,  and  (b)  increased  beneficiary  capacity  of  climate  change  adaption  practices,  risk 
management,  and  environmental  awareness.  The  environmental  sustainability  of  REFP  will  be 
assured by continuous monitoring of FSPs’ compliance with environmental and social regulations and 
by the creation of incentives to these providers to mainstream environmental and social issues in their 
approach. REFP capacity building support, through trainings and workshops, will ensure that REFPs 
benefits  will  be  accrued  beyond  the  lifetime  of  REFP.  REFP  will  seek  to  ensure  environmental 
sustainability in all its interventions by promoting environmentally sound and sustainable resource use 
practices.  The  trainings  will  strengthen  beneficiaries’  capacities  to  recover  from  climate-induced 
shocks  through  the  adoption  of  climate  smart  models  tailored  to  the  specific  environmental  and 
climate  context.  Throughout  the  project  cycle,  evidence  on  the  potential  to  reduce  vulnerability  and 
increase  production  through  the  integrated,  efficient  and  sustainable  use  of  land  and  water  waste 
resources will be generated, thus contributing to the overall environmental sustainability. 
128. 
Institutional  Sustainability  –  REFP  supports  institutions  from  village  level  (ASCAs)  to 
provincial  and  central  level.  With  its  focus  on  financial  services,  the  interest  rate  spreads  over  the 
different intermediation  levels need to cover costs and risks. This is ensured through  linking lending 
rates  from  the  union  financing  institution  to  the  central  bank  reference  rate,  so  that  rates  remain 
positive  in  real  terms  and  proper  spreads  and  incomes  are  generated  for  all  intermediaries  in  the 
financial  intermediation  chain.  As  the  REFP  is  implementing  improved  infrastructure,  access  to 
finance,  Business  Development  Support  to  rural  micro  and  small  entrepreneurs,  private  and  public 
sector institutions will be recipients of strong, and detailed capacity building support. This will enable 
them to continue providing support to the target beneficiaries beyond the lifespan of the REFP. Finally, 
a  detailed  analysis  of  risks  and  proposed  mitigating  measures  that  corresponds  to  each  of  the  sub-
components is included in this report with a view to identify institutional sustainability challenges early 
and early remedial action, when required. 
30 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Appendix 1: 
Country and rural context background 
Mozambique has a total area of 799,380 km², with 786,380 km² being occupied by land and 13,000 
km²  by  inland  water39. The  country  borders  with  Malawi,  South Africa,  Swaziland, Tanzania,  Zambia 
and  Zimbabwe,  and  has  a  total  coastline  of  2,470  km40.  It  is  home  to  approximately  26.4  million 
people  (of  which  43%  are  under  15),  with  a  population  density  of  33,1  inhabitants  per  square 
kilometre and a population growth set at 2,7%41 in 2016. At  its independence  in 1975,  Mozambique 
was already facing a difficult economic crisis and the successive civil war from 1977 to 1992 further 
impoverished the country, rendering it one of the poorest in the world. The 1992 Mozambique Peace 
Agreement  represented  the  end  of  the  16  year  civil  war,  and  the  1994  elections  were  the  first  step 
towards the reintegration of productive social and economic activities42. 
Economy. The country is still considered a low income country43 and has grown at an average rate of 
circa 6-8% in the period between 2005-2015, one of the strongest performances in the continent, but 
faced  a  slowdown  in  2016,  with  growth  averaging  at  3,8%.  Nonetheless,  forecasts  predict  2017  to 
experience  more  growth  than  the  previous  year,  mainly  in  virtue  of  an  increase  in  coal  exports  and 
development  of  the  natural  gas  deposits  in  the  north,  that  have  the  potential  to  become  one  of  the 
largest investments in Africa. The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2016 was USD 11.01 billion, with 
agriculture accounting for 25% of GDP, industry for 22% and the services sector for 54%44. The Gross 
National Income (GNI) per capita was in the same year was of USD 48045. The country has faced a 
number of problems related to acquire loans that pushed the country into a debt crisis over the past 
few years. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) had suspended the country’s stand-by credit facility 
in  2016,  and  a  revised-borrowing  framework  is  currently  ongoing  with  the  IMF  in  order  to  secure  a 
new economic programme46. 
Inflation  rates  experienced  an  all-time  high  of  27%  in  November  2016,  but  this  rate  has  since 
undergone a downward trend in 2017, mostly reconnected to a greater currency stability and by the 
normalisation of food prices47. In parallel, the US dollar gained largely against the metical, to gradually 
relax in 2017. Nonetheless, the national currency is highly at risk of fluctuations, and the country may 
face financial instability  linked to the restructuring of the sovereign debts. Forecasts see the metical 
reaching a final average of MZN 65.1 for USD 1 by the end of 2017.  
Politics. The 2014  elections saw the victory of the  National Front for the  Liberation of Mozambique 
(FRELIMO),  with  Mr.  Filipe  Giacinto  Nyusi  being  appointed  as  President  of  the  Republic  of 
Mozambique.  The  next  elections  are  expected  be  held  in  October  2019.  Since  independence 
FRELIMO has stably  been in power,  and after a period  of blockade and tension  with the  opposition 
party,  the  Mozambique  National  Resistance  (RENAMO),  the  country  appears  to  be  experiencing  a 
period of cease fire and relative political stability. This appears to have had positive effects also on the 
will of foreign investors to look at Mozambique as a partner, especially foreign companies that have 
largely  invested  in  the  extractive  industries,  mainly  coal  and  natural  gas.  Therefore,  one  of  the 
Government’s  key  priorities  is  to  guarantee  macroeconomic  and  political  stability,  so  as  to  continue 
prompting investments in the extractive sector, as the revenues from the gas sector are expected to 
39 Statistical Yearbook – Government of 
Mozambique.http://www.ine.gov.mz/estatisticas/publicacoes/anuario/nacionais/anuario-estatistico-2016; World Bank country 
data - http://data.worldbank.org/country/mozambique  
40 Central Intelligence Agency, World Fact Book - Country Data https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/mz.html  
41 Statistical Yearbook – Government of Mozambique 
http://www.ine.gov.mz/estatisticas/publicacoes/anuario/nacionais/anuario-estatistico-2016  
42 USAID - https://www.usaid.gov/mozambique/history  
43 World Bank Country Data - http://data.worldbank.org/country/mozambique  
44 Ibidem 
45 Ibidem – Atlas method 
46 Economist Intelligence Unit – Mozambique Country Report 2017 (July 2017) 
47 Ibidem  
31 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
start rising in the upcoming quinquennial. This sector is expected to be the major driver of growth in 
the mid-term with large actors from the gas industry investing onshore and offshore facilities.  
Poverty. Poverty has declined at a much slower pace since 2003, falling by only 4 percentage points 
to  reach  52%  in  200948.  Between  1997  and  2009,  population  growth  outpaced  poverty  reduction, 
increasing the number of Mozambicans living in extreme poverty by 400,000 to a total of 11.2 million. 
As a result Mozambique still ranks as one of the countries with the highest poverty levels (69% at the 
for  2016  was  24,4%50  Mozambique,  with  youth 
USD1.9PPP)49.  The  unemployment  rate 
unemployment  reaching  as  high  as  41,4%51.  also  holds  position  181  in  the  Human  Development 
Index (HDI), with an HDI value of 0.420 and a life expectancy at birth is set at 55,5 years52. In 2016 
slightly over 10% of the population between 15-49 years of age were HIV positive, and the mortality 
rate of under-5 children per 1,000 births, was 79.  
The  country's  low  agricultural  productivity  is  the  result  of  a  lack  of  appropriate  technologies  and 
supports.  In  addition,  produce  markets  are  generally  distant,  unreliable  and  uncompetitive  for 
smallholder farmers, who depend on traditional farming methods, low-yield seed varieties and manual 
cultivation techniques. Alternative sources of income outside agriculture are few. In times of scarcity, 
poor rural people have little to buffer them from food insecurity. Overall, poverty in rural Mozambique 
is  marked  by  isolation,  inadequate  infrastructure  and  the  consequent  lack  of  access  to  goods  and 
services53. The road network is in very poor condition, and only about 51%54 cent of rural people have 
access  to  safe  water.  Rural  poverty  is  also  closely  related  to  lack  of  access  to.  The  recent  National 
Poverty Assessment55  indicates  that  poverty  has  reduced  from  54.2  percent  in  2008  to  about  49.2 
percent  in  2014.  This  is  further  confirmed  by  the  multidimensional  poverty  situation  based  on  non-
monetary dimensions56, which suggests improvements - almost half of the population was categorised 
as deprived in all six dimensions57 in 1996-97, by 2014/2015 this deprivation had reduced to about 14 
percent.  
Agriculture. Agriculture is the foundation of the economy in Mozambique. It contributes 25%58 of the 
Gross Domestic Product and 60% of export revenue, and circa 81% of the population is involved in 
agricultural  activities.  In  addition,  approximately  70%  of  the  population  live  in  the  rural  areas, 
rendering the agricultural sector key to the economic development of the country59. Major agricultural 
products  include  cotton,  cashew  nuts,  sugarcane,  tea,  cassava,  corn,  coconuts,  sisal,  citrus  and 
tropical fruits, potatoes, sunflowers but also beef production and a rapidly expanding poultry sector. Of 
the  available  land  only  16%  is  currently  being  fully  cultivated60.  Agricultural  production  is  largely 
organized in small, hand-cultivated units of land. Ninety-seven percent of production comes from 3.2 
million subsistence farms, with an average size of 1.2 hectares61. Smallholder farmers in Mozambique 
largely  practice  rain-fed  agriculture,  use  traditional  low  varieties  of  crops,  low-intensity  fertilizer, 
minimal pesticides and minimal cultivation techniques. The country’s low productivity results from lack 
of appropriate technology and support. In addition, produce markets are generally distant, unreliable 
and uncompetitive. Alternative sources of income outside agriculture are few; hence poor rural people 
48 World Bank (2016) Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities 
49 World Bank (2016) Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities 
50 World Bank - http://data.worldbank.org/country/mozambique  
51 https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/SLUEM1524ZSMOZ  
52 UNDP Human Development Report 2016  
53 IFAD - https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/bf1817c4-7061-40d6-9291-4512691f15fd  
54 World Bank - 
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/Views/Reports/ReportWidgetCustom.aspx?Report_Name=CountryProfile&Id=b450fd57&tba
r=y&dd=y&inf=n&zm=n&country=MOZ  
55 Poverty and Well-Being in Mozambique: Fourth National Poverty Assessment (IOF 2014/15) 
56 Poverty and Well-Being in Mozambique: Fourth National Poverty Assessment (IOF 2014/15)    
57 first level primary school, no access to safe water, inadequate sanitation, grass roofing, no electricity, and very limited 
possession of durable goods 
58 World Bank (2016) Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities 
59 UNDP 2016 - http://www.mz.undp.org/content/mozambique/en/home/countryinfo.html  
60 USAID; World Bank 
61 CGAP (March 2016); National Survey & Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Mozambique 
32 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
have  few  options  to  cope  with  shocks.  Agriculture  investment  forecasts  see  an  increment  in  the 
agricultural sector by 1.8% in 2016, with a foreseeable peak in investments in 2017 (10,5%) and 2021 
(8.1%)62. 
In order to prompt the development of the agricultural sector the GoM’s Strategic Plan for Agricultural 
Development  (PEDSA)  for  the  period  2014-2020  will  largely  focus  on  i)  increasing  agricultural 
production  and  productivity  and  its  competitiveness;  ii)  improving  infrastructures  and  services  for 
markets  and  marketing;  iii)  using  land,  water,  forest  and  fauna  resources  in  a  sustainable  way;  iv) 
establishing  a  legal  framework  and  policies  that  are  conducive  to  agricultural  investment;  and  v) 
strengthening agricultural institutions. These objectives furthermore stem from Mozambique’s Agenda 
2025  document,  which  advocates  for  an  “integrated,  prosperous,  competitive  and  sustainable 
agricultural  sector”.  These  efforts  are  expected  to  trickle  down  and  have  direct  positive  effects  in 
regard to guaranteeing food security across the country, and also setting the ground for smallholder 
farmers  to  participate  in  the  market  in  a  competitive  and  sustainable  way.  The  Agenda  2025  also 
states  that  agriculture,  fisheries  and  agro-processing  are  all  registered  in  the  Agenda  2025  as 
activities  that  require  medium  and  long-term  investments,  and  that,  though  representing  high-risk 
activities  for  the  banking  sector,  they  are  all  key  to  the  national  value  addition  and  employment 
creation. The fisheries sector contributed to circa 3% of the GDP in 2012, with a total catch of 208,000 
tons.  Of  this  0.3%  came  from  industrial  fishing,  10%  from  semi-industrial,  and  89%  from  artisanal 
fishing,  with  only  0.4%  deriving  from  aquaculture  investments63.  Both  coastal  and  especially  inland 
fisheries  have  high  potential  and  the  Fisheries  Master  Plan  (FMP)  2010-19  is  fully  aligned  with  the 
previous  Action  Plan  for  Poverty  Reduction  (PARP,  2010-14),  with  the  objective  of  increasing 
investments in the fisheries sector as a tool for poverty eradication in the country.  
Natural  Resources.  There  is  a  big  potential  for  the  protection  and  sustainable  management  of  the 
country’s  vast  natural  resource  base.  The  country  has  over  36  million  hectares  of  arable  land  and 
circa  40  million  of  natural  forests  (70%  of  the  country),  and  terrestrial  and  marine  protected  areas 
account for circa 10% of the total territorial area64. Of the land available only 10% is currently in use, 
and of this 90% is reconnected to the rural or family sector65. There are ten different agro-ecological 
zone,  characterized  by  very  divers  rainfall  patterns  and  types  of  soil.  This  diversity,  from  an  agro-
ecological point of view, represents a great potential for the development of different agricultural crops 
across  the  different  provinces.  Mozambique  also  has  15  water  basins,  sharing  9  of  these  with  its 
neighbouring countries. Mozambique unfortunately also experiences many cases of land degradation, 
deforestation  and  overfishing,  and  these,  summed  to  the  strong  impact  of  climate  change,  all 
represent risks and challenges that the GoM is seeking to tackle by 2025.  
The  PEDSA  indicates  Mozambique’s  alignment  with  the  guidelines  of  the  Comprehensive  Africa 
Agriculture  Development  Programme  (CAADP)  in  regard  to  the  sustainable  management  of  natural 
resources, and apart from the countrywide land tenure regularization program launched in 2015 (Terra 
Segura)  that  seeks  to  issue  land  certificates  to  5  million  individuals,  the  PEDSA  will  also  focus 
(amongst  others)  on  the  country’s  Re-afforestation  Strategy,  the  National  Forestry  Plan  and  the 
Irrigation Strategy. The focus on natural resource management is furthermore visible in the Five-year 
Government Plan for 2015-1966, that seeks to largely promote forestry (and agriculture) as key areas 
of investment for the GoM, and the  National Sustainable Development Program (NSDP). In virtue of 
the  many  untapped  opportunities  there  is  a  strong  interest  of  foreign  capital  to  invest  in  agriculture, 
hence land requests have rapidly increased over the past decade, alongside numerous investments 
(planned and ongoing) in both the forestry and fisheries sector. 
62 Economist Intelligence Unit – Mozambique Country Report 2017 (July 2017). 
63 “Support to the Fisheries Sector of Mozambique 2013-2017” -http://www.iceida.is/media/verkefnagagnabanki/Support-to-the-
Fisheries-Sector-of-Mozambique-2013-2017---Programme-Document-Common-Fund.pdf  
64 World Bank - 
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/Views/Reports/ReportWidgetCustom.aspx?Report_Name=CountryProfile&Id=b450fd57&tba
r=y&dd=y&inf=n&zm=n&country=MOZ  
65PEDSA 2010-19 - http://www.safi-research.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/2010_PEDSA_FINAL-English_22_Nov.pdf  
66 Plano Quinquenal do Governo 2015 - 2019 
33 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Policy, regulation and supervision in the context of rural finance in Mozambique 
1.1 REFP- Policy Issues 
The  Project  Development  Objective  of  the  REFP  is  to  increase  the  availability  of  and  access  to 
appropriate, adapted, inclusive and sustainable financial services in rural areas. During the course of 
the 6 year implementation period of the national project, several policy issues relating to the financing 
of target entrepreneurs in agriculture and allied sectors, are likely to emerge. Exploring policy options 
and studying policy implications of various proposed interventions and addressing the policy issues as 
they emerge during the course of implementation would pave the way for adopting the right strategy 
for successful implementation of the project.  Identifying suchpolicy issues and finding possible means 
of addressing the issues assume significance. 
1.2 Rural Finance Policy Environment 
The  details  of  Rural  Finance  environment  in  Mozambique  and  various  enabling  factors  and 
hindrances in the environment are explained in the paper, placed as the Appendix. As evident there-
from,  the  financial  services  are  purveyed  by  both  the  formal  and  informal  sector.  The  formal  sector 
comprises  credit  institutions,  financial  companies  and  capital  markets  supervised  by  the  BM  and 
insurance and pension market institutions supervised by the ISSM. In addition,there are semi  -formal 
institutions  that  are  not  supervised  or  regulated  such  as  community-  based  organisations  (ASCAs), 
individual agents (money lenders) and market linkage institutions (outgrower companies). The credit 
institutions include commercial banks, micro banks, credit cooperatives, E. money Institutes, Leasing 
Companies, 
Investment  companies,  Savings  and  Credits  Organisations  and  micro  credit 
operators.The  rural  financial  institutions  viz.19  commercial  banks,11  microbanks,  380  Micro  credit 
operators,  9  credit  cooperatives,12  savings  and  loan  organizations  and  ASCAs  are  likely  to  be 
involved  in the  delivery of financial services to the target  population under REFP. The nature of the 
financial  institutions  and  the  policy  and  strategic  interventions,  required  at  various  levels  particularly 
from the Central Bank, Government of Mozambique and related institutions are outlined below: 
2. Commercial Banks: Outreach and financial Services: 
 There is wide regional/provincial imbalance in branch distribution. The branches of Commercial Bank 
, which were 612 in 11 provinces in 2015 have increased to 642 at the end of May 2017 and 33.3% 
percent  of  branches  are  concentrated  in  Cidade  Maputo  province.  Only  77  districts  out  of  163 
continue  to  be  unbanked,  warranting  further  intensification  of  banks’  branches  in  the  uncovered 
districts  for  credit  dispensation.  Distribution  of  financial  institutions  is  skewed  and      provinces  like 
Zambezia, Gaza and Inhambane where the incidence of smallholders is high has a smaller proportion 
of financial service providers. 
Mozambique's banking sector is dominated by five large banks, Millennium BIM, BCI, Standard Bank, 
Barclays, and  Moza  Banco.  These  banks  own  around  90.0%  of  the  sector's  assets.  In  general, 
commercial  banks  do  not  serve  smallholders,  and  those  with  a  lending  portfolio  in  agriculture  serve 
medium  to  large  clients  operating  in  more  organised  value  chains.  Only  4  commercial  banks 
arededicated to microfinance effectively targeted small holders.  
Credit  is  concentrated  in  urban  areas,  leaving  productive  sectors  such  as  agriculture  and  MSME 
industry with less access. The policies, procedures, structure and loan products required for lending to 
the informal sector are largely absent in commercial banks. 87% of the MSMEs are in rural areas and 
have  little  or  no  access  to  credit  as  they  are  beset  with  problems  like  inability  to  offer  adequate 
collaterals,  poor  market  linkages,  business  weaknesses,  financial  illiteracy  and  requirement  of small 
loan amounts. The limited outreach and the reluctance of banks to lend to the agriculture and MSME 
businesses,  indicate  that  there  is  a  strong  need  to  nudge  and  equip  them  into  lending  to  these 
sectors. 
2.1Bringing Policy thrust / Orientation at GOM, BM and financial institutions for RF/RE: 
Notwithstanding  the  branch  licensing  regulation  issued  by  BM  for  encouraging  banks  in  opening 
branches in rural areas  and GOM’s “One District, One Bank’ programme encouraging CBs to set up 
agencies in the unbanked district,   still a  long way is left to ensure full financial inclusion. Agriculture 
credit stood at 3.4%, which could meet financial requirement of 2.3 % of farm holdings. Thus, much 
more focus is needed at thecorporate policy and strategy level of banks and the creation of enabling 
34 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
environment  by  BM/GOM  to  redirect  financial  services  for  agri-business.  These  could  include    up-
scaling the agency arrangement,  intensifying digital financial services ,bringing speed and efficiency 
in    financial  service  delivery  in  rural  areas  ,providing  incentives  to  their  HR  for  rural  postings  and 
business &building up their skill and insight for rural finance . GOM is required to create a facilitating 
environment  by  improving  physical  and  digital  infrastructure,  and  making  rural  finance  a  profitable 
business proposition for banks. Apart from need-based and demonstrative financial and promotional 
support to the stakeholders under REFP, continuous dialogue with BM,BOM and banks may be held 
for trying out various policy optionsto  bring out paradigm shift in banks’ approach and innovation in 
the financial services to ensure scale, economy and timeliness in services.  
2.2 Capital scarcity in the financial  system:  Several factors such as lack of interoperability  in the 
payments infrastructure, tying up large proportions of bank funding to petroleum imports and auxiliary 
mega  projects,  compulsory  lending  to  the  Government,  insufficient  deposit  mobilisation  lead  to 
liquidity  constraints  and  contribute  to  high  cost  to  income  ratios  of  banks.  These  result  in  focus  on 
high  value  corporate  and  retails  lending  and  inability  to  serve  the  traditional  middle  to  low  income 
clientele. It also increases the cost of services, thereby making many products unaffordable to them. 
There  is  need  for  a  comprehensive  study  of  these  and  other  factors  that  impact  rural  finance  and 
recommend specific measures to augment the resources of formal financial services, especially in the 
micro  finance  sector.  The  broad-based  study  of  the  financial  sector  with  a  focus  on  policy  could  be 
useful for policy corrections in financial sector under aegis of BM. 
2.3.  Maintaining  Financial  Stability:  The  banking  sector  is  in  the  midst  of  a  crisis,  with  banks  like 
Moza  being  taken  under  BM  control  and  another,  Nosso  Banco  having  its  license  withdrawn  on  the 
grounds  of  mismanagement  and  inadequate  capitalization.  Banks  will  face  further  headwinds  in  the 
form  of  weak  deposit  growth  in  2017,  as  the  population’s  savings  decline  in  real  terms  due  to 
is  affecting  the  country’s 
persistence  of  high  inflation  (over  26%).Weak  domestic  savings 
development,  especially  in  rural  areas  where  more  than  80%  of  the  population  lives.  BM  studies 
indicate that only 2 percent of the population, estimated at over 25 million had positive savings.REFP 
should spearhead a   savings-led approach in credit dispensation. 
2.4. Introduction of New Policy & Regulations: 
Policy  initiatives  may  be  taken  to  evolve/  put  in  place  credit  guarantee  scheme  and  crop  insurance 
scheme. The Central Bank should progressively work towards de-risking agricultural finance, paving 
the way for increasing participation of commercial banks. In view of the expansion of agency banking 
and  mobile  banking,  Central  bank  may  consider  issuing  more  comprehensive  regulation  and 
guidelines  in  key  areas.  Initiation  of  Policy  dialogues  and  provision  of  evidences/inputs,  based  on 
studies to BM, GOM and financial institutions under REFP would be useful.   
3. Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs): 
3.1  There  are  10  Micro  Banks  and  380  micro  credit  operators  which  are  termed  as  MFIs  that 
exclusively service the micro finance sector. None the less, the microfinance sector‘s growth has been 
stagnant,  with  total  number  of clients  remaining  below  200,000  and  declining  loan  portfolio.  Several 
limitations  and  issues  have  been  affecting  the  microfinance  sector  /institutional  growth  and 
development.  The  eventual  improvement  of  their  financial  performance  parameters  would  facilitate 
their complying with the eligibility criteria and eventual participation in REFP. 
3.1.1 Micro Banks 
Similar to banking sector, the micro finance sector is highly concentrated with a few (5) micro banks 
holding over 80% of the loan portfolio and 60% of the borrowers. Micro banks have limited outreach – 
only  36  branches  that  are  thinly  distributed  across  provinces.  They  offer  limited  services  because 
microfinance regulations requires micro banks to obtain authorisation from BM before offering savings 
services.  BM  does  not  authorise  the  micro  banks  to  offer  such  services  if  it  considers  the  bank’s 
internal  control  system  inadequate.  Hardly  any  micro  banks  mobilise  deposits.  Due  to  liquidity 
constraints and high cost of funds, the micro banks have high interest rates (38-52% annually) which 
may  strain  the  medium  to  long  term sustainability  of  smallholder  customer  business. The  banks  are 
also  constrained  by  the  inability  of  the  smallholders  to  provide  adequate  collateral.  All  these  impact 
the expansion of microfinance operations. 
35 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
3.1.2 Micro Credit Operators (MCO): 
Micro credit operators served 54,566 clients in 2016 with credit volume is 590,974 (000 MT). These 
operators  are  highly  dependent  on  development  partners  as  they  are  unable  to  fund  their  portfolio 
through deposits.There is wide variation in the size of business and outreach of MCOs as reflected in 
FSD Moc study. They are largely concentrated in Maputo City and province (80%). Their products and 
services  are  more  suited  to  the  income  profile  of  small  holders,  but  regulatory  restrictions  on  micro 
credit operators on providing savings restrict their capacity to meet smallholder requirements.  
3.2 Policy and sector development Issues:  
3.2.1    The  absence  of  up-to-date  data-  base  on  the  state  of  the  sector  is  hampering  planned  and 
systematic developmental efforts for furtherance of the sector. The data-base on microfinance sector, 
rural finance and agricultural finance is not generated periodically.  Similar is the fate of cooperative 
credit  and  ASCAs.    In  the  absence  of  any  otherapex  developmental  authority  for  rural  finance,  the 
Central Bank may be approached toembark upon digitization and compilation of such data regularly 
and put it in public domain, if necessary with support of REFP and other donor-driven projects in the 
financial sector. 
3.2.2 With a view to enabling the MFIs (micro banks, micro credit operators) to have a larger role in 
the  project,  it  will  be  necessary  for  BM  to  focus  on  their  individual  health,  system  and  process 
engineering, HRD and governance aspects. A road map for their transformation and upgradation (e.g. 
from  Micro  credit  Operator  to  Micro  Bank),  prospective  business  plan  for  6  years  in  that  direction 
would  be  warranted.An  in-depth  study  underREFP  would  help  in  bringing  out  the  status  and 
perspectives  in  the  direction.  While  exploring  perspectives  of  Line  of  credit  under  REFP,  
besidesassessment  of  credit  potential,  the  avenues  of  introduction  of  credit  guarantee,  institutional 
protection system and wider coverage under private credit bureau might be pursued. 
3.2.3 The regulatory framework including reporting requirement of Micro Banks is the same as that of 
commercial  banks.  A  separate  regulatory  and  supervisoryframework  including  reporting  framework 
commensurate with the size and business level of the MFIs is deemed necessary. BM might be given 
necessary inputs, based on international experience, facilitated through exposure visits. 
3.2.4 Micro credit operators and others which are not deposit-taking institutions  do not get adequate 
oversight  and  guidance  in  terms  of  self-regulation/  supervision.  With  the  AMOMIF  being  weak  and 
playing no role in promoting self- regulation in micro credit operators, it would be appropriate for GOM 
and  BM  to  consider  instituting  a  Self-  Regulatory  Organization  (SRO)  or  entrusting/delegating  to 
certain institution the non- prudential supervision of these institutions, which can fill the void and help 
in orderly and faster growth of MFI sector. SRO could assume policy dialogue, build up data through 
appropriate  reporting  arrangements,  ensure  compliance  to  codes  of  conduct  and  regulatory  norms 
among member organizations and facilitate over all sector development.  In India, MFIN and Sa Dhan, 
the  two  micro  finance  associations  have  been  designated  as  SROs  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
(Central  Bank),  with  suitable  regulations  to  perform  the  expected  functions.AMOIMF  may  be 
strengthened under REFP to assume such role eventually. 
3.2.5  The  objective  of  multi-fold  policy  initiatives  and  institutional  development  measures  suggested 
asabove  under  REFP  is  intended  to  bring  in  sustainable  institutional  architecture  for  financing  and 
graduating rural entrepreneurs, even after closure of the project. 
4. ASCA – Status: 
4.1  As  per  FSD  MO-FARE  study,  there  were  12,481  ASCAs,  covering  2,  27,279members  in  the 
country.   ASCAs serve as village level savings and credit associations and play a predominant role in 
the  informal  sector  and  a  large  segment  of  their  members  are  engaged  in  agricultural  and  allied 
activities. FARE has reported that 18 organisations were promoting ASCAs in 2014, though a recent 
research yet to be published by FSD Moc identifies 25 promoter organisations. Several efforts have 
been made to form, strengthen and link ASCAs to financial institutions and there have been varying 
degrees  of  success.  Their  efforts  have  been  directed  towards  making  ASCAs  and  theirmember’s 
bankable,  promoting  growth  of  savings  of  individual  members  and  enhancing  their  financial 
awareness. ASCAs provide an opportunity to rural people to join together, trust each other, save and 
use  group  funds  for  consumption,  emergency  loans  or  partly  production  loans,  thereby  facilitating 
36 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
socio  -economic  impact.,  ,  they  have  proved  themselves  the  best  channel  to  provide  last  mile 
connectivity. Being mostly stand alone institutions, they, however, exhibits general weakness in terms 
of  safety  of  funds,  lack  of  homogeneity  and  solidarity  of  groups,  accounting  and  book-  keeping 
deficiencies, lack of avenues to obtain higher credit facility for growth  and sustainability,  absence  of 
an  umbrella  /apex  organization  to  provide  promotional  support  for  development  and  maturing  of  the 
sector  and  lack  of  up-to-date  and  reliable  data.  Considering  overall  potential  of  ASCAs,  in  ensuring 
financial  inclusion  of  the  target  people  under  REFP,      following  policy  initiatives  and  strategic  steps 
could possibly be taken: 
4.2 Issues and Initiatives 
4.2.1  Strengthening  and  linkage  of  grassroots  level  institutions  with  mainstream  finance:  There  is  a 
need to forge a link between the formal and the informal channels to optimise flow of credit and other 
financial  services  to  the  rural  areas.  These  perspectives  have  not  been  adequately  explored  by 
studying  various  policy  and  strategic  option  by  policy-making  institutions  in  Mozambique.  Under 
REFP, the need for an enabling regulatory framework for formal financial sector to forge saving and 
financial  services  link  with  the  informal  sector  should  be  advocated.A  comprehensive  study  under 
REFP  may  be  supported  which  could  examine  the  scope  of  comprehensive  policy  package  with 
related regulation on linkage routes. It couldsuggest road map for orderly growth and development of 
the sector;it could map the sector and bring out concrete data on the progress, trends, systems and 
practices  of  ASCAs  including  possible  ways  for  digitization  of  ASCAs  for  generation  of  continuous 
data, on sustainable basis. 
4.2.2Instituting an Apex body of ASCAs: With the developmental efforts envisaged under the project, 
it  is  likely  that  a  number  of  ASCAs  would  be  linked  with  MFIs/banks  and  will  graduate  to  strong 
savings – led channels with higher credit prospects, with potential to transform into group/ individual 
enterprises  in  agri  business  and  allied  sectors.  Hence,  the  possibility  of  an  Apex  Body  to  assume 
developmental  role  to  bring  about  orderly  development  including  saving  and  financial  linkage  of 
ASCAs  with  banks/MFIs  may  be  expored.If  an  apex  development  bank  is  set  up  with  supervisory 
powers, it can assume a supervisory, financial and developmental role for the entire sector other than 
banks (micro credit organizations, cooperatives and ASCAs). Study /exposure visit by policy-makers 
to  some  of  thecountries  having  broad-based  Apex  institutions  (e.g.  India,  Bangladesh,  and 
Uganda)may be considered... 
5. Cooperative Credit Institutions 
The  9  credit  cooperatives  and  12  savings  and  loan  organisations  in  Mozambique.  They  can  both 
accept deposits  and extend credit, though the savings and  loan organisations can only  lend to  their 
members. Their loan products are aligned to client profile and  hence provide small loans for up to 9 
months  and  accept  a  guarantor  instead  of  collateral.  However,  their  loans  are  provided  at  36  % 
annually  are  higher  than  commercial  banks.  Credit  cooperatives  have  limited  physical  outreach 
because  they  are  in  only  5  provinces,  Maputo  City  (4),  Gaza  (1),  Tete  (1),  Nampula  (2),  and  Cabo 
Delgado  (1)  and  in  2015  served  only  1101  customers.  Their  total  credit  portfolio  in  2015  stood  at 
1,776,593  (000  MT)  and  volume  of  deposits  at  1,677,599  (000MT).  Although  general  law  on 
cooperative  was  passed  in  2009,  the  scale  of  operation  of  credit  cooperatives  has  not  made  much 
headway.  Mozambican Association of Promotion of Modern Cooperatives (AMPCM) has been set up 
with  membership  of  2234  cooperatives  and  pre-cooperatives  comprising  over  1  million  members. 
(Mostly non-credit) for policy advocacy.  The cooperative credit sector is not cohesive and functions in 
an  isolated  way  without  an  Apex  body  (other  than  AMPCM)  for  policy  direction,  monitoring, 
promotional  and  financial  support  and  overall  development.  There  is  need  for  an  exclusive  apex 
institutional architecture for cooperative credit institutions for orderly growth and development. 
6. Policy Dialogue and implementation framework: 
6.1.  REFP  through  national  (NPSC)  and  regional  level  fora  (RPCG)  will  pursue  policy  advocacy 
measures on emerging themes, based on studies and experience. It will place for BM’s consideration 
evidence-based    issues  like(a)  the  need    for  differential  prudential/non-prudential  regulation 
,supervision  and  reporting    framework    for  different  set  of  financial  institutions;(b)  ensuring 
transparency in reporting financial performance, terms and conditions of credit including interest rate 
calculation  methods  by  financial  institutions;  (c)  providing  savings  thrust  in  rural  sector  to  make 
savings  as  collateral  substitute.It  will  also  collaborate  in  the  development  of  broad-based  policy  for 
37 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
agency banking,digital finance and other innovative delivery models. The REFP seeks to make BM an 
important stake holder of the project and a part of the consultative mechanism. It will provide inputs on 
policy  issues  to  BM  from  time  to  time.Joint  efforts  will  be  directed  to  remove  policy  constraints  in 
introducing innovations in financial products and services (credit, savings, remittance and insurance), 
digital financial services, contract farming/out grower arrangements, etc.   
6.2  REFP  will  be  implemented  in  close  collaboration  with  various  Ministries  of  the  Government  of 
Mozambique. It will pursue with GOM for setting up of a Rural Finance Unit in the GOM, particularly 
Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance  /Ministry  of  Land,  Rural  Development  and  Environment  to  give 
focused attention to development of rural finance policy and implementation of strategy. The project 
will  pursue  and  collaborate  with  GOM  for  providing  policy    thrust  for    rural  agribusiness  and 
entrepreneurship,  development  of  rural  basic  infrastructure  (power,  road    and  telecom),mandatory 
provision of service providers and extension services, formulating a sectoral/value chain development 
policy,  particularly  in  agriculture&  fisheries  ,  providing  price  support  for  all  potential  crops, 
development of crop insurance for  major crops as a de-risking measure, establishing an institutional 
mechanism 
in 
for  small  entrepreneurs, 
documentation for access to finance and imbalance in rural finance access points.  
  and  addressing  constraints 
for  credit  guarantee 
6.3  REFP  will  strive  to  enhance  application  research  for  policy-  making  on  emerging  themes.  It  will 
support  appropriate  institution(s)  for  the  purpose.  The  project  will  set  up  a  standing  forum  for  policy 
development and promote participatory process for policy discussion and dissemination. Such policy 
forums  were  supported  by  IFAD  in  its  programmes  in  Zambia,  Lesotho  and  Uganda.      It  will  also 
support convening of policy seminars, workshops and learning programmes on policy themes during 
the implementation period. 
6.4  In  the  implementation  process,  there  have  been  bureaucratic  delays  in  various  levels  in 
theGovernment. Mozambique stands very low in the ranking of Ease of Doing Business. Policy would 
be meaning full, if it is implemented through right strategy with skill, speed and scale. 
6.5  There  is  emerging  need  for  process  reengineering  and  technology  application  at  various 
institutions  involved  in  rural  finance.  On  the  other  hand,  financial  literacy  /awareness  of  target 
population to enhance demand side of rural finance for achieving the goal of REFP. 
7.  FAD’s  Rural  Finance  Policy:  The  above  policy  interventions  suggested  are  in  compliance  with 
IFAD’s  Rural  Finance  Policy,  encompassing  wide  range  of  financial  services,  introduction  of  
term 
in  collaborations 
innovative  delivery  models,  bringing 
strategies/sustainability of institutions, introduction of demand-driven services and policy-dialogues for 
creation of enabling environment. 
in  policy-making,  striving 
long 
Annex 1 
1. Rural Finance Policy Environment in Mozambique 
1.1 Introduction  
1.1.1Agriculture plays a key role in the economy of Mozambique, contributing 25 percent of the Gross 
National  Product  and  20  %  of  export  revenues.  More  than  80  %  of  the  population  are  economically 
connected  to  the  agriculture  and  fishery  sectors.  Yet  agriculture  credit  constitutes  a  miniscule 
proportion  of  the  total  credit  to  the  economy.  During  the  period  2012  to  2015,  the  contribution  of 
agriculture  to  total  credit  to  the  economy  varied  between  2.2  percent  to  5%.  In  2015,  credit  to 
agriculture  stood  at  3.4  %.    This  was  sufficient  only  to  cover  the  financial  requirements  of  2.3%  of 
3,920,058 farm holdings in the country. 
1.1.2 The SME sector too did not fare better with more than 75% being financially excluded from the 
formal  banking  sector.  There  are  4.9  million  MSMEs,  of  which  only  6%  are  fully  registered  and 
another  14%  are  licensed  by  districts  and/or  municipalities,  implying  that  a  large  majority  are  in  the 
informal sector. 92.7% of these are individual entrepreneurs. 6.6% are micro enterprises employing 1-
4  employees  and  a  mere  0.7%  are  small  with  5-49  employees.  Less  than  2%  of  the  individual 
entrepreneurs,  micro  and  small  micro  enterprises  have  access  to  overdraft,  working  capital  loan  or 
fixed  asset  loans;  whereas  the  medium  sector  is  adequately  serviced  by  the  financial  sector.  With 
38 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
more than 87% of the MSMEs located in rural areas and both agriculture and MSMEs dominating the 
rural spectrum, lack of credit to these sectors has impaired their sustainable development.  
1.1.3  The  agriculture  sector  has  great  potential  to  host  the  micro  and  small  enterprises  in  the  rural 
areas. However, the agriculture sector is beset with problems. 3/4th of all agri holdings are less than 2 
ha. A broad categorisation of farms reveals that 34% are less than 1 ha; 37% 1-2 ha; 25% - 2-5 ha 
and 3% 5 ha or more. (National survey of small holder households in Mozambique, CGAP, 2016). At 
the bottom end of the spectrum of small farmers (0-10 ha) are subsistence farmers who grow staple 
crops  –cereals,  tubers  and  roots;  are  net  buyers  of  food  and  heavily  rely  on  informal  financial 
mechanisms  (local  savings  and  loan  groups)  for  financial  services.  These  farmers  require  basic 
agriculture  inputs  to  graduate  to  the  next  stage.  The  next  type  of  farmers  are  farmers  with  1-2 
hectares, who are already organised in loose (weak) value chains; generate some level of surplus to 
sell  in  the  market,  grow  staples  and  some  higher  value  cash  crops  (such  as  tea,  coffee,  oilseeds, 
etc.);  but  have  limited  access  to  inputs,  storage  and  information  about  weather,  market  and  prices. 
They  have  some  access  to  financial  services.  The  third  category  of  farmers  have,  at  least,  2  ha  of 
land and sell in local/regional or highly structured value chains; have access to improved seeds and 
inputs,  grow  staples  and  high  value  crops  and  have  access  to  a  wider  range  of  financial  services 
providers  (both  formal  and  informal).  The  report  on  financing  value  chains  of  perineal  fruit  crops  in 
Mozambique  (KfW-  April  2016)  classifies  the  last  two  categories  of  small  farmers  as  ”emerging 
farmers”.  These  have  the  potential  to  expand  and  intensify  their  production  and  participate  in 
structured value chains. 
1.1.4  Thus,  71%  of  the  small  farmers  have  limited  or  no  access  to  markets.  As  they  are  not 
commercial farmers, their demand for market related extension services is limited, which, in turn, has 
impacted the development of agribusinesses and rural enterprises in formal value chains.  In order to 
develop the agri business sector, a two- pronged approach of transitioning small holder farmers into 
commercial agriculture (thereby creating demand for agribusiness) and simultaneously upgrading the 
agriculture  extension  services  (augmenting  supply  channels  through  agri  business  based  rural 
enterprises)  required  for  linking  them  to  formal  markets  will  need  to  be  taken.  Small  and  micro 
enterprises,  with their rural orientation,  are best set to step into this  void and provide the necessary 
extension  services.  Given  the  vast  potential  for  agricultural  growth  in  Mozambique,  agribusiness 
related rural enterprises also have potential to grow. The role of the financial sector in channelling this 
growth cannot be ignored. The exposure of the financial sector to agriculture and agribusiness micro 
and small enterprises is limited. 
2.  Rural Finance Environment  
2.1 Financial services in Mozambique are delivered by 19 commercial banks, 11 micro-banks, 9 credit 
cooperatives, 12 savings and loan organizations, and 380 microcredit operators, mostly microfinance 
institutions. These formal financial institutions are located mainly  in  the 11 provincial capitals and  in 
about  60%  of  the  country's  districts,  leaving  73  districts  deprived  of  formal  financial  services.  The 
weak penetration of financial services in rural areas is partly due to the liquidity problems experienced 
by micro finance institutions and the high cost of operations of serving a dispersed population. Mobile 
financial  services  are  at  an  emergent  phase,  there  are  still  problems  in  interoperability  of  services 
offered (M-Pesa and M-Kesh) by it with that of the formal banking system. Since a large proportion of 
the  population  lives  in  rural  areas  and  undertake  agriculture  related  activities,  they  are  largely 
underserved.  
2.1.2 There is reluctance on the part of banks to serve the rural sector. Only 10 % of the rural sector is 
banked, with close to 12% being served by the informal sector. Agribusiness is seen as risky due to 
the  predominance  of  small  scale  farming,  use  of  rudimentary  production  systems,  and  lack  of 
knowledge  and  management  of  commercial  agriculture.  The  main  obstacles  that  prevent  the  banks 
from  serving  the  rural  population  include  limited  financial  access  points;  lack  of  basic  infrastructure; 
low economic potential; highly disbursed transaction costs; limited products and services to meet the 
specific  needs  of  agriculture  and  small  business  segments;  poor  financial  literacy;  under  developed 
agriculture  insurance  market;  limited  compliance  with  KYC  requirements;  and  lack  of  adequate 
collateral (the assets owned by the unbanked do not meet bank requirements). There are 4.9 million 
MSMEs,  of  which  only  6%  are  fully  registered  and  another  14%  are  licensed  by  districts  and/or 
municipalities,  implying  that  a  large  majority  are  in  the  informal  sector.  The  informality  of  most 
MSMEs, their lack of business license, small size, dependency on one person to run the enterprise, 
39 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
mixing  of  personal  and  business  finance,  unprofessional  management,  low  level  of  capitalization  of 
business,  lack  of  adequate  and  accurate  financial  data  and  no  business  address  compound  to  the 
problem of adverse risk perception by banks. Demand and  
3. Factors helping or hindering Rural Finance 
Factors that helped and hindered the growth of rural finance at the macro, meso and the micro levels 
are listed below: 
3.1 Macro Level: 
3.1.1 Enabling factors include: 
  Government  of  Mozambique’s  initiatives  in  Financial  Inclusion:  (a)  National  Inclusion 
Strategy(2016-22),which is organized essentially around 3 basic pillars, viz., Pillar I. Access 
to and use of financial services; Pillar 2. Strengthening of financial infrastructure; and Pillar 3. 
Financial consumer protection and financial literacy. (b) Plan for Agriculture Sector, PEDSA, 
included  specific  sub  strategies  relevant  to  rural  and  agriculture  finance.  Under  pillar  1 
(agriculture  productivity),  there  is  a  provision  for  improving  access  to  agriculture  inputs  and 
services,  especially  to  credit.  Under  pillar  2  (access  to  markets),  it  is  stated  that  viable 
harvest  credit  may  be  ensured  to  farmers  from  commercial  banks  with  backing  from  the 
Government  and  investment  in  agriculture  should  be  promoted  through  the  development  of 
appropriate  financial  products  and  platforms  for  loans  to  agriculture.(c)  The  ‘Mozambican 
Financial  Sector  Development  Strategy  (FSDS)  -  2013-2022’  with  the  main  objective  of 
overcoming identified challenges in financial inclusion and allowing faster development of the 
financial  sector  to  make  it  sound,  diverse,  expansive  and  a  provider  of  adequate  products 
and  services  to  a  majority  of  households  and  businesses  at  competitive  prices.(d) 
Implementation of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) (e ) Introduction of the 
National  Payment  System (f) Establishment of Financial Information Center of Mozambique 
(g) Improvement of insurance and social security legal framework, and establishment of the 
Institute  of  Insurance  Supervision  of  Mozambique  (ISSM).  (h)  Constitution  of  the  District 
Development Fund (FDD) annually to fund food production and income- generating projects 
as  well  as  to  create  jobs  in  all  the  districts.  (i)  Launching  of  the  "One  District,  One  Bank" 
Programme that is open to commercial banks and provides incentives for rapid  deployment 
of  branches  in  the  country’s  rural  districts.(j)  Legislation  for  creation  of  a  system  of 
Warehouse Receipt (Decree no100/2014) that can be issued by BM or licensed authorities. 
This certificate specifies the type, quantity  and quality of stored goods, identifies location of 
warehouse and name of the depositor. This  will enable small and medium scale farmers or 
traders to access finance as it will serve as a bank loan guarantee. A Commodity Exchange 
has  been  established  to  give  impetus  to  the  agricultural  marketing  process.  For  non-
perishable  crops  such  as  maize,  beans,  peanuts  and  sesame  seeds,  they  can  serve  as  a 
credit guarantee and allow producers to take advantage of high prices that may arise at the 
time of marketing and increase their working capital through seasonal loans.  
  Measures implemented by BM: (a) Regulations for opening branches in rural and unbanked 
areas such as (i) Notice No. 4/GBM/ 2012, which establishes a special regime applicable  to 
credit  institutions  and  financial  companies  wishing  to  expand  their  activities  into  the  rural 
areas  by  setting  up  branches  or  other  forms  of  representation  and;  (ii)  Notice  No. 
1/GBM/2015, which gives the rules and criteria for opening and closing down bank branches, 
including geographic proportionality for opening bank branches and eligible locations for the 
same.  (b)  Setting  out  the  terms  and  conditions  under  which  banks  and  micro-banks  can 
expand  the  activities  by  contracting  bank  agents  (Notice  no  3/GBM/2015).  (c)  Legislation 
permitting  mobile  operators  to  partner  with  financial  institutions  to  provide  mobile  money 
services.  (2010)  (d)  Setting  out  measures  for  protection  of  funds  resulting  from  issuance  of 
electronic  money  and  guaranteeing 
the  security  of  depositors  and  users  (Notice 
06/GBM/2015). (e) Law No. 6/2015, which allows for establishment of privately owned credit 
bureau  and  defines  the  requirements  in  terms  of  legal  statute  and  ownership.  It  allows  for 
more  types  of  institutions  including  MFIs,  Micro  credit  operators  and  others  institutions  that 
serve the lower end market, to subscribe to a credit registry. 
40 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
  Donor  driven  projects  in  agriculture  and  rural  finance:  Large  scale  projects  being 
implemented by the World Bank, IFAD, USAID, GIZ, DfID,  DANIDA have contributed to the 
development of financial and rural sector. 
3.1.2 Hindrances: 
  High  Interest  Rate:  BM  raised  the  reference  rate  for  credit  to  23.25  percent.  High  interest 
rates make credit to agriculture and MSME sector unviable. 
  Banking  crisis:  The  banking  sector  is  in  the  midst  of  a  crisis,  with  banks  like  Moza  being 
 
 
taken under BM control and another, Nosso Banco having its license withdrawn. 
Inadequate  infrastructure  leading  to  high  operating  costs:  The  lack  of  basic  infrastructure 
(road, electricity, telecom coverage) in rural areas result in high transaction cost for serving 
the rule poor. 
Inappropriate  reporting  demands:  Micro  banks  are  subject  to  full  -  fledged  reporting 
requirements that apply to commercial banks.  Similarly mobile money operators classified as 
financial institutions, also have inappropriate reporting requirements. This policy of “one size 
fits all” can be tailored to the needs for prudential supervision of each type of institution. 
  Restrictive  regulations  on  data  processing:  The  current  regulations  require  financial  service 
provides  to  maintain  their  data  processing  within  the  country.  Use  of  cloud-  based  systems 
would  be  of  great  benefit  for  small  MFIs  that  do  not  have  financial  capability  to  maintain 
costly local IT infrastructure. 
  Lack  of  credit  bureau  for  micro  credit  operators:  Despite  new  legislation  permitting  the 
creation of private credit information bureaus, there are currently no private credit bureaus to 
provide information on micro credit operators. Small, non- regulated financial institutions have 
found it difficult to give data electronically. 
  Mobile  operators  are  currently  not  allowed  to  offer  savings  services,  which  can  be  an 
attractive service for low income population. 
  Banks  encounter  challenges  in  implementation  of  eligibility  criteria  of  agents  and  the  non-
exclusivity of agents; few agents can meet the formality and documentation clause set under 
this notice.  
  Land  Law  19/97  does  not  allow  private  ownership  of  land.  People  (including  foreign 
nationals) can apply for a license to use land through DUAT. The license is or a period of 50 
years.  Under  this  framework,  land  cannot  be  used  as  collateral  and  this  limits  access  to 
financial services of the unnerved population. 
3.2Meso and Micro level 
3.2.1 Enabling factors: 
  Banks are embracing digital services and investing in new technology. While the current focus 
is on urban clients, this will lay the foundation for reaching out to rural clients as well. 
  Growth  and  outreach  of  mobile  money  operators  is  a  positive  development  with  more 
collaboration between financial institutions and mobile money operators, entry of new players 
– Movitel  and Zoona and the  willingness of some rural players such as ASCAs to embrace 
these services. 
  Stronger  farmer  associations  :While  a  vast  majority  of  farmers  are  yet  to  be  organised  into 
farmers’ organisations, some of the stronger farmers organisations are playing an important 
role in intermediating between small holders and other players in accessing credit, facilitating 
financial  education  ,improving  agriculture  techniques  and  bulking  produce  for  marketing; 
thereby becoming important value chain actors. 
  Warehouse  receipts:  With  the  emphasis  on  value  chain  development,  the  promotion  of 
warehouse  receipts  by  the  Bolse  de  Mercadorias  de  Mozambique  and  USAID’s  Trade  hub 
offer secure storage of agriculture produce, access to finance , increased linkage to markets 
and increasing confidence of bankers in agriculture finance. 
3.2.2 Hindrances: 
41 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
  Limited outreach of formal banking services has come in the way of financial inclusion of rural 
population.  This  is  attributed  to  high  operating  costs  and  the  slow  pace  in  embracing 
alternate outreach strategies. 
  The  weak  penetration  of  financial  services  in  rural  areas  is  also  partly  due  to  the  liquidity 
problems experienced by micro finance institutions. Most of the MFIs do not accept deposits 
although  there  has  been  a  growth  of  rural-  based  MFIs,  only  a  few  of  these  MFIs  offer 
agriculture loans. Their scale of operations has been very limited due to resource constraints, 
notwithstanding their thrust on rural poor and small farmers/microenterprises. 
  There is limited access to long term finance resulting in maturity mismatch for providing long 
term loans to small businesses.  
  While  there  is  a  renewed  interest  in  banks  to  finance  agriculture  through  profitable  value 
chains, the specialization to assess and analyze loans focused on agriculture is still low. 
  The  lack  of  capacity  of  banks  and  MFIs  to  serve  the  rural  areas  is  manifest  in  the  limited 
products and services required to meet the specific needs of social and business segments. 
The  systems,  procedures  and  processes  adopted  by  these  institutions  are  standardized 
across  different  client  segments  and  are  not  adapted  to  meet  the  specific  requirements  of 
small farmers and rural entrepreneurs. 
  There is lack of interoperability between mobile money operators and between mobile money 
and other payment systems. 
3.3 Client level: 
3.3.1 Enabling factors: 
  The advent and growth of out grower companies has introduced farmers to better agriculture 
practices,  access  to  inputs  without  the  hassles  of  soliciting  credit  from  financial  institutions 
and a market for their produce 
  Vast expansion of ASCAs: the lack of access to formal finance and the need for avenues for 
savings and credit in rural areas has translated in the vast expansion of ASCAs in the rural 
areas.  
3.3.2 Hindrances: 
  All banks and MFIs in general insist on collateral for the loan provided which the farmers and 
rural  entrepreneurs  find  difficult  to  arrange,  particularly  when  land  belonging  to  the  State 
cannot be given as collateral. 
  Documentation  requirements  for  accessing  financial  services,  be  it  compliance  with  KYC 
requirement,  particularly  obtaining  National  Identity  Card,  or  documents  like  DUAT 
Permission  to  use  Government  land,  company  registration  or  financial  records    are  
cumbersome. 
 Besides most of the micro and small units do not have business enterprise plans, repayment 
capacity or market accessibility, making them too risky to lend.  
 
  Less  than  1  %  of  the  poor  households  (earning  less  than  USD  2  per  day)  are  serviced  by 
micro  credit.  The  poor  have  meagre  income,  no  savings  and  hence  very  little  appetite  for 
financial services.  
  Rural  people,  in  general,  are  averse  to  approaching  banks  due  to  lack  of  financial  literacy 
and, thereby, lack of familiarity with banking products, procedures and system. 
  Rural people  do not have  an  avenue to save, as most of the MFIs  do  not accept deposits. 
They have thus to turn to ASCAs/Commercial banks for the same. 
  Rural  entrepreneurs/  small  farmers  have  difficulties  in  marketing  their  products  due  to  the 
absence of assured marketing avenues. Most of the farmers are subsistence farmers or sell 
sporadically  in  the  market.  This  limits  their  demand  for  agriculture  inputs  and  services  and 
cuts  them  off  from  formal  value  chains.  Thus,  the  lack  of  commercial  agriculture  and  the 
resultant stunting of agribusinesses work as a dampener for growth of rural credit. 
  A World Bank Report,  published  in  2017,  presents an analytical framework that shows that 
there is a  positive correlation in Mozambique between access to credit and the  adoption of 
42 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
improved  agricultural  technologies,  since  farmers  with  access  to  credit  are  more  likely  to 
acquire  inputs  and  use  technologies.  Therefore,  rural  areas  are  faced  with  problems  of 
limited demand for and supply of credit. 
  Agribusiness is unable to shake off its high risk profile contributed by informality of business, 
lack of capital, predominance of small scale farming, lack of service providers, limited access 
to physical assets, lack of knowledge of commercial agriculture, little or no financial literacy 
and lack of poor quality of collateral. 
43 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2: 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
A. 
Introduction 
According  to  the  National  Statistics  Institute  (INE),  in  2015  Mozambique  had  a  population  of 
approximately  26,500  million  inhabitants.  Population  density  is  35.667  people  per  square  kilometre, 
with 70 % of the population residing in rural areas. In 2011, the population growth rate was estimated 
at 2.8%, with the average household size of 5 members and women constituting around 52.8% of the 
population.  In  2015,  life  expectancy  was  55  years.  In  the  same  year,  the  infant  mortality  rate  was 
estimated at 84.5 deaths per 1,000 live births68. The youth make up 87.4% of the population. In 2016, 
the  Mozambique  ranked  181/188  on  Human  Development  Index69.  The  literacy  rates  among  adults 
are 58.8% (2015)  with a higher rate among men (73.4%) in comparison to 45.5%70 for women. The 
real GDP growth rate was 6.6% in 201571) and inflation rate was at 12.2% (2016)72. According to the 
National  Statistics  Institute  Survey  (IOF)  2014/15,  unemployment  in  Mozambique  was  38.4  % 
nationwide of which 39.8% were women compared to 36.8% men. 
B. 
Poverty and vulnerability in Mozambique 
Mozambique  remains  rooted  in  deep,  rural  poverty  and  still  ranks  as  one  of  the  countries  with  the 
highest poverty levels (69% at the USD1.9PPP)73. Poverty is still predominantly a rural phenomenon 
in  Mozambique,  where  67%  (2016)74  of  the  poor  households  are  located.  According  to  the  2016 
Human Development Report of United Nations, 55 % of the population in Mozambique live below the 
poverty  line  and  44  %  in  severe  poverty.  Poverty  levels  vary  across  ten  provinces,  with  poverty 
prevalence rates ranging from 31.9 % to  70.5 %75 for Niassa and Zambezia  Provinces respectively. 
Table  1  in  Annex  1  gives  key  development  parameters  in  the  10  provinces  envisaged  for  REFP 
coverage. 
The challenges posed by  poverty  in Mozambique are reflected in the  Poverty  Reduction  Acton  Plan 
(PARP  2011-14).  The  PARP  concentrates  on  increasing  agricultural  production,  promoting  the 
development  of  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)  and  an  investment  in  human  and  social 
development.  
The country continues to face challenges in food and nutrition insecurity and 80%76 of the population 
cannot afford the minimum cost for an adequate diet. The country’s stunting  prevalence for children 
under  the  age  of  five  is  high  at  43%,  with  higher  prevalence  in  rural  areas77.  These  problems  are 
further aggravated by the HIV prevalence (10.5%78 and ranked 8th globally), and chronic exposure to 
weather  related  hazards.    Two  out  of  three  people  live  in  the  coastal  areas  and  are  vulnerable  to 
disasters such as storms, cyclones, and flash floods. The El-Niño, induced drought in 2016, resulted 
in  an  estimated  2  million79  people  in  the  Central  and  Northern  parts  of  the  country  with  acute  food 
insecurity. 
67 World bank statistics (2016) 
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/Views/Reports/ReportWidgetCustom.aspx?Report_Name=CountryProfile&Id=b450fd57&tba
r=y&dd=y&inf=n&zm=n&country=MOZ 
68 Unless further specified, overview sources: National Agriculture Investment Plan 2014–2018 (Comprehensive Africa 
Agriculture Development Programme) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security) 
69 UNDP Human Development Report 2015 
70 UNESCO (2016); Education Profile of Mozambique United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural organisation 
71  World bank statistics (2016) 
72World Bank Statistics (2016) 
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/Views/Reports/ReportWidgetCustom.aspx?Report_Name=CountryProfile&Id=b450fd57&tba
r=y&dd=y&inf=n&zm=n&country=MOZ 
73 World Bank (2016) Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities 
74 World Bank data (2016) http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?view=map 
75 International Monetary Fund  Country Report June 2011 IMF Country Report No 132 
76 WFP http://www1.wfp.org/countries/mozambique 
77 UNICEF Mozambique (2015) http://www.unicef.org.mz/en/our-work/what-we-do/nutrition/ 
78UNAIDS  http://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/mozambique 
79 WFP http://www1.wfp.org/countries/mozambique 
45 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
C. 
Rural livelihoods 
Agriculture  is  the  foundation  of  the  economy  in  Mozambique.  It  contributes  25%80  of  the  Gross 
Domestic  Product  and  60%  of  export  revenues;  80%81  of  the  population  is  involved  in  agricultural 
activities. Agricultural  production  is  largely  organized  in  small,  hand-cultivated  units  of  land.  Ninety-
seven  percent  of  production  comes  from  3.2  million  subsistence  farms,  with  an  average  size  of  1.2 
hectares82.  Smallholder  farmers  in  Mozambique  largely  practice  rain-fed  agriculture,  use  traditional 
low  varieties  of  crops,  low-intensity  fertilizer,  minimal  pesticides  and  minimal  cultivation  techniques. 
The  country’s  low  productivity  results  from  lack  of  appropriate  technology  and  support.  In  addition, 
produce markets are generally distant, unreliable and uncompetitive. The findings of the CGAP study 
(2016)  shows  that  the  smallholder  farmers  engage  in  agriculture,  relying  mostly  on  their  own 
resources, with limited outside assistance from financial institutions and other entities that often form 
part of an agricultural value chain.  
Rural entrepreneurs have a number of income sources from both agriculture and other rural MSMEs. 
According  the  CGAP  (2016)  study,  a  rural  household/entrepreneur  in  Mozambique  had  8  income 
sources, of which 2 income sources were agricultural related. The study in rural Nampula showed that 
non-agricultural income represents a much higher proportion of the household income (93%). Besides 
agriculture83,  the  rural  entrepreneurs  engage  in  a  number  of  non  -  agricultural  MSMEs84’.  Rural 
entrepreneurs with smaller land holdings tended to diversify their enterprises much more than those 
with larger holdings. The rural MSEs not only provide income to the rural entrepreneur but also create 
employment.  
D. 
Rural Women  
Rural women, in particular Women Headed Households remain vulnerable and constitute the poorest 
segment  of  the  population.  The  Gender  Equality  Index  in  Mozambique  indicates  big  discrepancies 
between  male  and  female.  With  61.9  per  cent  on  the  Africa  Gender  Equality  Index  that  measures 
gender  differences  across  three  dimensions:  economic  opportunities,  human  development,  and  law 
and institutions85, Mozambique ranks 16th out 52 African countries. The vast majority of rural women 
rely on agriculture (90%), where they are engaged in food production. Women have limited access to 
income  generating  activities,  financial  services,  technical  and  business  skills,  technology  and 
extension  services.  The  challenges  faced  by  women  are  further  aggravated  by  low  education  and 
literacy levels. According to a 2014/15 family budget survey (IOF), there are 74.3 % male-headed and 
25.7%  female-headed  households  with  the  provinces  of  Gaza,  Inhambane  and  Manica  featuring 
higher percentages of female headed households: 59.5, 67.7 and 55.2 % respectively (INE, 2014)86, 
due to migration of males to neighbouring countries. There are wide gender disparities with respect to 
access,  control  and  ownership  of  economic  resources  and  involvement  in  community  decision 
making. 
According  to  the  Demographic  and  Health  Survey  (2011),  Mozambique  has  high  rates  of  child 
marriages.  In 2011, 14% of adolescent girls got married before the age of 15 and 48% before the age 
of  18,  with  the  highest  child  marriages  in  Northern  provinces  (Niassa  (24.4%),  Nampula  and 
Zambezia)87.  They  are  not  only  deprived  of  continuing  their  education,  but  are  often  exposed  to 
violence and health risks for both the mother and infant. 
80 World Bank (2016) Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities 
81 With more women working in agriculture (90%) than men (70%) 
82 CGAP (March 2016); National Survey & Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Mozambique 
83  The  crops  grown  include  maize  and  cassava,  beans,  groundnuts,  sweet  potatoes,  and  cowpeas. A  few  households  in  the 
central region grow cash crops, which tend to be sugar cane and sesame. Small livestock (chickens, ducks, goats, and pigs) 
are mainly reared for consumption while cattle are reared for sale. 
84 Include: vending, selling of charcoal, firewood, traditional alcoholic beverages, handicrafts, and dried fish. At the same time 
there are self-employed rural artisans/entrepreneurs including: tailors, hairdressers, carpenters, basket makers, reed mat 
makers, fisheries, stone masons, tinsmiths, barbers and builders. Other non-farm MSEs include: petty trading, fishing, soap 
making, grain milling, furniture making, cake and bread production, and construction. In addition, remittances are invested in 
agricultural production (agricultural inputs, poultry, piggery, equipment, agribusiness etc.), transport, bicycle and watch repairs, 
tailoring and shop-keeping. 
85 African Development Bank Group 2015; Empowering African Women: An Agenda for Action. African Gender Equality Index; 
African Development Bank, Abidjan 
86 Mozambique INE 2014 Reports about head of households 
87 UNICEF (2015) Child Marriages & Adolescent Pregnancy in Mozambique: Causes and Impact 
46 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Women  in  agriculture  have  a  workload  that  if  not  heavier  in  physical  terms  is  still  more  time- 
consuming  than  for  men  (ADF  200588;  INE  201089).  Studies  also  show  that  women  are  much  less 
likely than men to grow tradable crops because they concentrate on basic foods to feed their family 
(Tarp 200090; ADF 2005). An important aspect of the “feminisation‟ of agricultural production has been 
that men move out of agriculture and into the private sector and self-employment in non-agricultural 
sectors to a higher degree than women. Women’s limited options to leave agriculture altogether relate 
to issues such as gender penalties in the labour market, socio-cultural pressure to stay in the village 
and  take  care  of  children,  and  the  importance  of  agriculture  for  feeding  children,  which  is  often  the 
ultimate responsibility of women.  
Women’s  access  to  financial  services:  Women  in  Mozambique  mainly  use  informal  financial 
services  such  as  Xitique,  family  and  ASCAS.    Although  banks  are  the  least  used,  40%  of  the  rural 
women  compared  to  20%  in  urban  areas  use  MFIs.    Banks  are  mostly  used  by  business  women 
(45%) compared to domestic women (6%). Women engage in low income activities that hinder their 
ability  to  save  and  thereby  resort  to  credit  to  cater  for  their  unmet  needs.91  Challenges  faced  by 
women  and  their  MSMEs  include  the  limited  access  to  financial  services,  limited  market  access, 
shortage  of  raw  material,  lack  of  collateral,  savings  and  insurance,  lack  of  financial  literacy,  limited 
knowledge  of  business  development  and  management  skills  (no  records  for  administration,  lack  of 
planning).  Women  and  youth  are  particularly  disadvantaged  and  therefore  constitute  the  poorest 
segment of the rural communities. A CGAP (2015)  study showed that 77% individual entrepreneurs 
and  56%  microenterprises  are  financially  excluded.  For  women  in  particular,  social  norms  often 
dictate  SMEs  and  economic  sectors  in  which  women  engage.  For  instance,  women  are  involved  in 
production  and  are  less  present  in  business  outside  the  home  in  Nampula.    In  certain  households, 
women  have  less  decision making  power  than  men.  Despite  these  constraints  and  as  confirmed  by 
the  field  visits92  during  the  design  mission,  there  is  interest  among  rural  entrepreneurs:  poor  men, 
women and youth to save, and insure their MSEs, and they desire to have more options for mitigating 
risk and to sustain their livelihoods.  
The  main  opportunities  that  can  improve  women’s  access  to  financial  services  are:  product  design, 
diversification, financial literacy and improvement in convenience of transactions.  Women engaged in 
MSMEs  will  benefit  from  expanded  financial  services  to  improve  their  businesses.  The  low  income 
women  use  informal  mechanisms  to  meet  their  financial  needs,  require  financial  education  while 
higher income women would benefit from product design to enhance their enterprises.  
E. Youth  
The  present  youth  policy  (1996)  defines  youth  as  citizens  between  15  and  3593  years.  Rural  youth 
consists of 69 %94 of the rural population. Youth labour force is increasing by approximately 37%95 per 
annum but the rate of new jobs created is static, hence three quarters of the youth are employed in 
the  informal  sector.  According  to  the  National  Statistics  Institute  survey,  IOF  2014/15  youth 
unemployment in the country was high at 44.6 % nationwide of which  46.4 % was in young women 
compared to  42.2 %  in  young men.  Major  youth specific challenges  when entering the  agricultural 
and  non-agricultural  MSEs  are:  insufficient  access  to  knowledge  and  education;  limited  access  to 
land;  inadequate  access  to  financial  services;  limited  access  to  markets;  lack  of  brick  and  mortar 
financial  institutions  in  rural  areas    and  limited  involvement  in  policy  dialogue.  In  addition,  financial 
exclusion among the rural youth entrepreneurs is higher as they are considered a risky demographic.  
88 ADF (2005). Republic of Mozambique. Women's Entrepreneurship and Skills Development for Food Security Tunisia: African 
Development Fund. 
89 INE (2010) Inquérito sobre Orçamento Familiar 2008/09. Quadros Básicos. Maputo: Instituto Nacional de Estatística 
90 Tarp, Finn (2000); Gender and Agricultural Technology‟;  In: World Development.Vol.28, No. 7 pp. 1307-1326. 
91 http://www.nfnv.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/Women%C2%B4s-Access-to-Financial-Services-in-Mozambique-Report.pdf 
92 Design team field visit to Angonia district in Tete Province 
93 Mozambique National Youth Policy (1996) 
94 UNCDF (2015) Youth Start Global: Youth Economic Opportunity Ecosystem Analysis 
95 UNCDF (2015) Youth Start Global: Youth Economic Opportunity Ecosystem Analysis 
47 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
B.  Socio – economic characterization of Rural Smallholder households  
In Mozambique, rural smallholder households that engage in agriculture fisheries and non agricultural 
MSMEs  are  categorised  into  four  broad  categories:96  (i)  Smallholder  subsistence    and  semi-
subsistence  producers,  (ii)  Rural  household  (self-employed)  entrepreneurs  (iii)  Emergent  Farmers 
(market  oriented  producers)  and  iv)  Medium  Entrepreneurs  (transit  and  stable).  The  criteria  for 
defining  the  smallholder  farmers  is  based  on  (i)  landholding  size;  (ii)  market  orientation;  (iii)  labour 
input; (iv)income; (v) farming system ; (vi) farm management responsibilities;  (vi) capacity; (vii) legal 
aspect  and (viii) level of organization.  The primary target group of the  Project consists of poor and 
disadvantaged rural households involved in agriculture, fisheries and MSMEs. These will include men, 
women,  women  head  of  household,  youth  including  the  vulnerable  people.  In  line  with  the  rural 
livelihood assessments of the country, and the ongoing IFAD portfolio, the main characteristics of the 
target group include i) smallholder farmers (subsistence and semi-subsistence), ii) smallholder fisher 
men and women, iii) rural household and micro-entrepreneurs. 
129.  The  following  section  describes  characteristics  of  four  broad  categories  of  rural  smallholder 
households and MSMEs categories97 based on resource endowments and livelihood strategies.  
130.  The  direct  target  group  will  consist  of  poor  and  disadvantaged  rural  households  involved  in 
agriculture,  fisheries  and  household  enterprises.  These  will  include  men,  women,  women  head  of 
household, youth including the vulnerable. In line with the rural livelihood assessments of the country, 
and the ongoing portfolio, the main characteristics of the target group include i) smallholder farmers 
(subsistence  and  semi-subsistence),  ii)  smallholder  fisher  men  and  women,  iii)  rural  household  and 
micro-entrepreneurs.  
131.  Smallholder  subsistence  and  semi-subsistence  producers:  This  category  will  consist  of 
poor rural households engaged in both agriculture production and fisheries. They have limited access 
to  land,  inputs,  credit,  markets  and  market  information,  representing  about  99  per  cent  of  the 
agriculture sector producers in the country. These producers are net producers of staple crops, food 
insecure  with  no  proper  water  and  soil  fertility  management  practices.  They  are  under-covered  by 
extension, and have a longer learning curve in the uptake of new technologies and approaches. They 
largely  operate as individuals and  are highly  vulnerable and dependent on their farm produce. They 
have weak bargaining power, poor market linkages and no access to market information.  
132.  Rural  household  (self-employed)  entrepreneurs:  This  category  includes  subsistence 
producers,  engaged  in  various  entrepreneurial  incomes  generating  activities  off-farm.  They  have 
limited  access  to  finance,  land,  and  live  below  the  poverty  line.  In  addition,  they  have  insufficient 
production,  depletion  of  food  stocks,  and  have  high  risk  exposure  to  rising  food  prices,  thereby  are 
food  insecure,  and  exposed  to  acute  malnutrition  due  to  inadequate  diet.  They  also  have  limited 
resilience  to  climatic  shocks;  therefore  households  are  highly  vulnerable,  live  off  of  farm  produce, 
either  by  consuming,  selling,  or  trading  their  agricultural  labour.  This  is  an  important  target  group 
deserving  promotion  because  of  their  potential  for  income  and  employment  generation.  The 
entrepreneurs are interested to expand their activities but have limited access to financial resources. 
They have limited business and technical skills, however a fully integrated approach providing credit, 
raw materials, technical and business training as well as marketing assistance would be beneficial for 
this group. They also may need small equipment to further support their business enterprises.   
133.  Emergent  farmers  (market-oriented  producers)  are  considered  as  economically  active, 
commercially viable (to an extent) and in a position to benefit from opportunities along the agricultural 
value  chain.  They  will  be  targeted  in  so  far  as  they  bring  experience,  dynamism,  innovation,  and 
services to the poorer subsistence-oriented farmers. These emergent smallholder farmers are already 
involved in value chain production (existing cassava, horticulture, livestock producers and fishermen). 
This group is composed of both poor and non-poor, who have already  graduated to market-oriented 
agriculture. This group has successfully increased production, applies fertilizers and some agronomic 
practices,  and  is  interested  in  further  expanding  their  business,  increasing  value-added  and 
developing new activities that support the production and marketing of target crops. 
Small and medium entrepreneurs (transit and stable): This category has multiple income sources 
and includes wages from occasional labour, salary from employees, retail, agriculture and other non-
96  US2,50 PPP/day form CGAP (2016) National Survey  & Segmentation of Smallholder in Mozambique. 
97 Draft COSOP for Mozambique 2017 
48 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
farm  income  generating  activities.  The  business  employs  5  to  20  workers  and  monthly  income  is 
between  USD100  –  USD1000.  The  group  earn  higher  income,  has  resources  for  addressing 
emergencies. The household income is split equally between agriculture and non-agricultural MSEs. 
The  group  has  been  set  up  by  policy  makers,  development  agencies  and  financial  institutions.  The 
business is usually  obtained through family  inheritance usually originating from an agricultural  base. 
The group can access credit for the formal  financial institutions for funding MSEs operations as well 
as buying new equipment  to replace obsolete machinery. The group  is  wealthy,  more educated and 
more prepared to tackle emergency situations. 
134.  Women will be directly targeted as they constitute the main constituent engaged in agriculture, 
and  the  majority  of  the  rural  population.  Female-headed  households  are  amongst  the  poorest  and 
their  economic  progression  is  hindered  by  a  combination  of  social  and  structural  constraints.  Their 
access  to  land,  knowledge,  inputs,  finance,  high  value  agriculture  chains  and  capacity  to  generate 
income  is  heavily  curtailed  by  traditional  gender  roles  that  will  undermine  their  participation  unless 
gender  is  mainstreamed  into  all  project’s  components.  their  participation  will  be  prioritized  and  in 
addition to mobilisation strategy, the  project will apply affirmative actions (i.e. quotas) to ensure their 
equitable  participation  and  benefit  from  the  intervention.  Project  implementation  and  management 
arrangements  will  be  gender  sensitive.  Interventions  will  be  aligned  to  the  Strategy  for  Gender 
Inclusion  in Agriculture  (2016-2025)  developed  by  PROSUL  for  the  Ministry  of Agriculture  and  Food 
Security.  
135.  Youth  will  constitute  a  direct  target  group  because  they  are  more  likely  to  be  resource  poor, 
lack control over assets and have limited livelihood options, and their integration into rural economies 
has  long-term  positive  social  and  economic  consequences.  Selection  criteria  will  prioritize  their 
participation whenever possible and a number of activities have been identified that will address their 
needs  and  priorities.  Youth  will  be  mobilised  and  consultation  to  capture  their  view,  aspirations  and 
expectation will be conducted. Interventions will be guided by the Gender, Youth and Social inclusion 
manual.  In  this  regard,  the  project  will  consider  the  heterogeneity  of  the  youth  cohort  i.e.    Gender, 
level of education, interest & aspirations in determining investments. 
136.  Highly  vulnerable  and  marginalized  households  i.e.  HIV/AIDS  affected,  elderly:  This  
group comprise  child and/or female headed households and the elderly women who assume the role 
of  carer  for  orphans  and  the  sick. They  are  highly  vulnerable  due  to  the  impact  of  HIV/AIDS,  which 
retards  agricultural  production,  and  threatens  food  security,  due  to  the  lack  manpower  at  crucial 
moments of agricultural productivity. They may  also  be  impacted by traditional  land tenure systems, 
where  women  can  lose  access  to  land  All  factors  (HIV/AIDS,  Disabilities,  Elderly)  influence  the 
availability of other household members for productive activities, while they are tending to their needs. 
IFAD  will  consider  cross-cutting  initiatives  to  ensure  that  project  interventions  are  sensitive  to  their 
unique  circumstances,  in  particular  through  training  and  capacity  building  on  production,  business 
skills  to  facilitate  household  /group  enterprise  development,  diversification  of  production,  access  to 
markets.  This  will  also  include  the  inclusion  of  HIV/AIDS  Nutrition,  dietary  diversity  &  food 
management in extension modules.   
Table 2 in Annex 1 gives the categories and characteristics of smallholder households 
 REFP Targeting Strategy and Measures 
F. 
REFP will implement an inclusive targeting strategy to ensure that project benefits are distributed to a 
large  number  of  poor  rural  entrepreneurs  and  poorer  members  of  the  communities.  The  targeting 
measures will  include geographic targeting, direct targeting, and targeting quotas for  youths (20 per 
cent) and  women (50 per  cent) rural entrepreneurs. A total of  63,370 MSMEs  will be supported  and 
this will benefit 209,400 poor rural entrepreneurs. In addition, 78,300 beneficiaries will benefit directly 
from access to non-financial products to give the total beneficiary poor rural entrepreneurs of 287,700 
as shown in table 3 in Annex 1.  
a) 
Geographic targeting 
The project shall on the one hand seek to provide a consolidated response to the demand for financial 
services  within  existing  IFAD  projects  being  implemented  in  the  central,  northern  and  southern 
regions of the country98 and at the same time invest a greater proportion of its resources in the central 
98 Ongoing IFAD - funded programmes of PROSUL, PROPESCA, PROMER, PSP and PROAQUA. 
49 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
provinces  of  Sofala,  Manica  and  Tete.  The  central  region  has  the  highest  concentration  of  the  poor 
(49%),  is  under-served  by  rural  financial  services  and  yet  has  in  recent  years  been  demonstrating 
increased  agribusiness  increased  demand  for  rural  financial  services.  REFP  will  initially  start  in  the 
districts already covered by  IFAD projects and  programmes and  will be gradually rolled out to other 
new  areas99.  The  Project  will  target  micro  and  small  enterprises  in  agriculture  and  non-agricultural 
related sectors. Table 5, Annex 4 shows the targeted areas with ongoing IFAD-funded programmes. 
b)  Self-Targeting Measures  
The  approach  to  self-targeting  will  be  based  on  interventions  and  support  that  respond  to  the 
priorities,  financial  and  labour  capacities  and  pre-existing  livelihood  strategies  of  the  target  groups. 
Deliberate  efforts  will  be  made  to  ensure  that  the  selected  MSMEs  value  chains  will  be  suitable  for 
women,  youth,  poor  people  and  people  living  with  HIV/AIDS  considering  their  potential  for  food 
security,  local  sales,  small  volumes,  low  input,  low  risk,  low  risk  and  proximity  to  homestead, 
availability  of  local  processing  equipment  and  value-adding  opportunities.    There  will  also  be 
purposive selection of technologies that address women’s labour constraints, and are also suitable for 
use by the youth and vulnerable groups. The project will promote the use of self-help labour input, as 
a precondition for accessing certain types of project and individuals in contexts where the upper class 
consider manual labour as socially degrading. 
c)  Direct Targeting 
Overall,  an  inclusive  approach  will  be  pursued  to  enable  the  extremely  poor  and  food  insecure, 
vulnerable  (HIV/AIDS  affected  and  elderly)  to  participate  and  benefit  from  the  relevant  project 
interventions.  The  project  will  target  directly  the  poor  and  disadvantaged  smallholder  farming 
households,  guided  by  the  characteristics  of  smallholder  farmers  outlined  in  table  2,  Annex  1  and 
application of the eligibility criteria will be conducted in a participatory manner in conjunction with the 
communities involved. Approaches such as participatory wealth ranking could be used in order to rank 
the  communities  into  different  wealth  groups.  In  approving  application  forms  from  a  group,  the 
intermediary  institution  or  fund  manager  will  take  into  consideration  the  number  of  female-headed 
households to benefit. 
Due consideration will be given to i) participating households characteristics i.e. must be living below 
the  national  poverty  line,  ii)  farmer  groups  or  associations  must  be  at  least  70  percent  made  up  of 
small  farming  households;  iii)  priority  for  districts,  localities  and  communities  that  have  a  high 
incidence of poverty; iv) social affiliation, v) labour, income source, vi) specification of quotas for the 
participation  of  women  (50  per  cent)  and  young  women  and  men  (20  per  cent).  Projects  will  be 
expected  to  work  with  partners  to  ensure  that  the  disadvantaged  individuals  –  HIV/AIDs  affected 
elderly  –  have  access  to  the  full  range  of  assistance  self-targeted  to  the  poorest.  Participatory 
measures will also be employed to involve communities in the selection of beneficiaries.  
Women and Female headed households: are a highly vulnerable group engaged in agriculture and 
non-agriculture MSEs but lack control on productive assets, income and decision making. They are 
vulnerable because of deeply embedded socio-cultural attitudes and practices. These factors result in 
their impoverishment. 50% of the targeted beneficiaries will be women. 
Youth:  These  include  (i)  young  men  and  women  (age  15  to  35  years)100  who  are  engaged  in  rural 
MSEs at subsistence level working as wage labourer and /or as unpaid family workers with an interest 
to  engage  in  MSEs  as  business  and  increase  their  income  and  (ii)  unemployed  young  men  and 
women  who  are  not  directly  engaged  in  rural  activities  who  are  interested  to  explore  the  sector, 
identify  and  engage  in  better  employment  and  self-employment  opportunities  offered  by  the 
99 The criteria for the selection of the districts is based on the following considerations: a) they are under-served by rural finance services, 
yet with considerable demand for those financial products and services that have been piloted with successful results with a high potential 
for rural development; b) availability of an enabling business environment for investments in MSEs in the rural sector; c) absence of 
significant investments (both private and public), that address the need for value addition for smallholders; d) high poverty and food 
insecurity; e) high rural population density; and f) relatively developed infrastructure and road network linking the districts to market 
outlets; g) agricultural potential/ surplus, production, h) trade activity, i) complementarity /avoiding duplication with other projects and j) 
rural districts. 
100 Mozambique National Youth Policy (1996). 
50 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
agriculture,  fisheries    and  non-agriculture  MSEs.    At  least  20%  of  the  targeted  beneficiaries  will  be 
youth. 
Table 3, Annex 1, gives a Summary of REFP Beneficiaries Targeting Quota and the Distribution of 
beneficiary rural entrepreneurs per province is given in Table 4.  
d)  Empowerment and capacity building measures  
137.  The main focus will be to support the poor, women, youth and vulnerable individuals to have a 
stake in the decision making process at the household and community levels.101 The main entry point 
is through exposure, training and capacity building in both soft and hard skills. The soft skills relate to 
the sensitisation efforts that are focused on addressing cultural and traditional norms, gender and age 
stereotypes that inhibit equal participation and benefit. In line with the new IFAD focus on promoting 
transformation of gender relations, REFP will implement a range of capacity building interventions for 
rural entrepreneurs and MSMEs as well as support institutions working with rural entrepreneurs.  The 
Project  will  contribute  to  three  main  outcomes  for  Gender  Equality  and  Women’s  Empowerment 
(GE/WE): 
  Expand women’s economic empowerment through access to and control over productive and 
household assets.  Women heading households and women in male-headed households will 
be  empowered.    Their  financial,  business  and  entrepreneurial  skills  will  be  strengthened  to 
build small businesses and effectively engage in income generating activities (IGAs). Women 
will    be  assisted  in    accessing  key  technologies,  equipment,  financial  and  non-financial 
services to increase fish/ agricultural  production and productivity. 
  Strengthen  women’s  decision-making  role  in  the  household  and  community  and  their 
representation  in  membership  and  leadership  of  local  institutions.    The  use  of  capacity 
building, including household methodologies, will ensure that women are fully part of decision-
making  in  the  household  and  regarding  economic  related  activities.    Their  participation  in 
ASCAs  (where  women  account  over  50%  of  participants)  will  be  used  to  encourage  their 
membership  and  leadership  in  those  groups  and  organisations  and  key  committees  created 
by the project and existing ones that will be strengthen by the intervention. In particular, the 
project  will  focus  on  strengthening  women’s  leadership  skills  in  ASCAs  and  in  decision 
making positions, by providing training to women-led ASCAs.Achieve a reduced workload and 
an  equitable  workload  balance  between  women  and  men,  girls  and  boys.  Time  and  labour 
saving  technologies  as  well  as  other  type  of  technologies  will  be  promoted  by  the  project. 
Another  main  contributor  for  an  equitable  workload  balance  will  be  the  application  of  HHs 
methodology at household level. 
e)  Enabling Measures 
REFP will provide training to rural entrepreneurs and support to institutions working with rural 
entrepreneurs. REFP will also provide relevant capacity needs for financial services intermediaries. 
Various activities are proposed under sub-component 2.1  and 2.2 and these include among others  
(i) Institutional and technical capacity building of financial service intermediaries; (ii) bbuild a database 
of MFI performance and promote social performance management through Mozambican Association 
of MFIs, (iii) transformation of FARE to a sustainable and permanent rural and microfinance support 
organization; (iv) Establishing and strengthening the "Development Finance Coordination" secretariat 
under the Ministry of Economy and Finance; (v) Supporting the Bank of Mozambique to assist the 
transformation of MFIs and promote financial literacy and consumer protection. 
f)  Operational measures  
A Gender and Youth Expert will be recruited as part of the PMU (refer to TOR in Appendix 5). The 
expert will be responsible to supervise the implementation of the poverty, gender and targeting 
strategy, and to develop capacity building tools for the implementation of activities under the two 
101 Draft COSOP for Mozambique,  2017 
51 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
components and to provide leadership, supervision and support capacity building and mentoring 
activities for gender mainstreaming. 
G. 
 REFP Gender Strategy 
REFP  recognizes  that  financial  services  in  rural  areas  have  important  gender  dimensions  affecting 
women  and  men  differently,  and  different  categories  of  women.  Access  to  financial  services  and 
opportunities  are  frequently  unequal. Although  women  are  more  active  than  men  in  agricultural  and 
non-agricultural MSMEs, their prospects of generating larger productivity gains and income are limited 
by a range of factors - a lack of business skills, limited of labour,  lack of finances, limited access to 
markets,  and  time  constraints.  Women  also  have  weak  representation  in  decision-making  bodies 
dealing  with  productive  and  economic  issues  due  to  their  traditional  and  social  role.  Due  to  their 
domestic  and  reproductive  roles  and  gender  relations,  women  spend  more  than  14  hrs  doing 
agriculture  and  domestic  work.  Rural  women  face  difficulties  in  accessing  financial  services  -  loans 
and credit - due to the conditions imposed by lending institutions, the need for collateral as well as the 
need to obtain the permission from the husband.   
Despite these constraints, poor women and men are able to adapt and innovate and can benefit from 
the increased availability, access and use of appropriate and sustainable financial services in rural 
areas. The gender and social inclusion strategy will consider lessons from existing IFAD experiences 
in the country, and will support women farmers/fishers to take advantage of financial services and 
economic opportunities provided by REFP.  REFP will implement a number of pathways for 
empowering women and promoting gender equality. The Project gender strategy aims at equal 
involvement and benefits of women and men in the development of the intervention. Women and men 
of different ages and socioeconomic categories, including youth, will be given equal chances to 
participate in REFP activities and obtain equal returns.   
Increasing social capital among the poor is a guiding principle of the proposed Project, which 
emphasizes the importance of enhancing economic and social inclusion of vulnerable and 
marginalized groups in targeted rural communities.  This will comprise unemployed youth, elderly 
women and men, widows/orphans, the disabled and people living with HIV/AIDS. In addition, women 
will be supported in becoming active and vocal members of relevant organizations.  It will also support 
(i) women smallholders’ farmers access to services, inputs and assets; (ii) women and youth inclusion 
in capacity building; and (iii) nutrition education.  In consideration of women’s (i) low levels of literacy 
and numeracy, (ii) lack of business development and management skills and (iii) limited voice, 
leadership and decision making capacity in organizations and business management, the Gender 
strategy will include the following: 
  Gender  Analysis:  A  gender  analysis  study  will  be  conducted  in  order  to  understand  the 
different roles, interests and priorities of women and men in accessing financial services. 
  Development of a REFP Gender Strategy: The PMU Gender and Youth Expert shall develop 
and  implement  a  gender  strategy  for  the  Project  to  ensure  that  gender  concerns  are 
mainstreamed in all  Project activities throughout the implementation period,  in order to offer 
equal opportunities under the Project to men, women, women-headed households, youth and 
other  disadvantaged  groups.  The  strategy  will  take  into  account  the  difference  that  exists 
among  women  in  terms  of  age,  ethnicity  and  socio-economic  category  and  the  dynamic  in 
gender roles and relations. Technical  Assistance  will  be hired for 1 month to assist  with the 
development of the strategy 
  The development of REFP Gender Training Manual will be done jointly in the first year of the 
project by the PMU Gender and Youth Expert (see TOR in Appendix 5) in collaboration with 
gender  focal  persons  in  relevant  government  institutions  for  instance  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture and gender focal points from the current IFAD – funded projects as well as within 
the  financial  intermediary  institutions  and  service  providers.  Technical  assistance  will  be 
provided  by  a  Gender  Specialist  who  will  be  hired  to  assist  with  the  development  of  the 
training manual.  
  Development of a framework on collecting sex disaggregated and youth disaggregated data;  
The PMU gender and Youth Expert will be required to set up a framework on collecting sex 
disaggregated data that is relevant to the project components.  
52 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
  Gender  Sensitization  course  for  key  staff  of  intermediary  institutions:  Selected  staff  and 
gender  focal  points  persons  from  the  institutions  will  undergo  a  Training  of  Trainers  Course 
that  will  enable  them  to  conduct  a  gender  sensitisation  course  for  their  own  key  staff  of 
intermediary  organisations  (commercial  banks,  ASCAs,  MFIs,  Non-Banking  Financial 
Institutions102 (NBFIs)/Financial Non-Government Organisations (FNGOs), etc.). This Gender 
Sensitization  course  will  be  mainstreamed  in  the  overall  capacity  building  activities  of 
Component 2.  
  Women specific projects: REFP will provide specific financial products that are aligned to the 
needs  and  profile  of  women  in  different  levels  on  income.  For  instance  while  ASCAs  are 
suitable for low  income women, higher income women would require sophisticated products 
to  grow  their  businesses.  Women  will  benefit  from  business/  entrepreneurship  development 
skill training, alleviating constraints on start-up capital to establish MSMEs, and increasing the 
provision of business support coaching and mentorship for the MSMEs. 
  Strengthening women’s social capital: The project  will support service providers to provision 
of low cost savings that allow small deposits and withdrawals and that pay interest on balance 
as well as credit products taking into account the type of activities women engage in and that 
are adequate to women’s needs.  
  Training  of  Banks:  Under  component  2,  banks  risk  assessment  analysis  will  improve  their 
understanding  of  business  operations  and  will  help  them  to  change  their  perception  of  risk 
and reduce the risk level attributed to clients, thereby reduce the banks demands on collateral 
requirements. Bank staff will be trained on products and services they offer and on financial 
services to serve their clients.  
  Training  in  financial  literacy:  and  leadership  training  for  women:  REFP  will  deliver  financial 
literacy to raise the awareness of financial products and services to men and women, expand 
mobile banking, etc. The training  will  work on their capacity to engage  in business activities 
and  become  leaders.    This  activity  will  support  women  participation  in  groups,  cooperatives 
and  enterprises,  enabling  them  to  engage  in  profitable  income  generating  activities  and 
benefit  from  them.    Training  will  target  women  who  are  already  member  of  producers’ 
organizations, cooperatives or private enterprises or those who have the potential to be active 
members of one of those.  The intervention will pay particular attention to encourage women 
in key leadership position. 
  Training of REFP staff and staff of intermediary organisations and service providers in each 
district  on  social  analysis,  youth  and  gender  sensitive  programming.  The  Project  will  pay 
careful  attention  to  ensure  trainings  respond  to  women’s  needs.    To  ensure  their  inclusion 
(50% participants) the extension agents will consider appropriate time, location and childcare 
facilities will be provided. 
  Stakeholder  review  meetings  to  share  lessons  learnt  and  best  practices  in  relation  to 
mainstreaming  youth  and  gender  in  MSMEs.  REFP  will  apply  continuous  learning  and 
analysis  based  on  field  experiences  to  develop  more  effective  approaches  and  to  generate 
information for evidence based advocacy and policy dialogue.  
  Support the implementation of the Rural Finance Sector Gender Strategy in MSMEs 
Gender Mainstreaming in Project implementation 
REFP  will  ensure  gender  mainstreaming  through  targeting  and  participation  of  women  in  all  the 
activities.  The  strategy  for  gender  mainstreaming  will  be  described  in  detail  in  the  Gender  Strategy 
that  will  be  developed  for  REFP.  The  project  will    adopt  a  gender  sensitive  approach  ensuring  that 
women  equally  benefit  as  men.    The  project  will  create  an  enabling  environment  for  women 
entrepreneurs through the provision of business development services, access to credit to allow  the 
women  to  engage  in  viable  MSMEs.  In  addition,  gender  sensitisation  training  is  planned  for  all  the 
project  stakeholders.  The  project  will  encourage  active  involvement  of  women  and  men  in  planning 
and  sensitisation  activities  and  will  ensure  the  promotion  of  gender  equality  in  ASCAs  and  other 
activities. In particular, the project will focus on strengthening women’s leadership skills in ASCAs and 
in decision making positions, by providing training to women-led ASCAs. Rural women and men will 
be  informed  about  REFP  and  how  they  can  benefit  from  what  is  being  offered  by  the  project,  also 
102A non-bank financial institution (NBFI) is a financial institution that does not have a full banking license or is not supervised 
by a national or international banking regulatory agency. 
53 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
taking  into  account  their  specific  needs  and  constraints.  The  project  will  ensure  gender  parity  for  all 
the  capacity  building,  training,  and  meetings  as  well  as  in  the  recruitment  of  staff  for  the  PMU.  In 
addition,  the  lessons  learnt  will  be  shared  with  a  wider  audience  with  a  view  to  scale-up  best 
practices. 
The  project  will  also  address  issues  relevant  to  household  affected  by  HIV/AIDS,  through  reducing 
stigma  by  increasing  awareness  about  HIV/AIDs,  its  prevention  and  consequences. The  project  will 
also stimulate ASCAs initiatives aimed at mutual help for members who are faced with problems such 
as labour shortages, medical bills by promoting local savings schemes that can form safety nets for 
affected households and by specifically selection members of smallholders who will be trained as peer 
educators.  All the above will be mainstreamed in project activities through integration in the terms of 
reference of contracted services providers, the curriculum for capacity building and associations.  
Whereas cultural and social constraints may limit women’s participation, the  Project will put in place 
separate consultation modality for mobilization and creation of women’s groups and leadership.  
I.  
Youth Engagement and Strategy 
facilitate 
their  access 
to  entrepreneurship 
Youth  Engagement:  REFP  will  seek  to  address  the  problems  facing  the  youth  in  Mozambique  as 
highlighted in Section E. REFP will ensure that young people have access to relevant and affordable 
training,  mentoring, 
financial  services,  and  will 
apprenticeships,  and  other  relevant  nonfinancial  services 
incentives  and 
opportunities  for  young  men  and  women  to  engage  in  sustainable  rural  MSEs  in  order  to  increase 
employment and income. Such opportunities will include Youth Fund for scouting, training, mentoring 
and  networking  enterprising  young  men  and  women,  providing  them  with  all  rounded  business  and 
entrepreneurship  training  and  linking  them  to  service  providers.  By  supporting  the  creation  of 
incubators  (professional  training  centres)  and  the  development  of  innovative  activities  for  the 
curriculum, the National Youth Incubation in MSEs aims at providing not only theoretical and practical 
knowledge for young men and women, but also enhancing the opportunities to create direct linkages 
with  the  reality  of  business  and  its  key  actors.  The  training  will  cover  a  wide  range  of  agriculture, 
fishing and non-agricultural enterprises103.   
that  can  provide 
Youth Strategy: The interventions will create rural labour opportunities, in particular for rural youth, in 
the  formal  and  in-formal  MSMEs  sectors.  The  Project  will:  (i)  prioritise  young  people  for  vocational 
training related to capacity building activities in business skills and vocational skills development; (ii) 
provide seed capital as loans to the trained youth to engage in small enterprise development and (iii) 
support the creation and mentorship of youth led enterprises. Equality between young men and young 
women  will  be  respected  in  their  selection  and  participation  and  implementers  will  be  trained  in 
specific  approaches  for  reaching  out  and  involving  youth,  especially  young  women  who  may  face 
additional  constraints  compared  to  their  young  male  counterparts.  In  each  province,  the  project  will 
identify  and facilitate  low skilled rural  youth already  engaged or potentially  interested  in engaging  in 
agriculture  and  non-agricultural  MSMEs  in  the  various  areas  highlighted  above.  REFP’s  will 
implement  a  youth  incubation  programme  that  is  aimed  at  creating  jobs  for  youth  in  the  agricultural 
and allied sectors. The youth will receive vocational skills training and on graduation the youth will be 
provided with an equipment kit or access small loans to start their business.  In addition, there will be 
opportunities to target and involve the young men and women to become aggregators, agro-dealers, 
traders  or  agents  between  market-oriented  producers  and  off  takers  or  large  agro-industries  and/or 
wholesalers. Through  the  provision of Technical  Assistance, the  youth  will be identified, trained and 
supported to lead profitable enterprises and develop youth-led MSEs in various sectors.  
J. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Monitoring  of  components  during  implementation,  especially  with  respect  to  adoption  rates,  outputs 
and outcomes will be disaggregated by gender and age. Where relevant, project management will be 
encouraged  to  respond  positively  to  any  clear  learning  opportunities  or  any  issues  that  need  to  be 
addressed.  
103  Including  fishing, soap making,  grain  milling,  furniture making,  baking,  agribusiness,  building,  tailoring,  tinsmith,  extractive 
sectors, retail and agriculture (crop and livestock enterprises and other enterprises along the value chain)  
54 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Gender  and  age  disaggregated  data  (youth  versus  non-youth)  will  be  collected  at  all  stages  of  the 
project  and  used  to  fine  tune  operational  strategies.  In  addition  to  the  progress  and  impact 
measurement  of  all  project  activities,  REFP  will  monitor  targeting  effectiveness  and  progress  in  the 
advancement of gender equality and engagement of youth in target communities through participatory 
processes at community level.  
As  part  of  the  training  to  be  provided  to  REFP  staff,  it  is  expected  that  field  staff  in  particular,  are 
attentive  to  critical  monitoring  of  intended  beneficiaries  to  ensure  they  are  effectively  reached  and 
understand the effects of interventions within each target group. Field staff will also monitor, through 
participatory  processes,  the  occurrence  of  any  unintended  effects  of  project  on  men,  women  and 
youth,  together  with  gender  relations  in  target  communities.  The  project´s  mid-term  review  will  also 
assess  targeting  effectiveness,  and  the  quality  of  participatory  processes  used  by  the  project, 
including processes used to monitor targeting performance.  
It is expected that through the implementation of the Gender Strategy, the following positive changes 
will  be  observed  in  beneficiary  households  (depending  on  their  level):  (i)  increase  in  women  owned 
MSMEs    and  greater  participation  in  community  spaces  and  decision-making;  (ii)    increased  /  more 
equal access and control of  productive assets by women; (iii) improved decision-making of women at 
household  and  community  level;  (iv)  more  equitable  workloads  between  men  and  women  at 
household level.  
K. 
Capacity building and household methodology 
Household  methodologies  will  be  used  in  capacity  building  activities  related  to  nutrition  as  well  as 
production outcomes. Inequalities in gender relations at the household level have a direct impact on 
agricultural  production  and  productivity,  and  on  other  desirable  development  outcomes,  such  as 
education,  food  security  and  nutrition.  Household  methodologies  involve  working  with  all  household 
members  towards  achieving  a  common  household  vision.  Household  methodologies  have  been 
successfully  used  in  IFAD  supported  projects  in  Uganda,  Chad,  Malawi,  and  Zambia  and  are 
appropriate  for  livelihoods  approaches  as  well  as  value  chain  development.  In  REFP,  the 
methodology  will  be 
the 
methodologies will be used to ensure that organizational goals are inclusive, address issues of power 
and gender, and strengthen mechanisms for dialogue. 
In  entrepreneur  empowerment, 
implemented  at 
the  group 
level. 
Households’  methodology  has  been  adopted  in  Mozambique  as  part  of  the  following  projects  and 
programmes:  PROSUL,  PROPESCA,  PSP,  PROAQUA,  PROMER  and  therefore  lessons  will  be 
drawn from existing experiences in country.  
55 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Annex 1: Targeting checklist  
Targeting checklist 
Design 
the  main 
characteristics, 
target  group  – 
target  group  as  defined  by 
those 
1.  Does 
expected  to  benefit  most  –  correspond  to 
IFAD’s 
the 
Targeting Policy (poorer households and food-
insecure)? 
2.  Have  target  sub-groups  been  identified  and 
described  according  to  their  different  socio-
economic 
and 
livelihoods – with attention to gender and youth 
differences 
group 
on 
characteristics completed)? 
3. Is evidence provided of interest in and likely 
the 
uptake  of 
target  sub-groups?  What 
identified 
the 
evidence 
(matrix  on  analysis  of  project 
components  and  activities  by  principal 
beneficiary groups completed)? 
the  proposed  activities  by 
is 
(matrix 
assets 
target 
4.  Does  the  design  document  describe  a 
feasible  and  operational  targeting  strategy  in 
line  with  the  Targeting  Policy,  involving  some 
or all of the following measures and methods: 
4.1  Geographic  targeting  –  based  on 
poverty  data  or  proxy  indicators  to  identify, 
for  area-based  projects  or  projects, 
geographic  areas 
these, 
communities)  with  high  concentration  of 
poor people; 
(and  within 
4.2  Direct  targeting  –  when  services  or 
resources  are  to  be  channelled  to  specific 
individuals or households; 
4.3  Self-targeting  –  when  good  and 
services  respond  to  the  priority  needs, 
resource  endowments  and 
livelihood 
strategies of target groups; 
4.4  Empowering  measures  –  including 
information  and  communication,  focused 
capacity- 
confidence-building 
measures,  organizational  support,  in  order 
to empower and encourage the more active 
and 
104 https://www.usaid.gov/mozambique/food-assistance 
Yes,  REFP  will  target  the  rural  poor  in  the  rural  areas 
where over 70 per cent of people live below the poverty 
line.  It  is  estimated  that  2  million104  people  face  hunger 
in  2017  (due  to  poor  harvest,  HIV  infection  and  El  nino 
induced drought). 
Yes, target group has been identified based on review of 
rural 
literature 
interviews  with 
entrepreneurs  and  key 
in 
Mozambique,  and  include  women  and  the  youth,  and 
vulnerable households excluded from financial services.  
implementing  agencies 
farmers, 
and 
for 
Yes,  with  60%  of  the  population  who  are  financially 
the 
excluded,  REFP  presence  an  opportunity 
improvement  of  rural  livelihoods  and  a  strategic  priority 
for  both  the  Government  and  rural  entrepreneurs.  Field 
visits  and  consultations  during  the  mission  confirmed 
high  interest  from  men  and  women  and  communities 
visited.  
Yes, the design describes a multi-pronged and inclusive 
targeting strategy.  
and 
another 
households 
Yes,  REFP  targets  10  rural  provinces  of  Mozambique 
where  there  is  a  high  concentration  of  the  rural  poor, 
and  where  rural  households  are  financially  excluded  in 
particular women and youths. The project will start in the 
districts where there is already IFAD-funded project with 
a financial services component and gradually expand to 
other districts.  
At  least  5  per  cent  of  total  beneficiaries  should  be 
female-headed 
20% 
unemployed  underemployed  youth  (50  %  young  men 
and  50%  young  women).  Poor  and  food  insecure  rural 
households  will  be 
transparent 
through 
identified 
participatory process with the communities.  
REFP  gives  opportunity  for  the  participation  of  poor 
farmers,  in  particular  women,  youths  and  HIV/AIDS 
affected  households 
the 
Graduation  Promotion  and  Outreach  Project.  The  poor 
households  are  given  loans  and  technical  support  to 
implement  micro  enterprises  that  will  pull  them  out  of 
poverty.    The  benefits  arising  from  the  intervention  will 
be enjoyed by a wider populace. 
A  number  of  empowering  measures  are  proposed  for 
building  rural  entrepreneurs  and  local  communities’ 
capacity  to  self-organize,  plan,  make  decisions  and  to 
improve  their  livelihoods  through  increased  availability, 
financial  services  
access  and  use  of  sustainable 
through  support 
from 
56 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
participation  and  inclusion  in  planning  and 
decision-making  of  people  who  traditionally 
have less voice and power; 
4.5  Enabling  measures  –  to  strengthen 
stakeholders’  and  partners’  attitude  and 
commitment  to  poverty  targeting,  gender 
equality  and  women’s  empowerment, 
including policy dialogue, awareness-raising 
and capacity-building; 
4.6  Attention  to  procedural  measures  – 
that  could  militate  against  participation  by 
the intended target groups; 
4.7  Operational  measures  –  appropriate 
project/project  management  arrangements, 
staffing, 
implementation 
selection 
partners and service providers. 
of 
that 
be  monitored 
5.  Monitoring  targeting  performance.  Does  the 
targeting 
design  document  specify 
performance  will 
using 
participatory  M&E,  and  also  be  assessed  at 
mid-term  review?  Does  the  M&E  framework 
the  collection/analysis  of  sex-
allow 
disaggregated  data  and  are  there  gender-
sensitive  indicators  against  which  to  monitor/ 
evaluate outputs, outcomes and impacts? 
for 
(Component 2)  
Component  2  comprises  of  capacity  building  and 
support  for  local  institutions  and  rural  entrepreneurs. 
E.g.  (i)  Institutional  and  technical  capacity  building  of 
financial  service  intermediaries;  (ii)  build  a  database  of 
MFI  performance  and  promote  social  performance 
management through Mozambican Association of MFIs, 
(iii)  transformation  of  FARE  to  a  sustainable  and 
permanent rural and microfinance support organization; 
(iv)  Establishing  and  strengthening  the  "Development 
Finance  Coordination"  secretariat  under  the  Ministry  of 
Economy  and  Finance;  (v)  Supporting  the  Bank  of 
Mozambique  to  assist  the  transformation  of  MFIs  and 
promote financial literacy and consumer protection. 
gender 
equality 
budgets 
involving 
REFP  includes  participatory  approaches  for  inclusive 
governance 
and 
institutions, 
empowerment of women.  
The design includes recruitment of a Gender and Youth 
Expert  as  PMU  staff.  Technical  Assistance  to  design  a 
training  manual  and 
gender  strategy  and  gender 
appropriate 
intermediary 
for 
organizations  and  service  providers  with  expertise  on 
community  development,  for  the  implementation  of  the 
targeting strategy   
Yes,  the  design  document  specifies  that  targeting 
performance  will  be  monitored  using  participatory  M&E 
and will be assessed at mid-term review.  Baseline data 
and M&E systems will be disaggregated by gender and 
target  groups.  Participatory  monitoring  and  evaluation 
systems  will  be  established  and  gender  sensitive 
monitoring indicators would be used to evaluate outputs, 
outcomes and impacts.  
57 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Annex 2: Gender checklist  
Gender checklist 
1.  The  project  design  report  contains  –  and  project 
implementation  is  based  on  –  gender-disaggregated 
poverty  data  and  an  analysis  of  gender  differences  in 
the  activities  or  sectors  concerned,  as  well  as  an 
the  gender 
analysis  of  each  project  activity 
perspective  to  address  any  unintentional  barriers  to 
women’s participation. 
2.  The  project  design  articulates  –  or  the  project 
implements – actions with aim to: 
  Expand  women’s  economic  empowerment  through 
to  and  control  over  productive  and 
from 
access 
household assets; 
Design 
Yes,  the  gender  strategy  outlines  the  strategic 
gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment 
activities  as  well  as  pragmatic  interventions  to 
mainstream gender in all project components.  
in 
result 
Yes,  activities  in  component  1  are  designed  to 
provide livelihood diversification opportunities to 
women.  Women  will  benefit  equally  from  the 
Funds  and  capacity  building  initiatives  that 
would 
improved  and  sustainable 
MSMEs.  In  addition  to  their  access  and  control 
of  assets,  access  to  technologies,  improved 
business  acumen,  and  income  from  market 
access,  women  will  gain  more  self-  confidence 
to  participate  in  financial  services,  business 
plans 
implementation,  
negotiate confidently in market transactions and 
with  service  providers,  and  have  greater  voice 
and influence in management committees.  
development 
and 
  Strengthen  women’s  decision-making  role  in  the 
household  and  community  and  their  representation 
in membership and leadership of local institutions; 
  Achieve  a  reduced  workload  and  an  equitable 
workload balance between women and men. 
3.  The  project  design  report  includes  one  paragraph  in 
the  targeting  section  that  explains  what  the  project  will 
deliver from a gender perspective. 
4. The project design report describes the key elements 
for operationalizing  the  gender strategy,  with respect to 
the relevant project components. 
5. The design document – and the project implements – 
to  ensure  gender-equitable 
operational  measures 
participation  in,  and  benefit  from,  project  activities. 
These will generally include:  
5.1  Allocating  adequate  human  and 
resources to implement the gender strategy. 
financial 
58 
Yes,  activities  in  component  2  are  designed  to 
build  women’s  social  capital  and  strengthen 
in  community 
their  participation  and  voice 
institutions,  particularly  the  ASCAs  and  .other 
associations. 
The MSMEs are likely to increase the burden to 
women  and  increase  their  workload.  There  will 
be  need  to  expose  women  and  raise  their 
awareness  to  identify  efficient  labour  saving 
technologies 
to  reduce  women’s  workload. 
Knowledge  about  the  benefits  at  the  different 
types  of  technologies  could  be  disseminated 
during  association  meetings  or  by 
the 
intermediary institutions.  
Yes,  an  explicit  gender  targeting  strategy  is 
described. 
Yes,  the  gender  strategy  outlines  strategic 
for  gender  equality  and  women’s 
activities 
empowerment, and more pragmatic activities for 
integrating gender in all project components.  
The PMU will include a staff member on Gender 
and  Youth  who  will  be  responsible  for  gender 
mainstreaming in all project components as well 
as monitoring the implementation of the gender 
receive  direct 
specific empowerment activities.  
At  least 50% of the  project beneficiaries  will be 
women  and  will 
targeted 
interventions.  Women  would  be  represented 
equally  in  management  committees  in  ASCAs. 
The various components will focus on promoting 
gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment. 
Gender-sensitive  activities  are  proposed  for  all 
the components. 
The PMU will have technical assistance and will 
recruit a gender and youth expert as part of the 
PMU  staff.  TA  will  be  hired  to  design  gender 
strategy  and  action  plan.  REFP  will  ensure 
gender balance in recruitment of overall  project 
management and staff.  
Women  will  be  active  participants  in  all  local 
institutions,  ASCAs,  MFI  etc.  Training  will  take 
place using field extension staff and community 
facilitators  at  local  level.  Women  and  men  will 
participate  in  various  training  such  as  financial 
literacy,  enterprise  skills  training,  BDS  and 
entrepreneurship training.  
See  5.3  above.  In  addition,  REFP  will  support 
the implementation of the Rural Finance Sector 
Gender Strategy in micro and small enterprises. 
The national gender focal point on gender in the 
Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  Gender  and 
Community  Development  would  be  involved 
project management committees.  Gender Focal 
Points  and  Gender  Units 
intermediary 
institutions  and  gender  based  NGOs  would  be 
involved as Service providers  and organisation 
building for women led ASCAs , MFIs etc 
Monitoring  and  evaluation  of  poverty  targeting, 
gender  and  youth  focus  will  be  part  of  the 
projects’ supervision schedule. This will include; 
One  supervision  mission  and  one  follow-up 
mission  annually;  and  a  Mid-term  review. 
Progress on these issues will be reported in the 
project’s bi-annual progress reports. All people-
centred  indicators  will  be  disaggregated  by 
gender  and  age,  and  enriched  by  qualitative 
information  and  analysis.  Reporting  on  poverty 
targeting, gender and youth focus will be part of 
the reporting requirements. 
in 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
5.2  Ensuring  and  supporting  women’s  active 
participation  in  project-related  activities,  decision-
making  bodies  and  committees,  including  setting 
specific targets for participation. 
that  project/project  management 
5.3  Ensuring 
arrangements 
project 
of 
(composition 
management  unit),  project  terms  of  reference  for 
staff and implementing partners, etc. reflect attention 
to  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment 
concerns. 
the 
5.4  Ensuring  direct  project/programme  outreach  to 
women  (for  example  through  appropriate  numbers 
and  qualification  of  field  staff),  especially  where 
women’s mobility is limited. 
5.5  Identifying  opportunities  to  support  strategic 
opportunities 
other 
development organizations for networking and policy 
dialogue. 
government 
with 
and 
6.  The  project’s  logical  framework,  M&E,  MIS,  and 
learning  systems  specify  in  design  –  and  project  M&E 
unit  collects,  analyses  and  interprets  sex-  and  age-
disaggregated  performance  and  impact  data,  including 
specific  indicators  on  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment. 
59 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Annex 3 
Table 1: Key Data on REFP Provinces 
Province 
Area 
Km2 
Total 
populatio
n 
2008105  
000’ 
HIV 
prevalenc
e rate % 
2009106 
Financial 
exclusion 
% 2014107 
Chronic 
malnutritio
n108 
% 2008 
Poverty 
rate %109 
2008-9 
Niassa 
Cabo Delgado 
Nampula 
Zambezia 
Tete 
Manica 
Sofala 
Inhambane 
Gaza 
Maputo 
Province 
122,827 
78,778 
79,010 
103,478 
98,417 
62,292 
67,755 
68,775 
75,334 
1,415 
1,764 
4,529 
4,327 
2,137 
1,672 
1,852 
1,402 
1,320 
22,693 
1,444 
Source: several, compiled by the mission  
3.7 
9.4 
4.6 
12.6 
7.0 
15.3 
15.5 
8.6 
25.1 
19.8 
74 
54 
65 
61 
75 
74 
78 
38 
56 
41 
45 
56 
51 
46 
48 
48 
41 
35 
34 
25 
31.9 
37.4 
54.7 
70.5 
42.0 
55.1 
58.0 
57.9 
62.5 
67.5 
Table 2: Detailed Smallholder household characteristics in Mozambique (CGAP)110  
Criteria for defining 
smallholder 
households 
34111%  Smallholder 
subsistence & semi-
subsistence 
producers: 
37% Rural 
household (self-
employed) 
entrepreneurs 
Landholding 
Size112 
Market Orientation  Subsistence 
Less than 1 ha 
Between 1 and 2 
ha 
Subsistence/Hybri
d 
Family 
(between 
employees) 
labour 
3-10 
Monthly  expenses 
exceed income 
vs. 
market-oriented  vs. 
hybrid 
family 
(between 
employees) 
labour 
1-2 
Monthly  expenses 
exceed 
income. 
Shared income from 
multiple 
farming, 
sources (agricultural 
and non-agricultural  
Labour input 
Income  
25 % Emergent 
Farmers(market 
oriented 
producers) 
Between 2 and 5 
ha 
Market oriented 
3  %  Small  and 
Medium 
Entrepreneurs 
(transit 
stable) 
Above 5ha 
and 
Market oriented 
Family labour plus 
labour 
hired 
(between 
11-50 
employees) 
Monthly  expenses 
exceed 
income 
for  4  months  of 
the year 
Mostly 
hired 
labour    Over  50 
employees 
Monthly  expenses 
mostly  covered  & 
surplus 
income 
for saving 
Farming system 
Rainfed 
Rainfed 
Rainfed/irrigated 
Rainfed/irrigated 
105 INE (2010) in  UNDP (2010) Report on Millennium Development goal (2010) 
106 Government of Mozambique (2010) Report on Millennium Development goal 
107 Fin Scope Consumer Survey Mozambique 2014 
108 UNDP (2010) Report on the Millennium Development Goals;  2008 Chronic malnutrition levels 
109 Republic of Mozambique: (2011)  Poverty Reduction Action Plan  (PARP)  2011-14 
110 Extracted from CGAP (2016); draft COSOP for Mozambique 2017 
111 The classification based on plot size. 
112 
60 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Farm Management 
responsibility 
Owner, 
over how to farm 
influence 
Owner, 
over how to farm 
influence 
Owner, 
over how to farm 
influence 
Capacity 
Legal aspects 
Level of 
organization 
Storage, 
management, 
administration 
limited 
Informal 
  Member 
group—producer, 
supply 
service provider 
chain, 
Storage, 
management, 
administration 
limited 
Storage, 
management, 
administration 
limited 
informal 
Savings group 
of 
Informal/formal 
Belong 
a 
savings  group  –
ASCAs 
to 
Financial inclusion 
3  % 
included 
financially 
9% 
included 
financially 
26% 
included 
financially 
Proper 
farm 
manger  influence 
over how to farm 
Storage, 
management, 
administration 
almost adequately 
covered 
formal 
Belong to ASCAs, 
producer 
organization/ 
service  provider 
and supply chain 
68  % 
included 
financially 
Table 3:  Calculation of beneficiary groups 
In the context of Mozambique, micro enterprises are classified as those with between 1 and 2 
employees; small enterprises are classified as those with between 3 and 10 employees and medium 
enterprise with employees between 11 and 50. Large enterprises operate with more than 50- 
employees. 98.6 per cent of Mozambican firms are composed of micro and small enterprises. For the 
REFP’s calculation of the target beneficiaries, the average number of people benefiting from the 
MSMEs will be used. Therefore the average number beneficiaries for the micro, small and medium 
enterprises, will be 1, 6 and 20 respectively. The people benefiting from the micro and small 
enterprises are mostly family members and with medium enterprises, employees will consist of a 
mixture of family and hired employees. In terms of investment, the micro enterprises range between 
USD 100 to USD 500, small enterprise investment are between USD 500 to USD 3,000 and the 
medium enterprises investments are between USD 3,000 to USD 10,000.  The average investment 
will be used for calculation purposes and this will be USD 300, USD 750 and USD 5,000 for the micro, 
small and medium enterprises respectively. 
Calculation of target beneficiaries under the Crowding in Fund 
With an average investment of USD 5,000 per enterprise, the CIF will benefit a total of 1,000 rural 
MSMEs targeting poor smallholder producers associations, cooperatives and other rural non-
agricultural MSMES. The CIF will be provide a tripartite matching grant, for which the beneficiary will 
contribute 20 per cent of the cost, the participating institution and REFP will contribute 40 per cent 
each. The total number of beneficiaries under the CIF is broken down as follows: 
Type of Enterprise 
Number of Enterprises  Beneficiaries 
per 
enterprise 
Total 
beneficiaries 
number 
of 
Medium 
1,000 
20 
20,000 
Calculation of target beneficiaries under the Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme 
The total number of beneficiaries under the Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme 20,000 
beneficiaries, consisting of poor smallholder subsistence farmers, fisher folks and other poor rural 
people  who will be assisted to develop small business skills and entrepreneurship to become 
creditworthy and bankable to access mainstream rural financial institutions (under LOC) at the end of 
the graduation cycle.  
Calculation of target beneficiaries under the Line of Credit  
The Line of Credit will benefit a total of 62,370 agricultural and non-agricultural MSMEs for individuals, 
groups, associations and other collective in rural Mozambique. The size of loan ranges from USD 150 
to USD 5,000. The number of beneficiaries for the LOC is broken down as follows: 
61 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Type of Enterprise 
Number of Enterprises  Beneficiaries 
per 
Micro 
Small 
Medium 
Total 
enterprise 
47,404 
12,666 
2,300 
62,370 
1 
6 
20 
Total 
beneficiaries 
number 
of 
47,404 
75,996 
46,000 
169,400 
Component 2: The total number of supported  enterprises is 63,370 (1, 000 under CIF and 62,370 
under LOC). In addition, all the beneficiaries under component 2, with the exception of 78,300 ASCA 
members who are accessing facilitated non-financial services such as training in financial literacy, 
nutrition, and  training on how to manage natural resources and climate-related risks, will be excluded 
from the total number of REFP beneficiaries to avoid double counting.  
The total number of REFP direct beneficiaries will be 287,700 calculated as: 
Crowding in Fund 
Graduation Promotion and Outreach 
Programme113 
Line of Credit 
Component 2 non financial products beneficiaries 
with no access to Financial products 
Direct Beneficiaries 
20,000 
20,000  
169,400  
.78,300 
287,700 
In addition, under sub-component 2.1, RELP will strengthen 40 financial institutions. 
Core Target Group of REFP 
Total number of individual rural entrepreneurs receiving direct support from REFP is 287,700 and this 
figure includes 209,400 rural entrepreneurs who will be provided with loans for their rural enterprises 
as well as 78,300 beneficiaries that will be accessing facilitated non-financial services such as training 
in financial literacy, nutrition, and training on managing natural resources and climate-related risks.   
Women (heads of households, wives and young women) will account for at least 50% of the target. 
The youth will also account for at least 20% of the target. A summary of the REFP beneficiaries 
targeting quotas is given in the table below: 
Summary of REFP Beneficiaries Targeting Quota 
Sub-component 
Target  no 
for 
rural  
entreprene
urs 
Target  no  of 
rural  men  and 
women 
entrepreneurs 
Target no. for 
women 
50% 
Target no for youth 
20% total 
beneficiaries; 50% 
girls 
in 
Component  1 
1.1.1  Crowding  – 
Fund 
1.1.2 Graduation 
Promotion and Outreach 
Programme (GPO) - 
income generating 
activities  
1.1.3 Line of Credit  
Component 2114  
20,000 
20,000 
16,000 
16,000 
8,000 
8,000 
4,000 are youth (2,000 
male  and 2,000 female)) 
4,000 youth (2,000 male 
and 2,000 women),   
169,400 
135,520 
67,760 
33,880 are youth (16,940 
male and 16,940 female),  
113 The assumption is that, those Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme beneficiaries, who access Line of 
Credit, will be excluded from this financing window and will be accounted for under the Line of Credit. This is necessary 
in order to avoid double counting. 
114   All the beneficiaries under component 2  with the exception of 78,300 ASCA members, will be excluded  in the total 
target beneficiary of287,700, in order to avoid double counting.    The 78,300 ASCA members, are part of the 100,000 
62 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Rural entrepreneurs 
trained115 but not 
accessing financial 
products 
Total 
beneficiaries 
number 
40,640 
20,320 
15,660 (7,830 girls 
and 7,830 boys) 
78,300 
ASCA 
members 
not 
accessing 
LOC 
of 
287,700 
230,160 
115,080 
. 57,540 (28,770 
boys and 28,770 
girls 
Table 4: REFP Beneficiaries by Province 
Province 
Niassa 
Cabo Delgado 
Nampula 
Zambezia 
Tete 
Manica 
Sofala 
Inhambane 
Gaza 
Maputo Province 
Total beneficiaries 
Number of beneficiaries 
28,738 
23,017 
23,017 
23,017 
46,060 
46,060 
28,738 
23,017 
23,017 
23,017 
287,700 
Annex 4 
Table 5: Districts with on-going programmes 
Province 
Programme  Districts with ongoing programmes 
Niassa 
PROMER 
PSP 
Cuamba,  Mandimba,  Marrupa,  Maua, 
Mecanhelas, Metarica 
Cuamba,  Mandimba,  Marrupa,  Maua, 
Mecanhelas, Metarica 
Cabo 
Delgado 
PROMER 
Ancuabe,  Balama,  Chiure,  Montepuez, 
Namuno 
PROPESCA  Pemba,  Quissanga,  Macomia,  Mocimboa 
Districts  not  covered  by 
any programmes 
Lago ,Lichinga, Majume, 
Maragoago, 
Mecanhelas,  Mecula, 
Muembe, 
Ngauma, 
Nipepe, Sanga 
Ibo,  Mecúfi,  Meluco, 
Mueda, 
Muidumbe, 
Nangade  
PSP 
da Praia, Palma 
Ancuabe,  Balama,  Chiure,  Montepuez, 
Namuno 
Malema, Ribáuè 
PROMER 
PROPESCA  Moma  (Sede),  Moma  (Larde),  Angoche, 
Nacala, 
de 
Mocambique 
Ilha 
Memba,Mgincual, Nacala Porto 
Malema,  Ribáuè,  Nampula,  Meconta, 
Monapo, Monapo, Mossuril, Nacala Porto 
Alto Molocue, Gurue 
PROMER 
PROPESCA  Chinde,  Quelimane,  Nicoadala  (Zalala), 
PSP 
Nampula 
Zambezia 
Eráti,  Lalaua,  Mecubúri, 
Mogovolas,  Muecate, 
Murrupula, Nacarôa,  
 Gilé, Ile, Inhassunge, 
Maganja da Costa, 
ASCA members who will participate in one or more training on financial literacy, nutrition and  manage natural 
resources and climate-related risks. but only 21,700 ASCA  members will access loans and are included under the 
LOC.  
115 In financial literacy, business planning and entrepreneurship, manage natural resources and climate-related risks, 
support to improve their nutrition 
63 
Mocuba, Mopeia, 
Morrumbala, Namarroi 
Di,  
Cahora-Bassa, 
Changara, Chifunde, 
Chiuta, Macanga, 
Magoé, Marávia, 
Mutarara, Zumbo. 
Guro, Machaze, 
Macossa, ,Sofala, 
Tambara 
Chemba, 
Caia, 
Cheringoma, Chibabava, 
Marromeu, Maringué,   
,   
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
PSP 
PSP 
Tete 
Pebane 
Namacurra,  Milange,  Lugela,  Gurue,  Alto 
Molocue 
Angónia, Tsangano, Moatize, 
Manica 
PROAQUA  Gondola, Sussundenga, Mossurize 
PSP 
Báruè, Manica, Sussundenga, Gondola, 
Sofala 
PROPESCA  Beira (Ndjalane/Casa Partida) 
(Sede),  Buzi 
(Chiloane)’ 
(Nova  Sofala), 
Mwanza 
Beira 
Machanga 
(Sambazo) 
PROAQUA  Gorongosa, 
PSP 
Inhambane  PROPESCA  Maxixi, Vilanculos , Inhassoro  
Gorongosa, Nhamatanda, Buzi, Dondo 
PROSUL 
Govuro  (Nova Mambone) 
Jangamo, 
Inharrime, 
  Massinga, 
  Funhalouro,  Homoine,  
Morrumbene, 
Mabote, Panda, Zavala 
Inharrime, Zavala, Morrumbene 
PSP 
PROPESCA  Xai-Xai 
PROSUL 
PSP 
PROPESCA  Matola 
PROSUL 
PSP 
Chicualacuala,  Mapai,  Chibuto,    Chokwe, 
Guijá,    Mabalane,    Manjakaze,  Massingir,  
Xai Xai, Bilene Macia,  Massangena 
Chokwe, Chibuto, Guijá, 
Boane,  Manhiça,  Magude,  Marracuene,  
Moamba,  Namaacha, Matutuíne 
Moamba, 
Manhiça 
  Namaacha,  Marracuene, 
Gaza 
Maputo 
province 
Source: IFAD Operations in Mozambique 
64 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3: 
Country performance and lessons learned 
A. 
Overview 
IFAD  began  operations  in  Mozambique  in  1983  and  has  provided  more  than  USD200  million  in 
financing  for  12  programmes  and  projects  in  the  country.  A  Country  Strategic  Opportunities 
Programme (COSOP) approved in 2011 sets out a framework for the partnership between IFAD and 
the  Government  of  Mozambique  from  2011  through  2015116.  The  COSOP  builds  on  IFAD's 
experience and lessons learned from past operations in the country, including notable successes in: 
  Creating market linkages between small-scale producers and buyers 
  Facilitating the introduction of new technologies and services for fishing communities 
  Setting up savings and credit groups 
  Rehabilitating rural roads for better access to markets and services 
 
Introducing  important  policy  and  legislative  changes,  such  as  the  protection  of  artisanal 
fishing     
The country programme continues its strategic focus on supporting smallholder farmers and artisanal 
fishers.  Its  main  target  group  comprises  poor  producers  who  have  the  potential  to  expand  and 
commercialize their activities, with a special emphasis on disadvantaged groups such as women and 
young people. 
IFAD's main goal in Mozambique is to help integrate these small-scale producers into profitable and 
accessible markets. To achieve this goal, it pursues three strategic objectives: 
 
 
 
Improving smallholder farmers' and artisanal fishers' access to technologies and services that 
increase  productivity  –  by  ensuring  that  farmers  and  fishers  have  secure  rights  to  use  key 
natural  resources,  supporting  a  strong  natural  resource  management  system  and  mitigating 
climate risks where possible 
Increasing access to and participation in markets for an equitable share of profits – by helping 
to  develop  economic  infrastructure  for  the  conservation,  processing  and  marketing  of 
produce,  and  building  solid  and  equitable  partnerships  between  small-scale  producers  and 
agribusinesses 
Increasing access to sustainable financial services in rural areas – by promoting an enhanced 
institutional  and  policy  environment  for  rural  finance,  and  supporting  community-based 
services offering financial products specifically targeted to the needs of rural communities. 
Moreover,  IFAD  engages  in  policy  dialogue  where  relevant  issues  emerge  from  project  operations, 
and it helps build the capacity of local stakeholders to participate in policy processes. 
IFAD's  country  strategy  is  fully  aligned  with  all  the  major  strategies  defining  the  framework  for 
collaboration  between  the  government  and  its  development  partners  –  including  the  Poverty 
Reduction  Action  Plan,  United  Nations  Development  Assistance  Framework,  and  Strategic  Plan  for 
Agricultural Development and Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme. 
B. 
IFAD Operations in the Country 
Beyond its regular programme of work in Mozambique that has been outlined in the main report, IFAD 
also funds projects with small grants, including the following: 
  Securing Artisanal Fishers' Resource Rights Project (PRODIRPA), which aims to improve the 
livelihoods  of  artisanal  fishing  communities  by  strengthening  their  security  over  and 
management  of  natural  resources  (Implementation:  Institute  for  Development  of Small-scale 
Fisheries, 2013-2016) 
116 A new COSOP is currently being prepared and will be released in the fourth quarter of 2017. 
65 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
  Coastal  HIV/Aids  Prevention  and  Nutrition  Improvement  Project  (CHAPANI),  designed  to 
improve  food  security  and  livelihoods  of  artisanal  fisher  households  (Implementation: 
Associação Moçambicana Ajuda de Povo para Povo, 2012-2015) 
  Community Investor Partnership Project (ProParcerias), which promotes the establishment of 
in  rural  areas  (Implementation:  National 
sustainable  community-investor  partnerships 
Directorate for the Promotion of Rural Development, 2011-2013) 
  Project  for  Promotion  of  Small  Scale  Aquaculture  (PROAQUA),  financed  by  the  European 
Union through IFAD, this project is implemented by the National Institute for the Development 
of  Aquaculture  and  aims  to  increase  the  consumption  and  sale  of  fish  by  small-scale  fisher 
households  in  four  districts  of  Manica  and  Sofala  Provinces.  The  project's  overall  goal  is  to 
improve  the  livelihoods  and  food  security  of  poor  households  involved  in  fish  farming.  It 
supports  aquaculture  development  by  building  fish  farmer  groups  and  providing  technical 
support, training and start-up packages. 
In total, IFAD has approved 12 loans with 4 of these investments ongoing. The total amount of IFAD 
lending  to  the  country  amounts  to  USD  239.3  million.  The  total  amount  of  counterpart  funding 
composed  of  Government  and  beneficiary  contributions  has  reached  USD  53.4  million  117.  IFAD’s 
investments  also  attracted  a  significant  amount  of  co-  and  parallel  financing  reaching  USD  96.7 
million. 
In  terms  of  parallel  and  co-financing,  the  recent  IFAD  Country  Strategy  and  Programme  Evaluation 
(CSPE)  points  out  that  recent  trends  in  this  regard  are  positive.  In  the  period  1982  –  2009,  IFAD 
provided 72 per cent of total costs to projects, with 9 per cent coming from other partners. Since 2010, 
however, and coinciding with the start-up of PAFIR/RFSP, IFAD’s contribution represented 51 of total 
required  resources,  with  a  stronger  contribution  of  other  partners:  at  39.5  per  cent.  This  figure 
increases  further  when  linked  grants  by  other  partners  are  added.  Further,  when  all  national  grants 
are included, co-financing represents 41.6 per cent of the total 
C. 
Lessons Learned 
When  conceptualizing  REFP  internally  within  IFAD,  there  was  an  emphasis  on  basing  new  project 
design on lessons learned from portfolio experience and the IFAD ESA Concept Note recommended 
to take above all the following lessons into account: 
a)  Well-focused, realistically targeted interventions can add value at sector level. The value 
added  in  the  sector  can  be  seen  from  the  growing  demand  for  the  piloted  financial  services 
interventions that have  performed satisfactorily as evidenced  in  the  2015 PAFIR PCR Report, 
the  latest  2016  MTR  report  for  PROSUL,  the  2016  Supervision  Mission  Report  for 
PROSPESCA  and  the  2016  Supervision  mission  Report  for  PROMER  –  all  of  which  point 
towards a growing and unmet demand for financial services in project areas. This needs to be 
followed  with  well-defined 
that  measure  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 
achievements;  
indicators 
b) 
A  set  of  key  financial  and  technical  performance  indicators  for  rural  finance  institutions 
are important. In addition, exchange of debtor information between different wholesale lenders 
would likewise improve the information available that enables good management of loans; 
c) 
Setting up an effective and sustainable ASCA Union is a protracted process that requires 
several,  well-thought  through  stages.  The  initial  stages  require  deployment  of  considerable 
resources for management and institutional consolidation. For sustainability, governance issues 
between  the  union  board  and  management,  and  the  different  Union  members  and  the  Union 
itself need to be carefully considered and worked out; 
Sound  financial  sector  management  procedures  are  critical,  when  managing  loans  and 
d) 
grants  without  the  strict  provisions  of  Central  Bank.  In  addition,  minimum  standards  are 
required  for  Rural  Financial  Institutions  applying  for  matching  grant  funds  and  needed  to 
alleviate the challenge of quality differentials of grant proposals; and 
High quality Fund management is key to dispensing successful credit and accompanying 
e) 
grant functions. 
117 All figures in this paragraph as of 02-2017. 
66 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Also,  a  recent  Country  Strategic  and  Performance  Evaluation  (CSPE)  of  IFAD  concluded  with  the 
following observations, first regarding lessons learned on rural finance operations in Mozambique: 
Although  the  COSOP  note  the  absence  of  access  to financial  suitable  services  as  one  of  the  major 
obstacles to alleviating rural poverty in Mozambique, the impact and sustainability of IFAD supported 
interventions  remained  behind  expectations.  Against  the  COSOP  strategic  framework,  the  PAFIR/ 
FRSP  project  tackled  a  major  gap,  but  was  closed  without  extension  without  having  achieved  its 
objectives. There were no adequate provisions made for follow up and support to the ongoing projects 
to  carry  out  their  own  rural  finance  sub-components,  which  were  important  for  achieving  project 
results. For this reason, ProPESCA, PROMER and PROSUL had to go through lengthy procedures or 
amendments to their agreements and identify their own way forward.  
Apart  from  the  highly  successful  informal  ASCAs,  the  CSPE  finds  that  there  was  little  tangible 
progress  made  in  improving  access  to  credit  for  small-scale  rural  producers  in  agriculture  and 
fisheries.  This  gap  undermined  the  effects  of  many  of  the  efforts  made  by  the  project  in  building 
capacity and supporting non-financial and production and marketing oriented services ,  
The CSPE also offered some lessons learned on other aspects of project design and implementation: 
a)  The projects did not explicitly include objectives or approaches aimed at tackling over-arching 
goals for both the Government and IFAD. 
b)  COSOP identified the target population for IFAD interventions as those who already had the 
potential for stronger value addition at local level and commercialize their activities. This led to 
a focus on producers who already had better access to factors of production. 
c)  This  meant  that  many  rural  producers  in  IFAD  supported  districts,  who  in  good  years  may 
achieve a limited market surplus but in bad years struggle with food insecurity. 
d)  The  environmental  and  natural  resource  management  dimension  was  found  to  be  weak 
overall. 
e)  Delays  in  project  financial  execution  and  slow  implementation  was  recognized  by  all 
stakeholders as the main weakness of the portfolio under evaluation in the CSPE. 
f)  The mixed experience in the recruitment of service providers (SP) provides an opportunity for 
re-thinking the project implementation model. 
g)  There  is  room  for  improvement  in  the  contribution  of  non-lending  activities  to  the  country 
programme. 
Based  on 
recommendations for consideration:  
these  observations  and 
lessons 
learned, 
the  CSPE  proposes 
the 
following 
1.  Focus  on  rural  poor  and  on  more  vulnerable  groups,  including  women,  youths  and  people 
living with AIDS; 
2.  Full  attention  should  be  given  to  sustainable  natural  resource  management,  and  to 
strengthening climate-change resilience; 
3. 
IFAD  support  to  the  rural  finance  sector  should  be  conceptualized  within  a  long-term 
commitment horizon and with basis on the lessons learned so far: 
4.  Efficiency of the financial execution should be enhanced; 
5.  Principles for the reliance on service providers should be enhanced. 
6.  Dedicate more attention and resources to Knowledge Management and Policy Dialogue. 
67 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Appendix 4: 
Detailed project description 
Component 1:  Improved access to adaptive financial services for rural entrepreneurs.  
Component overview 
Component 1 will be implemented through two interrelated subcomponents. First, sub-component 1.1 
the  establishment  of  adapted  financial  instruments  for  the  development  of  rural  entrepreneurship. 
Different funds will be operationalized and managed under one umbrella fund structure with improved 
operational,  implementation  and  sustainability  prospects.  The  second  sub-component  1.2  foresees 
the  establishment  of  adapted  innovative  refinancing  instruments  to  finance  the  project  target  group. 
This subcomponent will be linked closely with subcomponent 1.1 and will involve the establishment of 
a  Line  of  Credit  (LOC).  The  LOC  will  function  as  a  classic  debt  finance  instrument  between  the 
financial  institutions  and  the  rural  entrepreneurs  who  qualify  to  address  their  liquidity  challenges. 
Qualifying  rural  entrepreneurs  and  other  possible  interested  rural  enterprises  will  access  the  LOC 
the  Financial 
funds  under  market-based  pricing  conditions,  after 
Intermediaries. 
fulfilling  criteria  set  with 
The component will stimulate and scale up rural finance innovations that would increase the presence 
of rural financial service providers in rural areas. The component  would provide grants and financial 
contributions that would be matched by recipients (co-financing). The match contribution will either be 
in cash or in kind. This fund will target innovative entrepreneurial solutions that have the capacity to 
either propose new ideas, or contribute more effectively to existing ideas that target rural areas and 
contribute  to  the  expansion  of  services  in  the  underserved  target  area.  The  solutions  can  be  in  the 
form  of  business  models  to  reach  the  last  mile,  but  also  consider  both  operation  and  production 
aspects.  Alternatively,  it  can  be  in  the  form  of  new  modalities  through  which  products  and  services 
can be delivered in rural and agricultural settings.). 
Subcomponent 1.1. Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme (GPO) 
The fund is designed to achieve the following outcomes: (i) Increased  incomes and assets  through 
establishment of profitable enterprises facilitated by  access to financial services (ii) Increased savings 
by beneficiaries (iii) Improved food security (iv) Improved health and nutrition. .(v) Increased outreach 
to  marginalised  groups  and  areas.  The  GOF  will  be  implemented  through  two  sub-windows  (i)  The 
Graduation Facility (ii) Outreach expansion facility.  
(i)The Graduation Facility Window 
Description  of  Delivery  model118:  The  graduation  fund  will  be  deployed  as  a  series  of  interrelated 
steps aimed at providing a pathway to sustainable  livelihoods for poor households. The fund will  be 
built  on  five  core  elements:  targeting  and  selection,  skills  training,  savings,  enterprise  selection  and 
enterprise  specific 
  coaching  and  mentoring, 
establishment  of  VSAs/ASCAs  and  linkage  to  mainstream  service  providers  (financial  institutions, 
market linkages, value addition etc.).  
training,  provision  of  start-up 
loans,  regular 
Targeting  and  selection:  The  primary  target  group  for  the  fund  will  be  20,000119  extremely  poor 
households  in  the  REFP  project  areas.  These  households  live  vulnerable  lives  characterised  by 
irregular  and  unpredictable  incomes,  food  insecurity,  poor  health,  lack  of  education,  lack  of  assets, 
((i.e. technology, tools, land ownership, etc.) ), limited livelihood prospects, and  social isolation., The 
target group will include vulnerable and most disadvantaged households including those affected by  
HIV/AIDS  and  disabilities.  This  target  group  is  consistent  with  IFAD’s  target  group  defined  as  ”rural 
people  living  in  poverty  and  experiencing  food  insecurity  in  developing  countries”.  Poverty  maps  or 
local knowledge will be used to select areas with high incidence of poverty. 
Selection:  Selection  of  beneficiaries  will  be  conducted  by  a  specialized  service  provider  (SP)  using 
the participatory wealth ranking methodology and/or simple household surveys to identify the poorest 
118 See annexe 1 for delivery model. 
119 Representing 30% of the project target group. 
69 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
households.  Household  visits  will  be  conducted  by  the  SP  and  project  staff  to  verify  the  identified 
beneficiaries  in  order  to  avoid  participation  by  economically  better  off  people.  Since  the  model  is 
based  on  engaging  poor  households  in  productive  income  generating    economic  activities,  only 
people who are physically or mentally able to manage enterprises will be selected for participation in 
fund  activities.  This  strategy  is  consistent  with  IFAD’s  targeting  strategy  which  strives  to  reach 
extremely  poor  people  who  have  the  potential  to  take  advantage  of  improved  access  to  assets  and 
opportunities  for  agricultural  production  and  rural  income  generating  activities.  Women  who  are 
landless, do not own any productive assets and with no working male members will be included in the 
target group.  
Selection  will  be  conducted  in  a  series  of  steps  as  follows:  (i)  initial  selection  by  local  community 
leaders/committee;  (ii)  verification  by  project  staff  through  physical  visits  to  the  households;  and  (iii) 
registration of beneficiaries will be done using biometric or manual system120.  
Selection Criteria 
Household characteristics 
Agricultural 
Production and 
land use 
Non-farm income  
generating activities 
Social affiliation 
Female headed households 
Vulnerable household due to illness of the breadwinner (HIV, 
other terminal diseases) 
Do not own land 
Do not cultivate land 
because they cannot 
afford inputs and /or 
because the farmland is 
distant and poor,  
Practice subsistence farming 
Afraid or unable to take 
risk 
Low-end employment 
Lack capital to start any business 
Do not belong any 
Association 
Family labour  
Labour 
Access to financial services  Financially excluded 
Income sources 
Unstable income sources 
Low end/seasonal employment 
Business and livelihood training121: After selection, the beneficiaries will be offered various training 
packages  to  equip  them  entrepreneurship,  business  management  and  financial  literacy  skills.  A 
simple  training  curriculum  and  training  manual  will  be  developed.  Training  will  be  offered  at  three 
levels: (i) Training of trainers: Trainers will be selected122 from the various project areas and will be 
trained  to  equip  them  with  skills  to  train  project  beneficiaries.  Training  of  trainers  will  be  classroom 
based  with  duration  of  between  1  to  2  weeks.  (ii)  Training  of  beneficiaries:  This  will  include  basic 
general training in entrepreneurship, business management and financial literacy.  
Savings:  Accumulation  of  savings  is  a  key  component  of  the  theory  of  change  of  graduation 
programmes.  An  increase  in  savings  is  an  important  driver  of  productive  inclusion,  resilience  and 
escape  from  poverty  since  it  enables  poor  households  to  smooth  consumption,  manage  risks  and  
reduces  negative  coping  strategies  (such  as  selling  off  productive  assets)  that  undermine  their 
capacity  to  move  out  of  poverty  in  the  long  term.  Beneficiaries  will  be  encouraged  to  save  regularly 
(e.g. on daily or weekly basis) whatever little surplus they have, either in cash or in kind (eg livestock, 
grain, chicken, vegetables, fruits etc). Savings maybe deposited in informal facilities (savings boxes, 
120 FAO is piloting a biometric registration system in Manica and Sofala provinces for an EU funded input  supply 
project. 
121 Training will be provided through the structures established in component 2 of the project.  
122 Trainers will be selected from the community to enhance ownership of the programme. Selection criteria will 
be developed. 
70 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
grain/livestock.  fruit/vegetable  banks)  or  in  formal  institutions  (MFIs,  ASCAs  etc).  Regular  saving 
builds  not  only  builds  a  savings  culture  and  financial  discipline  but  it  also  shifts  the  focus  from 
consumption  to  investment  in  productive  activities.  Incentives  will  be  provided  to  encourage 
beneficiaries  to  save  regularly  (for  example  the  fund  may  offer  to  boost  the  savings  on  a  1:1  ratio 
where for every metical saved, the fund will contribute a similar amount).  
Mentoring and coaching: Once the beneficiaries start their business enterprises, extension staff will 
offer  regular  business  mentoring  and  coaching  to  stabilize  the  businesses  and  enhance  business 
survival beyond the start-up phase123, Finally, through regular monitoring and coaching, staff check if 
participants are on track to reach their goals by the end of the project and offer guidance on how to do 
so.  They  also  offer  business  planning  advice,  provide  social  support,  promote  health  and  nutrition, 
and encourage positive attitudinal changes along the way.  
Linkage to formal financial institutions:  As the business enterprises grow, they will require larger 
loans  and  other  investment  facilities  which  are  beyond  the  capacity  of  the  funds  provided  by  the 
Graduation  fund.  The  fund  will  provide  linkage  to  formal  financial  institutions  to  enable  graduating 
entrepreneurs to access larger loans  with  longer maturity  as  well as other transaction services. The 
support may include referrals and limited risk-sharing funds to encourage MFIs/banks to lend to these 
entrepreneurs.  
Implementation  framework:    The  graduation  programme  will  be  managed  by  a  service  provider 
specialized in graduation and targeting the ultra-poor (TUP) programmes.  
Gender mainstreaming. Gender mainstreaming will be achieved through targeting and participation 
of women in all activities of the fund.  At the start of the implementation of the fund, rural women in the 
project areas will be informed about the activities of the fund. Poor rural women would be expected to: 
i)  participate  in  the  training  courses,  (ii)  women  will  be  encouraged  to  save  (iii)  women  will  be 
encouraged to start business enterprises (iv) Women will be encouraged and facilitated to take loans . 
Monitoring & Evaluation The project will deploy various tools including the movement out of poverty 
index  to  measure  movement  of  the  beneficiaries  out  of  poverty.    The  following  indicators  will  be 
tracked:  
ECONOMIC INDICATORS 
Stabilised and diversified income 
sources 
Increase in assets 
Increase in savings 
Improved housing 
SOCIAL INDICATORS 
Improved health 
Increased self-confidence and social inclusion 
Improved nutrition 
Children attending School 
14. Partnerships: The fund will develop synergies and partnerships with on-going initiatives which 
provide rural finance services in the Project area. The fund will be supported to utilize the 
complementary financial sources made available by other IFAD projects in the project area. This is to 
ensure that the limited resources under the fund are leveraged to attain a higher level of impact on the 
target beneficiaries. 
(ii) Outreach Window (OF)   
This  outreach  facility  will  support  adoption  of  new  products  and  alternative  delivery  channels  to 
facilitate  the  access  of  the  REFP  targeted  rural  population  groups  to  financial  services.  GOF  will 
support  the  introduction,  fine-tuning  or  area  expansion  from  other  countries  or  regions  of  relevant 
123 Most micro and small business fail during the first few months of the start-up phase due to lack of proper support systems 
including lack of markets, lack of capital, weak record keeping etc. 
71 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
innovative  techniques  and  approaches  including  utilization  of  digital  finance  solutions  to  further 
expand access to the unbanked, especially rural women.   
In order to enable well-based decisions of what funding requests can be approved under this specific 
facility,  the following definition of initiatives will be considered for funding: :  
(a) New products: These relate to all types of services that are relevant to the IFAD supported target 
group in their financial dealings: money transfer services, establishment or maintenance of transit or 
deposit  accounts,  cheque  and  current  accounts,  leasing  and  hire-purchase  services,  as  well  as 
insurance services of different types that are relevant to rural on and off farm producers, value chain 
financing, term-finance for agriculture, technological innovations that help reduce cost of 
Service delivery such as M-Pesa, use of point of sale devices, biometric data storage, and pilot testing 
financial graduation approaches. In line with IFAD’s Rural Finance Policy (2009), also services related 
to  meso  level  financial  services  support  institutions  will  be  eligible  for  funding,  if  a  direct  link  to  the 
IFAD  relevant  target  group  and  their  service  requirements  can  be  established.  Examples  include  a 
possible support for including smaller and rural based MFIs in a national credit reference database. 
(b) Definition Outreach: IFAD uses the term flexibly. In terms of physical outreach, the quantitative 
aspect  of  reaching  out  with  infrastructure,  products,  services  or  digital  coverage  is  key.  Qualitative 
outreach  aspects  emphasize  improvements  in  reaching  out  to  clients  that  are  already  captured  as 
clients  but not with the same depth of services.  
Allocation of OF at Beneficiary Level (with focus on  ASCA Support) 
The OEF will support interventions directly at the level of the rural on- and off-farm sector and directly 
to  individuals  or  groups,  associations  or  other  forms  of  collective  action.  Activities  that  can  be 
considered include a  wide  range of activities. The following eligibility list is proposed to be validated 
and complemented during REFP start-up: 
(a)  Organization of farmer of MSE groups as community financial organizations 
(b)  Financial management practices 
(c)  Business and farm management practices 
(d)  Thriftiness and deposit mobilization 
(e)  Preparation of a loan application 
(f) 
(g)  Digital finance, basics and intermediate 
(h)  Contract farming 
(i)  Other forms of value chain financing from producer perspective 
(j)  Climate resilience (incl. domestic Local Plans of Adaptation) 
Insurance services in rural areas of Mozambique 
In addition, under this heading, support is available for innovative entrepreneurial solutions that have 
the  capacity  to  either  propose  new  ideas,  or  contribute  more  effectively  to  existing  ideas  that  target 
rural areas and contribute to the expansion of services in the underserved target area. The solutions 
can be  in the form of business models to reach the  last mile , but also consider both operation  and 
production aspects. Alternatively, it can be in the form of new modalities through which products and 
services can be delivered in rural and agricultural settings. 
Recipients  of  grant  allocations  are  expected  to  contribute  0  to  30  per  cent  to  the  total  costs  of  the 
innovation initiative to be financed, depending on access and co-financing criteria to be established. 
1.1.2.B  Allocation  of OE at Financial Institutions Level 
Support  for  interventions  to  enhance  outreach  will  target  a  broad  range  of  financial  institutions  with 
current  or  potential  reach  to  the  rural  on-  and  off  farm  sector.  These  include  community  based 
financial  institutions,  rural  banks,  microfinance  institutions  with  different  licenses,  commercial  and 
other banks. 
72 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Eligible areas comprise a wide list of possible activities. Innovation action will include, but possibly not 
be restricted to the following:  
(a)  Innovations in rural and agricultural products and services 
(b)  Back-office management for lean business practices  
(c)  Market entry, client organization and business expansion in rural areas 
(d)  Modern loan appraisal techniques for agricultural financing 
(e)  Modern loan appraisal techniques for small off-farm sector financing 
(f) 
(g)  Digital finance 
(h)  Contract farming 
(i)  Other forms of value chain financing 
(j)  Compliance with National Climate Adaptation Provisions and International Best Practice 
Insurance services  -  scope for collaboration or service agent approach 
Recipient  financial  institutions  are  expected  to  contribute  between  10  (cash)  and  up  to  30  per  cent 
(balance in-kind) to the total costs of the innovative action to be financed. Criteria will depend on the 
type,  size  and  financial  strength  of  the  institution  and  co-financing  criteria  will  be  established  during 
project start-up.  
1.1.2.C  Allocation of OF for Government & Leveraging of Private Sector Support 
OEF will also consider funding applications (up to a maximum of 20% of the total available resources 
under this category for Government (up to 10%) and private sector applicants (up to 10% of the total 
OEF allocation). Different government agencies or Ministries may have bottlenecks in operationalizing 
their facilitation, legal or compliance and supervision aspects related to innovation areas in rural and 
agricultural finance. Relevant examples in the country context include challenges in the area of digital 
finance and domestic money transfers, but also legal and supervisory aspects related to this with the 
dealing departments of the Central Bank also applicable for funding under REFP OEF. 
As  far  as  leveraging  private  sector  support  is  concerned.  OEF  will  seek  to  leverage  private  sector 
investments that can feed into the agricultural sector (and beyond). The fund will support the provision 
of  specific/targeted  financial  services  aimed  at  incentivising  businesses  and  investors  to  work  with 
selected rural entrepreneurs and smallholder farmers.  
Public  sector  recipients  may  be  considered  for  100%  funding  support  to  meet  the  costs  of  the 
proposed  intervention.  Criteria  will  depend  on  the  degree  of  decentralization  of  the  applicant  entity, 
size and financial strength. 
Private sector applicants are expected to contribute 30% in cash to the total costs of the intervention 
to be financed. Application Process: 
The  PMU  and  the  Umbrella  Fund  will  launch  Call  for  Proposals  through  the  local  media  and  as 
appropriate  to  the  intended  target  recipients.  Short  listed  applicants  will  then  be  notified  and  their 
proposal and financial strength (co-financing) assessed on site by the Fund Secretariat. The Fund will 
then  apply  a  final  list  of  technical,  social  and  other  evaluation  criteria  to  select  the  successful 
applicants out of the short list. 
Subcomponent 1.2. Crowding In Fund (CIF) 
1.  Justification and Rationale 
Access  to  capital  has  been  identified  as  one  of  the  main  constraints  to  the  expansion  of  SME 
businesses.  As  per  the  recent  Finscope  Access  Study,  only  25%  of  SMEs  are  banked.  Most  SMEs 
prefer  to  use  their  own  funds  and  private  loans  to  make  investments  due  to  high  cost  of  debt 
servicing, limited access to credit and venture capital and requirements of guarantee and collateral. 
With the rural farming areas, demand for credit has been determined to high amount rural traders and 
union associations that are involved in inputs trading and aggregation of produce. The IFAD financed 
Rural  Markets  Support  Programme  (PROMER)  for  example  is  working  with  some  225  rural  traders 
73 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
that provide marketing services to rural households within the project focal areas.  A priority demand 
of these traders is access to working capital for purchasing produce. During the 2015-16 season only 
13%  of  these  traders  were  able  to  access  credit.  The  inability  of  such  traders  to  access  finance  is 
partly due to their inability to present collateral security acceptable to financial institutions.    
This  Crowding  in  Fund  aims  at  improving  access  to  finance  for  otherwise  un-bankable  small  and 
medium sized enterprises. The facility will support investments in productive assets such as on farm 
production  equipment,  post-harvest  machinery  and  equipment,  rural  transportation  and  processing 
equipment thereby allowing beneficiaries to increase production and productivity, reduce post-harvest 
losses and increase their incomes. 
The facility  will also serve  as a mechanism to leverage private sector financing through i) improving 
the collateral base of target beneficiaries. Strengthening and growing the agribusinesses through fixed 
asset  investments  and  balance  sheet  reinforcement  is  expected  to  result  in  more  bankable 
enterprises and broader access to long-term private capital, which promotes SMEs’ ability to expand 
and  grow  and  become  more  productive  and  profitable  and  ii)  reducing  the  risk  for  financial 
intermediaries  willing to  work with target beneficiaries. The main value for financial intermediaries is 
that  this  ‘blended  finance’  approach,  i.e.  the  leveraging  of  grant  funding  for  credit,  significantly 
decreases  credit  risk  and  enables  financial  intermediaries  to  invest  in  a  customer  segment  they 
previously  were  not  able  to  do  business  with.  For  investees,  the  combination  of  grants  and  credit 
reduces the cost of traditional credit and enables access to collateral previously not available 
2.  Description  
The Crowding in Fund will operate as a cost-sharing mechanism for productive investments by farmer 
groups  and  other  poor  rural  entrepreneurs  (inputs  suppliers,  aggregators  buying  from  smallholder 
farmers/fisherman,  transporters,  processors)  operating  mainly  within  agricultural/fisheries  value 
chains but also including the allied rural non-farm MSMEs. This grant acts as an incentive to crowd-in 
the  beneficiary  to  co-finance  the  productive  equipment  in  an  agreed  ratio  with  participating  financial 
service  providers  providing  part  of  the  investment  cost  through  an  interest-bearing  loan.  The  grant 
from  the  project  and  the  matching  component  from  the  beneficiary  are  intended  to  reduce  financial 
service provider’s loan exposure and repayment risks. Therefore, there will be an agreed cost-sharing 
ratio between project and the beneficiaries that shall contribute through own funds and a loan from a 
financial service provider. 
3. 
 Target Group And Eligibility 
The  fund’s  target  investees  are  MSMEs  -  farmer  associations  and  farmer  cooperatives  as  well  as 
other poor rural entrepreneurs operating in profitable value chains. It is estimated that the fund will be 
able to benefit about 1,000 enterprises. 
The Fund Manager will propose a selection criteria acceptable to participating financial Institutions to 
ensure  that  potential  beneficiaries  are  able  to  get  the  required  co-financing.  It  is  envisaged  that  the 
following eligibility criteria will apply: 
  Applicant: The applicant needs to be one of the actors identified within any of the value chains 
considered  profitable  for  the  target  region.  Such  value  chains  include  grains,  oilseeds  (sesame, 
soya  beans,  and  beans),  horticulture,  poultry,  beef,  cashew,  fish,  and  other  rural  non-farm 
MSMEs. 
  Legal  Status,  The  applicant  needs  to  be  a  legal  entity  registered  under  appropriate  legislation 
and has been in operation for at least one year. Investees are required to demonstrate legal and 
fiscal statutory documents to ensure their compliance with local legislation. 
  Viability: The proposed investment must be financially viable. Investees will be required to submit 
a bankable business plan that analyses the strength and viability of their business and how their 
bankability will increase going forward.  
  Co-financing:  The  enterprise  owners  are  capable  of  mobilising  the  required  co-finance 
investment capital through a loan or from own capital. Partnerships with local financial institutions 
will be established to leverage the grant funding for additional capital.  
74 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
  Location:  While REFP is a national project, initial investees’ operations will be located in one of 
the three zones of influence, being the Beira Corridor, Nacala/Lichinga Corridor and the Maputo 
Corridor.  The  fund  will  be  expanded  beyond  the  four  initial  corridors  to  cover  other  parts  of  the 
country on a demand basis. 
 
Impact on Smallholder Farmers: In the particular case where the investment proposal is coming 
from a market intermediary, the proposed investment needs to present a marketing opportunity to 
smallholder farmers operating within that value chain. The facility needs to fund activities that will 
have a clear and direct benefit to smaller farmers. Applicants will be required to show the financial 
impact of the proposed investment on participating farmers. 
4.  Types Of Investments  
A  key  objective  of  the  Fund  is  to  finance  investments  that  would  improve  the  collateral  base  of 
farmer  groups,  farmers’  associations/unions,  trader  and  other  rural  non-farm  MSME.  It  is 
envisaged that investments will include: 
  Tractors and tillage equipment 
  Transport equipment – small to medium sized trucks necessary for marketing activities 
  Processing equipment- small to medium scale agro processing plants 
  Value  addition  investments  e.g.,  cleaning  facilities,  cold  storage  facilities,  storage 
facilities, etc.  
  energy related equipment (eg solar systems) 
 
irrigation equipment 
5.  Fund Parameters 
The  fund  will  be  established  with  an  initial  value  of  USD 5 million124.  The  Fund  will  operate  on  a 
tripartite  contribution  of  the  beneficiary,  financial  institution  and  the  project.  For  each  eligible 
investment, the beneficiary will contribute 20%125 of the cost, the participating financial institution 40% 
and the project 40%. It is envisaged that due to the nature of activities of traders, processors, farmer 
associations  and  other  non-farm  rural  MSMEs,  most  of  the  grants  will  be  small  within  the  range  of 
USD 3,000 – USD  5,000. The actual grant amount will depend on the requirements of the proposed 
investment.  
The  grantees  will  be  selected  through  regular  call  for  proposals.  Although  this  will  be  the  main 
mechanism, the Fund Manager will also remain open to consider applications sent between calls for 
proposal  windows.  The  application  will  involve  a  two-stage  process  in  which  applicants  submit  a 
concept note and then a full proposal upon approval of the concept note. During concept note stage, 
investees are required to submit basic information that can be used to assess the investee fulfilment 
of  the  basic  eligibility  criteria  (investment  concept,  program  region,  availability  of  documents  to 
demonstrate legal and fiscal compliance, type of organization, availability of a matching cash, etc.) If a 
candidate  is  approved,  they  are  invited  to  submit  a  full  application  complete  with  a  business  plan 
showing the financial projection  and a narrative of their proposal. The basic evaluation  of this stage 
involves  a  review  of  the  management  capacity,  the  viability  of  the  business  plan,  and  the  potential 
project development impact, not only in the individual business but  also in the community and in the 
value chain as a whole. If their project looks promising, the Fund Manager shall then visit the project 
and  make  a  more  detailed  assessment  including  an  environmental  impact  review  of  their  project. 
Approved business plans will be submitted to a Fund Selection Committee. 
6.  Financial Institutions 
The  facility  aims  at  improving  the  relationships  between  the  financial  sector  and  small  sized 
agribusinesses and other rural off-farm MSMEs and to ensure a sustainable source of growth capital 
post the project support. Partnerships shall therefore be established with local financial institutions to 
124 About 1.000 beneficiaries at USD5.000 each all-inclusive grant limit 
125 A combined contribution of 60% (20% own+40% loan) is high when one takes into account the experience of similar 
programmes in the country. Common experiences are up to 30% contributions eg FINAGRO, AGRIFUTURO, 
SUSTENTA, PROIRRI)  
75 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
support  the  investee  contribution  and  also  to  leverage  the  grant  funding  for  additional  capital. 
Financial  institutions  that  have  experience  in  this  type  of  twinning  finance  include  GAPI,  Millennium 
BIM,  BCI,  Banco  Terra  and  Opportunity  Bank.  At  the  outset,  the  program  will  ensure  that  the  basic 
eligibility criteria mirror the minimum requirements of participating banks, so as to prepare the  SMEs 
for relationships with financial institutions. The financial institutions will be involved at all stages of the 
project.  In order to make the banks more sensitive to the needs of the target group, the  project will 
work  with  financial  institutions  to  build  awareness  of  the  business  conditions  and  opportunities  in 
agriculture.  The  program  aims  to  support  as  many  investees  in  their  credit  application  process  as 
possible  by  creating  favourable  conditions  for  MSMEs  to  leverage  the  grants  for  formal  finance,  by 
building  financial  institutions’  trust  in  these  MSMEs  and  by  facilitating  communication  between  the 
parties. For example, ownership of the assets financed will be transferred to the MSMEs at the outset, 
which will allow them to pledge the assets to the financial institution to meet collateral requirements. 
7. 
 Fund Administration 
Fund Governance 
A  Fund  Selection  Committee  shall  be  set  up  for  each  of  the  three  regions  to  be  covered  by  the 
project. If a business meets the standard minimal score, it is  proposed for approval to the  Selection 
Committee.  The  selection  committee  shall  meet  once  per  window  to  review  all  proposed  business 
plans  for  approval.  Members  will  include  a  senior  representative  of  the  Fund  Manager,  a  bank 
representative,  and  an  independent  private  sector  representative.  The  responsibility  for  the  final 
selection of grantees will be that of BNI. 
Fund Management 
Banco Nacional de Investimentos (BNI) has been identified by Government as the preferred channel 
for funds under this project.  Given that BNI operates at a wholesale level, this activity shall therefore 
be assigned to a competent Fund Manager (FM) that would take care of its day to day administration 
under the overall oversight of BNI.  To effectively play this role it is expected that the FM will set up 
decentralised structures in each of the target regions that would allow it to timely receive and appraise 
application from potential investees.  
The Fund Manager will be responsible for: 
  Developing procedures for the application and Funds allocation process. 
  Publicise  the  fund  among  potential  beneficiaries.  This  includes  conducting  awareness 
workshop and seminars within the target regions as well as using electronic and other means 
of publicity. 
  Securing the participation of Financial Institutions. The Fund Manager shall identify and 
mobilise  financial  institutions  to  participate  in  the  project.    The  Fund  Manager  shall  create 
awareness  around  the  program  and  its  application  process  to  get  buy-in  from  FSPs.  FSPs 
need  to  participate  in  program  promotion  workshops,  which  enable  them  to  communicate 
clearly  how  bankable  MSMEs  in  the  agribusiness  and  other  rural  sectors  could  fulfil 
requirements for access to credit.  
  Manage  Grant  Application  Process:  The  Fund  Manager  shall  manage  all  stages  of  the 
grant application process including  
o  Solicit investments on a competitive basis. 
o  Coordinate with the Selection Committee for investment approvals.  
o  Conduct due diligence on project applications. 
o  Prepare  investment  proposals  for  evaluation  and  approval  by  the  Selection 
Committee. 
o  Coordinating  the  contributions  from  grantees  and  managing  the  procurement 
process. The  FM  shall  also  be  elaborate  contracts  with  beneficiaries  and  manage 
the matching grants.  
  Grant  Disbursement:  It  is  envisaged  that  grant  proceeds  will  be  channelled  directly  to 
suppliers  of  assets  to  be  acquired  under  the  project.  However,  for  this  cost-sharing 
76 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
mechanism  to  work  effectively,  the  direct  channelling  of  grant  proceeds  will  be  done  in 
tandem with the loan-financed and beneficiary contributions.    
  Monitoring: The Fund Manager will be required to maintain information on the beneficiaries 
and their investments in order for the  project to track the impact of the facility. The FM shall 
timely submit to the PMU all required reports, including progress reports. 
  Other  operational  matters  such  as  management  of  its  budget,  maintain  the  requisite  staff 
and  presence  in  Mozambique  in  suitable  locations,  and  operate  its  organization  with  the 
appropriate financial and internal controls. 
Fees and Remuneration 
The  Fund  Manager  shall  be  remunerated  in  accordance  with  the  Fund  Management  Services 
Agreement. The total fund management budget (fees and annual operating costs) is expected to be in 
the range of 6%  -10% per annum of the funds under management. Funds under Management shall 
be the total amount of grant disbursed by the Project to the Fund Manager.  
8.  Technical Assistance 
An emerging lesson from implementing similar initiatives in the country is that availability of technical 
assistance is indispensable for the successful implementation of such projects. 
The  Fund  Manager  would  therefore  be  required  to  enter  into  partnership  with  Technical  Assistance 
Service  Providers  that  would  interact  with  participating  beneficiaries’  and  assist  them  in  making 
applications  to  the  Fund.  Preference  should  be  to  identify  service  providers  that  are  capable  of 
sustaining project initiatives post project support rather than consultancy companies. Public business 
development service providers include Instituto para Pequenas e Médias Empresas (IPEME), District 
Directors  for  Economic  Activities  (SDAE),  CEPAGRI  (now  FDA)  and  Beira  Agricultural  Growth 
Corridor. Responsibilities of Technical Service providers will include:  
  Promoting the program and helping identify suitable candidates.  
  Assisting  potential  investees  in  the  development  of  business  plans  and  in  some  cases  with 
formalizing their legal status.  
  Support in market research and identifying market opportunities  
  Facilitate linkages with financial institutions.  
  Facilitate  linkages  with  providers  of  technical  assistance  relevant  to  the  activity  (agronomy, 
equipment selection and installation);  
The  project  should  also  seek  to  cooperate  with  service  providers  implementing  the  various  IFAD 
projects  to  identify  candidates  as  well  as  in  the  provision  of  post  investment  technical  support  that 
many of the beneficiaries would require. 
9.  Crowding In Fund: Risks and Mitigation Strategies 
Risk 
Ability  of  FM 
appropriate structures 
to 
timely  set  up 
Ability 
financial institutions 
to  mobilise  participating 
Capacity  of  beneficiaries  to  raise 
required contribution 
Risk mitigation 
  Making  the  establishment  of  such  structures  a  key  disbursement 
milestone during the start up  
  The  market  has  a  number  of  local  financial  institutions  with 
experience  in  this  type  of  product.  The  Fund  Manager  will  have 
responsibility for mobilising these financial institutions to participate 
  The  LOC  provides  a  financial  window  for  support  to  micro,  small 
and  medium  enterprises  that  will  be  channelled  through  selected 
participating  Institutions.  This  should  act  as  a  further  incentive  to 
participate 
  The  beneficiary  contribution  has  been  let  at  60%  (20%  own,  40% 
loan). Experience from ongoing programmes puts this as being on 
the high side. The uptake levels  will need to be closely monitored 
during implementation to determine if these levels turns out to be a 
77 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Limited  number  of  potential  clients 
meeting  the  established  criteria  eg 
bankable 
capacity 
business  plans, 
legal 
documents 
lack  of 
prepare 
to 
barrier to participation. 
  Retaining  the  services  of  service  provider  to  provide  Technical 
Assistance  in  financial  literacy,  business  plan  development,  legal 
registration  of  entities  as  well  as  post  financing  support  in 
agronomy, markets  
10.   TARGET GROUP AND ELIGIBILITY 
The  fund’s  target  investees  are  MSMEs  -  farmer  associations  and  farmer  cooperatives  as  well  as 
other  poor  rural  entrepreneurs  operating  in  priority  bankable  value  chains.  It  is  envisaged  that 
investments  will  include  small  to  medium  scale  agro  processing  plants,  value  addition  investments 
e.g.,  cleaning  facilities,  cold  storage  facilities,  storage  facilities,  etc.  as  required  by  farmer  groups, 
farmers  associations/unions,  traders,  associations  and  other  rural  non-farm  MSMEs.  It  is  estimated 
that  the  fund  will  be  able  to  benefit  about  1.000  enterprises.  The  Fund  Manager  will  propose  a 
selection criteria acceptable to participating financial Institutions to ensure that potential beneficiaries 
are able to get the required co-financing. It is envisaged that the following eligibility criteria will apply: 
  Applicant: The applicant needs to be one of the actors identified within any of the value chains 
considered  profitable  for  the  target  region.  Such  value  chains  include  grains,  oilseeds  (sesame, 
soya  beans,  and  beans),  horticulture,  poultry,  beef,  cashew,  fish,  and  other  rural  non-farm 
MSMEs. 
  Legal  Status,  The  applicant  needs  to  be  a  legal  entity  registered  under  appropriate  legislation 
and has been in operation for at least one year. Investees are required to demonstrate legal and 
fiscal statutory documents to ensure their compliance with local legislation. 
  Viability: The proposed investment must be financially viable. Investees will be required to submit 
a bankable business plan that analyses the strength and viability of their business and how their 
bankability will increase going forward.  
  Co-financing:  The  enterprise  owners  are  capable  of  mobilising  the  required  co-finance 
investment capital through a loan or from own capital. Partnerships with local financial institutions 
will be established to leverage the grant funding for additional capital.  
  Location:  While REFP is a national project, initial investees’ operations will be located in one of 
the three zones of influence, being the Beira  Corridor, Nacala/Lichinga Corridor and the Maputo 
Corridor.  The  fund  will  be  expanded  beyond  the  four  initial  corridors  to  cover  other  parts  of  the 
country on a demand basis. 
 
Impact on Smallholder Farmers: The facility needs to fund activities that  will have a clear and 
direct  benefit  to  smaller  farmers.  Applicants  will  be  required  to  show  the  financial  impact  of  the 
proposed investment on participating farmers. 
11.  FUND PARAMETERS 
The fund will be established with an initial  value of  USD5million126. The fund will be deployed  in the 
form  of  in-kind  matching  grants  (procurement  of  fixed  assets  for  the  investees),  with  a  maximum 
individual grant size of USD 10,000 per investment. 
The Fund will operate on a tripartite contribution of the beneficiary, financial institution and the project. 
For each eligible investment, the beneficiary will contribute 10% of the cost, the participating financial 
institution  40%  and  the  project  50%.  It  is  envisaged  that  due  to  the  nature  of  activities  of  traders, 
processors,  farmer  associations  and  other  non-farm  rural  MSMEs,  most  of  the  grants  will  be  small 
within  the  range  of  USD 5,000  –  USD 10,000.  The  actual  grant  amount  will  depend  on  the 
requirements of the proposed investment.  
126 About 1.000 beneficiaries at USD 5,000 each all-inclusive grant limit. 
78 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Grantees  will  be  selected  through  regular  grant  application  windows.  The  application  will  involve  a 
two-stage process in which applicants submit a concept note and then a full proposal upon approval 
of  the  concept  note.  During  concept  note  stage,  investees  are  required  to  submit  basic  information 
that can be used to assess the investee fulfilment of the basic eligibility criteria (investment concept, 
program  region,  availability  of  documents  to  demonstrate  legal  and  fiscal  compliance,  type  of 
organization,  availability  of  a  matching  cash,  etc.)  If  a  candidate  is  approved,  they  are  invited  to 
submit a full application complete with a business plan showing the financial projection and a narrative 
of  their  proposal.  The  basic  evaluation  of  this  stage  involves  a  review  of  the  management  capacity, 
the  viability  of  the  business  plan,  and  the  potential  project  development  impact,  not  only  in  the 
individual business but also in the community and in the value chain as a whole. If their project looks 
promising,  the  Fund  Manager  shall  then  visit  the  project  and  make  a  more  detailed  assessment 
including an environmental impact review of their project. Approved business plans will be submitted 
to a Fund Selection Committee. 
12.  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
The  facility  aims  at  improving  the  relationships  between  the  financial  sector  and  small  sized 
agribusinesses and other rural off-farm MSMEs and to ensure a sustainable source of growth capital 
post the project support. Partnerships shall therefore be established with local financial institutions to 
support  the  investee  contribution  and  also  to  leverage  the  grant  funding  for  additional  capital. 
Financial  institutions  that  have  experience  in  this  type  of  twinning  finance  include  GAPI,  Millennium 
BIM,  BCI,  Banco  Terra  and  Opportunity  Bank.  At  the  outset,  the  program  will  ensure  that  the  basic 
eligibility criteria mirror the minimum requirements of participating banks, so as to prepare the SMEs 
for relationships with financial institutions. The financial institutions will be involved at all stages of the 
project.  In order to make the banks more sensitive to the needs of the target group, the  project will 
work  with  financial  institutions  to  build  awareness  of  the  business  conditions  and  opportunities  in 
agriculture.  The  program  aims  to  support  as  many  investees  in  their  credit  application  process  as 
possible  by  creating  favourable  conditions  for  MSMEs  to  leverage  the  grants  for  formal  finance,  by 
building  financial  institutions’  trust  in  these  MSMEs  and  by  facilitating  communication  between  the 
parties. For example, ownership of the assets financed will be transferred to the MSMEs at the outset, 
which will allow them to pledge the assets to the financial institution to meet collateral requirements. 
13.   FUND ADMINISTRATION 
Fund Governance 
A  Fund  Selection  Committee  shall  be  set  up  for  each  of  the  three  regions  to  be  covered  by  the 
project. If a business meets the standard minimal score, it is proposed for approval to the  Selection 
Committee.  The  selection  committee  shall  meet  once  per  window  to  review  all  proposed  business 
plans for approval. Members will  include a  BNI representative,  as senior representative  of the Fund 
Manager,  a  RPMU  representative,  a  bank  representative,  and  an  independent  private  sector 
representative.  
Fund Management 
This  matching  grant  facility  will  be  administered  by  a  BNI  as  Fund  Manager.  The  requirements  of 
managing a matching grant facility are different from those of other instruments envisaged under this 
project. This will therefore  may require a separate  and dedicated team  working  under the under the 
BNI Fund Manager.   
This CIF  Fund Manager will be responsible for: 
  Develop procedures for the application and Funds allocation process. 
  Publicise  the  fund  among  potential  beneficiaries.  This  includes  conducting  awareness 
workshop and seminars within the target regions as well as using electronic and other means 
of publicity. 
  Securing the participation of Financial Institutions. The Fund Manager shall identify and 
mobilise  financial  institutions  to  participate  in  the  project.    The  Fund  Manager  shall  create 
awareness  around  the  program  and  its  application  process  to  get  buy-in  from  FSPs.  FSPs 
need  to  participate  in  program  promotion  workshops,  which  enable  them  to  communicate 
79 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
clearly  how  bankable  MSMEs  in  the  agribusiness  and  other  rural  sectors  could  fulfil 
requirements for access to credit.  
  Manage  Grant  Application  Process:  The  Fund  Manager  shall  manage  all  stages  of  the 
grant application process including: 
 
 
 
 
Solicit investments on a competitive basis. 
Coordinate with the Selection Committee for investment approvals.  
Conduct due diligence on project concept applications and preparation support for 
proposals. 
Prepare investment proposals for evaluation and approval by the Selection 
Committee. 
  Grant  Disbursement:  It  is  envisaged  that  grant  proceeds  will  be  channelled  directly  to 
suppliers  of  assets  to  be  acquired  under  the  project.  However,  for  this  cost-sharing 
mechanism  to  work  effectively,  the  direct  channelling  of  grant  proceeds  will  be  done  in 
tandem  with  the  loan-financed  and  beneficiary  contributions.      The  Fund  manager  shall  be 
responsible  for  coordinating  the  contributions  to  the  suppliers  and  for  managing  the 
procurement  process.  The  FM  shall  also  be  elaborate  contracts  with  beneficiaries  and 
manage the matching grants.  
  Monitoring: The Fund Manager will be required to maintain information on the beneficiaries 
and their investments in order for the project to track the impact of the facility. The FM shall 
timely submit to the PMU all required reports, including progress reports. 
  Other  operational  matters  such  as  management  of  its  budget,  maintain  the  requisite  staff 
and  presence  in  Mozambique  in  suitable  locations,  and  operate  its  organization  with  the 
appropriate financial and internal controls. 
Fees and Remuneration 
The  Fund  Manager  shall  be  remunerated  in  accordance  with  the  Fund  Management  Services 
Agreement.  The  total  fund  management  budget  (fees  and  annual  operating  costs  shall)  shall  not 
exceed 6% per annum of the funds under management. Funds under Management shall be the total 
amount of grant disbursed by the Project to the Fund Manager.  
14.  TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
An emerging lesson from implementing similar initiatives in the country is that availability of technical 
assistance is indispensable for the successful implementation of such projects. 
The  Fund  Manager  would  therefore  be  required  to  enter  into  partnership  with  Technical  Assistance 
Service  Providers  that  would  interact  with  participating  beneficiaries’  and  assist  them  in  making 
applications to the Fund. The technical Service Providers will be financed through subcomponent 2.2: 
Support  to  business  plan  validation  and  market  linkages.  Preference  should  be  to  identify  service 
providers that are capable of sustaining project initiatives post project support rather than consultancy 
companies. Public business development service providers include Instituto para Pequenas e Médias 
Empresas (IPEME), District Directors for Economic Activities (SDAE), CEPAGRI (now FDA) and Beira 
Agricultural Growth Corridor. Responsibilities of Technical Service providers will include  
  Promoting the program and helping identify suitable candidates.  
  Assisting  potential  investees  in  the  development  of  business  plans  and  in  some  cases  with 
formalizing their legal status.  
  Support in market research and identifying market opportunities  
  Facilitate linkages with financial institutions.  
  Facilitate  linkages  with  providers  of  technical  assistance  relevant  to  the  activity  (agronomy, 
equipment selection and installation);  
The  project  should  also  seek  to  cooperate  with  service  providers  implementing  the  various  IFAD 
projects  to  identify  candidates  as  well  as  in  the  provision  of  post  investment  technical  support  that 
many of the beneficiaries would require.  
Sub-component 1.3: Line of Credit (LOC) 
1. Introduction: 
80 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
1.1 The target group identified for the project – rural entrepreneurs in agriculture and allied sectors – 
have little access to credit. Currently, the financial requirements of only 2.3% of the farm holdings in 
the country and 25% of the MSMEs are met by the formal financial sector. There are several reasons 
contributing  to  this.  Primary  among  them  is  that  the  clientele  from  these  sectors  are  not  seen  as 
economically  viable  and  bankable,  are  located  in  remote  areas  with  poor  financial  access  and  are 
unable  to  satisfy  the  lending  criteria  of  financial  institutions.  The  financial  institutions,  on  the  other 
hand,  face  liquidity  problems  and  do  not  offer  products,  services  or  delivery  mechanisms  that  are 
especially suited to the requirements of this segment leading to high transaction costs, highly priced 
financial products and inaccessibility of financial services that serve as deterrents to the expansion of 
credit. 
1.2 Credit lines serve as an important routes to channelling credit to the unbanked population. In 2015 
there  were  16  active  credit  lines  funded  by  donors  and  DFIs  in  Mozambique.  Funding  from  these 
credit  lines  amounted  to  USD 216  million.  The  Credit  line  focuses  more  on  SMEs  and  less  on 
microenterprises. Very few (only 5%) are targeted at agriculture. As per FSD Moc Study, “As  of June 
2015 ,66%(apex) of total credit line facilities has been committed to and 40% has been disbursed to 
specific  financial  institutions  .Only  23  %  of  total  facilities  had  been  disbursed  to  MSMEs  or 
agriclients.”.  Despite  moderate  performance  under  the  existing  credit  lines,  credit  to  agriculture  has 
been on the decline which only demonstrates that there is vast scope for improvement in agriculture 
and agribusiness credit delivery. Earlier credit lines were concentrated in a few banks; but of late the 
number  of  banks  accessing  credit  lines  has  increased.  This  is  because  more  banks  are  willing  and 
becoming  eligible  for  accessing  credit  lines.  The  positive  development  is  that  banks  are  realigning 
their  priorities  and  many  are  recognising  the  business  potential  of  lending  to  the  agri-business  and 
SME sector. The advent of technological advancements – both digital finance and mobile technology- 
has increased their confidence. The  banks recognise  that credit lines and  guarantee facilities  would 
make  it  easier  for  them  to  enter  these  markets.  The  challenges  before  all  donors  and  funding 
agencies are how to ensure that the credit lines could have a sustainable impact on the target sector 
and  the  participating  financial  institutions,  how  to  reach  out  to  more  financial  institutions  (MFIs  for 
instance) that are not eligible for participation, how to build synergies among different credit lines, and 
how to deliver agriculture credit lines and link it to value chain development.  
2. Objectives: 
2.1 The LOC is aligned with the project objective of increasing the availability of, access to, and use of 
appropriate, adapted, inclusive and sustainable financial services in rural areas. The objective of the 
LOC is to provide financial institutions with liquidity support for augmenting the flow of credit to  agri-
preneurs  and  agribusinesses  in  the  rural  sector.  It  is  expected  that  this  would  facilitate    (a) 
subsistence  farmers  to  generate  small  surpluses  and  transition  from  subsistence  to  a  basic  level  of 
commercial  agriculture;  (b)  “emerging  farmers”  to  intensify  their  production  and  participate  in 
structured  value  chains;  (c)  micro  enterprises  to  provide  value  added  services  such  as  aggregation 
and  trading  of  produce,  input  supply,  basic  sorting,  grading,  processing  and  milling,  providing  small 
storage/warehousing  facilities,  transporting  and  marketing  of  agriculture  commodities;  and  (d)  lead 
firms to reach out to emerging small farmers via out grower schemes. 
2.2 The LOC in tandem with the innovative financial instruments envisaged in Sub-component 1.1 and 
1.2 will provide the necessary impetus to the PFIs to diversify their business portfolio and customer- 
base as also increase the bankability of the target clients. The measures in Sub Component 1 and 2 
are expected to improve the credit flow to agriculture and micro enterprises sectors and improve the 
proficiency  of  the  financial  institutions.  The  LOC  will  be  also  be  available  to  project  participants  of 
ongoing  IFAD  projects  and  will  cover  participants  who  have  been  benefited  from  training  and 
productive support under Components 1 and 2. The REFP, thus, adopts a 360 degree approach that 
enhances the capacity and confidence of the Financial Sector to lend to small, off farm and non- farm 
businesses in rural areas. 
3. Scope of LOC: 
3.1  The  LOC  targets  a  wide  array  of  activities  through  it  sub-  components  to  harness  credit  for  the 
agriculture  and  agri-business  sector  and  also  make  use  of  alternative  delivery  channels  that  have 
successfully  purveyed  credit  to  smallholder  farmers.  The  LOC  should  not  be  read  in  isolation,  but 
together  with  the  graduation  promotion  and  outreach  programe  and  crowding-in  fund  in  sub-
components  1.1  and  1.2,  as  well  as  with  the  capacity  building  in  Component  2  –  that  provide 
participants  with  the  complete  package  of  TA,  productive  and  capital  support.  The  LOC  component 
81 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
can be tailored into MOUs entered by the Funds with other institutions. However, LOC will also serve 
as  a  standalone  component  where  the  participant  is  already  recipients  of  training  and  productive 
support. 
3.2 The 4 LOC sub- components will augment flow of credit to small agriculture, allied and fisheries 
producers,  as  also  informal  and  formal  MSMEs  connected  with  agriculture  in  the  rural  sector.  This 
covers  the  economic  activities  engaged  by  80%  of  the  population  and  includes  77%  of  the  micro 
enterprises engaged in agriculture.  These sectors are least served by formal credit, with only 3.4% of 
the  credit  going  to  agriculture.  The  Mozambican  economy  is  an  agrarian  economy,  yet  it  is 
characterised by high levels of subsistence farming and low production levels per hectare compared 
to  other  economies.  Only  a  small  proportion  of  the  farms  produces  for  the  market  or  generate 
marketable  surplus.  This  severely  cripples  the  growth  of  agribusiness  that  caters  to  commercial 
agriculture.  Lack  of  access  to  finance  has  been  identified  as  stumbling  block  for  input  and  farm 
technology usage. There is, therefore, a need to provide necessary stimulus for directing credit to this 
sector. 
3.3  The  Government  of  Mozambique  has  recognised  scope  for  private  sector  investments  and 
engaging  of  both  rural  enterprises  and  small  farming  households  in  agriculture  value  chains.  The 
Strategic  Plan  for  the  Development  of  the  Agriculture  Sector  (PEDSA)  identifies  six  development 
corridors to attract investments into key value chains along the corridors: 
Development corridors and key value chains  
Corridor 
Pemba - Lichinga 
Nacala 
Vale de Zambeze 
Beira 
Limpopo 
Maputo 
,cotton,  poultry, 
Value Chains 
Potato,  wheat,  beans,  maize  soya,  cotton  tobacco 
and poultry 
Cassava,  maize 
groundnuts 
Rice, maize, goat, potato, cotton, cattle and poultry 
Maize,  Wheat,  horticulture,  poultry,  soya,  rice  and 
cattle 
Rice, horticulture, cattle and poultry 
Rice, horticulture, cattle and poultry 
fruits  and 
Source: Agriculture and Rural Development Non lending Technical Assistance: WB 
The  Government  strategy  creates  space  for  a  more  active  private  sector  in  production  and  service 
provision. The LOC is designed to support participants and activities along agriculture, fisheries and 
allied sector value chains in keeping with the GOM’s strategy of harnessing private sector investment 
along value chains. The wide spectrum of  possible recipients will include producers, input suppliers 
local  traders,  technicians,  processors,  millers,  storage  and  warehousing,,  aggregators,  packers, 
transporters,  quality  control  specialists,  and  other  service  providers  along  value  chains  along 
development corridors, established and upcoming value chains.  
3.4 The Government of Mozambique in its National Financial Inclusion strategy has given targets for 
credit to agriculture and MSME sectors as follows: 
Targets under National Financial Inclusion Strategy 
Indicator 
Year 
Target 2018 
Baseline 
(2015) 
2.5% 
3.0% 
3.5% 
4.0% 
Target 2022 
5.0% 
6.0% 
to 
Credit  to  agriculture  as 
total 
a  proportion 
bank credit 
Credit 
in 
proportion  to  the  total 
bank credit 
to  MSME 
These are very aggressive targets, achievement of which requires concerted efforts from all players. 
The  LOC  package  is  focused  on  augmenting  credit  flow  to  these  priority  areas  though  institutional 
strengthening and liquidity support. 
4. Sub-Components of LOC: 
82 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
4.1  The  LOC  will  provide  wholesale  financing  to  financial  institutions  for  on-lending  to  target 
participants  as  specified  below.  The  first  2  sub  -components  of  the  LOC  are  aimed  at  directing  the 
flow of credit to critical agri-preneurial and agribusiness activities and the last 2 sub-components look 
at  ways  of  increasing  credit  outreach  through  alternative  delivery  channels;  the  latter  assuming 
significance  as  REFP  target  participants  are  in  rural  areas,  where  the  formal  sector  has  limited 
outreach. 
Production credit to producers and local traders 
The first component augments flow of credit to small producers, especially emerging farmers, fishers, 
and village level traders and aggregators for financing their production/ working capital (up to 1 year) 
requirements through PFIs (CBs& MFIs). These loans may be used for purchase of seeds , chemical 
inputs,  fishing  net,  feed  and  other  low  value  inputs,  hiring  or  purchasing  of  agriculture  implements, 
hiring  of  labour,  repairing  boats,  formalisation  of  business  (DUAT  and  NUIT)  by  producers  and 
meeting of working capital requirements such as “stock” required by traders. Loans of different sizes 
with a cap of USD 1,000 dollars will be refinanced under this component. An allocation of USD 12.5 
million has been allocated for this purpose. 
The  demand  for  input  and  working  capital  credit  by  small  holders  and  traders  is  evident  from  the 
following: 
  Business  loans  have  increased  substantially  and  44%  of  business  loans  are  used  by 
wholesale  and  retail  traders,  whereas  22%  by  the  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries  sectors 
(Finscope  MSME  2012).  Traders  borrow  for  “stock”  and  other  working  capital  requirements. 
Overall  credit  for  business  has  expanded  from  12.5%  in  2012  to  33%  in  2014.  The  trend  is 
expected to continue. This component has been designed to address this demand. 
  Small  producers  require  funding  for  seeds,  fertilisers  and  other  low  value  inputs.  They  also 
require farm implements, equipment and livestock. Limited use of inputs and farm technology 
is  a  major  impediment  to  raising  agriculture  productivity  and  embracing  commercial 
agriculture.  The  percentage  of  adults  using  credit  for  seeds,  fertilizers  and  fishing  nets  has 
increased  from  3.3%  in  2009  to  17%  in  2014;  farming  equipment  from  1.3%  to  7  %    and 
livestock from 0.5% to 3%. Thus, the component will meet the rising demand for such credit. 
  The component will finance the formalisation of their businesses (DUAT and NUIT) required 
as documentation for accessing credit, thereby increasing the eligibility and demand for credit. 
  Loans for agriculture from micro banks range between 83 USD to 1600 USD and for livestock 
between 250 USD – 1,600 USD.  The BOM –DCA Agriculture portfolio showed more demand 
for producer and trader loans in the USD 400 – 800 bands.  The average loan size based on 
feedback from MFIs ranged from USD 147 -1125. The demand for loan sizes was taken into 
consideration while determining the loan cap of USD 1,000 and number of beneficiaries under 
this component.  
  Both individual and group loans given to producers will be considered for reimbursement. The 
advantage  of  group  loans  is  that  group  guarantee  may  be  accepted  as  collateral.  However, 
not all farmers are part of associations; hence individual loans need to be considered as well. 
Banks  prefer  to  give  individual  loans  to  traders,  which  will  be  considered  for  reimbursement 
under this project. 
Loans to micro and small enterprises: 
This  component  will  channel  credit  flow  through  PFIs  to  small  and  micro  enterprises  with  business 
along  agriculture,  fisheries  and  allied  sector  value  chains.  Existing  and  emerging  micro  enterprises 
that  offer  various  value  added  services  such  as  supplying  of  inputs,  leasing  or  repairing  of 
implements, maintenance  and  repair  services,  aggregation  of  produce,  sorting,  grading,  processing, 
preservation  and  milling,  labelling  and  packaging,  providing  small  storage/warehousing  facilities, 
market sheds,  transport  and  marketing  of  agriculture  commodities  though  segregated  loan  products 
are  envisaged  for  financing  under  this  component.  Upstream  small  and  micro  value  chain  in  the 
fisheries  sector  comprising  activities  such  as  transporters,  municipal  marketing  agents  and  naval 
carpentry may also be considered. Loans of different sizes with a cap of USD 4,000 will be refinanced 
under this component, with emphasis on loans of smaller denominations. Repayment period will vary 
83 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
from 1-3 years depending upon the purpose. An allocation of USD 8.9 million has been made for this 
purpose.  
The demand factors that were taken into consideration are s follows: 
  The Government of Mozambique has identified development along value chains as a means 
of integrated development of the agriculture sector. Financing of rural enterprises was sought 
along  value  chain  corridors  in  consonance  with  the  Government’s  Strategic  Plan  for  the 
Development  of  the  Agriculture  Sector  (PEDSA)  that  identifies  six  development  corridors  to 
attract  investments  into  key  value  chains  along  the  corridors.  Not  only  is  there  scope  for 
private  sector  investments  along  value  chains  but  sustainable  business  opportunities  for 
producers and units in the MSME sector. 
  The  need  for  private  sector  investment  in  value  chains  is  imperative;  given  the  fact 
Mozambican  farmer’s  access  to  public  sector  extension  services  has  declined  from  13.5 
percent in 2002 to 8.3 % in 2014.  
  Agro-input access points are limited, with one agro dealer for every 20,000-25,000 farmer as 
compared to one  to  2,800  in Tanzania, one to 1500 in Malawi, and one to 1400 in Zambia. 
Donor involvement in this sector has contributed to the increase in agro input points from 150 
in 2006 to 1000 in 2015. 
  77% of micro enterprises are engaged in agricultural activities and 45% of them are engaged 
in the sale of agriculture products. More than 88% are located in rural areas. Thus, there will 
be a demand for this component. The two funds- “crowding in fund”; “innovation and outreach 
fund” – can play a role in building capabilities and attracting funding into this area. 
  Banks have, of late shown interest in value chain financing but do not have the capabilities to 
lend to this sector. The component, along with the “innovation and outreach fund”, will serve 
as a catalyst to develop necessary capabilities to serve this sector. 
  Several  products  have  been  introduced  by  banks  for  extending  finance  to  agribusiness 
including  microfinance  input  loans,  agribusiness  input  advances  to  smallholders  and 
outgrowers; and trader loans from banks, which can be scaled up for meeting demand from 
this  sector.  The  banks  could  also  look  at  instruments  such  as  warehouse  receipt  finance, 
collateral  management  loans,  leasing,  asset-  based  lending  and  develop  new  loan  products 
for the same. 
  The  banks  are  moving  towards  larger  value  loans  in  this  sector  and  smaller  denomination 
loans are more difficult to come by. Micro banks offer loans ranging between USD 50-5000 to 
this  sector,  whereas  commercial  banks  with  a  micro  sector  focus  give  loans  ranging  from 
USD 250-12,000. The BTM-DCA portfolio comprised loans to MSME in the agriculture sector 
ranging from less than USD 17,000 for micro enterprises and ranging between USD 17,000-
200,000 for small enterprises.  
Financial  institution  may  stipulate  borrower’s  margin,  grace  period,  repayment  period,  instalments, 
interest rate, based on the activity and borrowers’ loan appraisal. 
 Lending to ASCAs: 
This  component  is  designed  to  serve  the  target  clientele  through  ASCAs.  ASCAs  play  an  important 
role in the dispensation of credit in the informal sector.  Data from FARE’s presentation in ASCA’s 7th 
Forum in 2014, as given in a FSD MoC study report, indicates the following statistics on ASCAs. 
Total Number of ASCAs 
Number of Members 
Active members 
Accumulated Savings (000 mt.) 
Active Savings 
Active Credit 
Retained income 
Social fund  
12,481 
227,979 
76,201 
362,980,607 
241,186,962 
140,296,924 
73,103,045 
25,384,222 
84 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
1.  Source : Finscope 2014 
The  ASCAs are growing very fast with the number of clients increasing from approximately 65,000 in 
2012  to  227,979  in  2014  and  total  savings  from  MZN  27  million  (2012)  to  MZN  363  million.  This 
indicates that there is a growing appetite for financial services in rural areas. FARE has reported that 
18 organisations had been promoting ASCAs in 2014, though a recent research yet to be published 
by  FSD  Moc  identifies  25  promoter  organisations.  GAPI  and  GIZ  provide  assistance  to  ASCA 
promoters.  GAPI  is  assisting  a  total  of  520  ASCA  groups,  providing  them  with  access  to  markets, 
business  management  skills  and  linkage  to  financial  institutions.  So  far  GAPI  has  linked  ASCAs  to 
BCI, BTM and Cooperativa de Poupanca do Limpopo. GIZ also in its Pro Econ Project has enabled 
linkage  of  3,000  members  of  ASCA  groups  to  the  formal  sector  in  Sofala,  Manica  and  Inhambane 
provinces.  Pro  Econ  set  up  a  joint  venture  with  mobile  money  provider  CarteiraMovel  .  In  pilot 
projects,  the  groups  were  not  only  given  access  to  mobile  savings  facilities  but  also  other  financial 
services  and  transactions.  One  micro  bank  is  offering  a  special  loan  product  for  ASCAs.In  addition,  
Banco Opportunide, through the intermediation of ADEM has developed a partnership with ASCAs in 
several provinces. Donor agencies like CARE&IFAD and some of the NGOs have made initiatives in 
ASCA strengthening with varying degrees of success. 
This component strives to mainstream ASCAs with the formal sector. Under this component, matured 
and  saving-linked  ASCAs  may  credit  liked  to  formal  financial  institutions.  The  credit  would  be  in 
proportion to ASCA savings. The rationale for the same is as under: 
  The large number of ASCAs, by virtue of their significant role in facilitating rural outreach and 
their  perspectives  in  financial  inclusion  warrant  mainstreaming  with  formal  sector.  This  is 
important in the Mozambican contest because ASCAs can provide the formal sector with the 
rural outreach that it doesn’t have. As an intermediary, the ASCA can give confidence to the 
formal  sector  to  lend  to  the  rural  sector  and  secure  for  its  members  collateral-  free  loans 
backed by savings. The linking of ASCAS to financial institutions will present an opportunity to 
channelize  ASCA  savings  into  the  formal  sector  by  offering  savings-  cum-  loan  products  or 
plain  vanilla  savings  products.  This  will  not  only  help  to  augment  the  savings/deposits  of 
financial institutions but also reduce the risk perception of lenders, which could then translate 
in  better  priced  credit.  It  can  also  foster  mobile  and  digital  finance  innovations  that  would 
enable  remote  ASCAs  to  be  linked  and  avail  of  formal  financial  services.  Most  of  all,  it  will 
help  in  putting  together  a  regulatory  framework  for  linkage  banking  that  will  help  in 
mainstreaming this activity with necessary safeguards. 
 
 In  a  typical  linkage  model  (SHG-Bank-India),  the  groups  start  with  the  collection  of  thrift  of 
their  members,  provide  small  credit  to  them,  based  on  their  wisdom  and  manage  their  own 
kitty.  They  open  group  savings  accounts  with  banks,  thereby  demonstrating  their  financial 
discipline, and the banks release loans to the group in proportion to their savings and based 
on  their  stability.  The  ASCAs  that  have  traditionally  mobilised  group  savings  and  disbursed 
credit to groups, are well poised for the next stage of the linkage model which entails opening 
of savings accounts for safe- keeping of group savings and availing of credit facilities. Linkage 
will  also  provide  ASCAs  with  other  financial  services  which  would  otherwise  be  denied  to 
them. 
  While  it  is  argued  that  credit  linking  ASCAs  could  hamper  the  self-  sufficiency  character  of 
groups, yet data from the National Survey of smallholder farmers in Mozambique shows that 
1.5  million  people  or  nearly  370,000  households  were  found  most  likely  to  access  formal 
financial  services.  In  the  publication,  ‘Linking  savings  groups  to  Banks-  What  works,  What 
doesn’t, and What’s next’ brought out by CARE and Plan in partnership with Barclays on April 
21,2015, one of the key learnings about Groups was that “ savings groups- especially those 
that have been saving for two years or more – voice an increased need for financial products 
such  as  credit;  this  is  especially  true  during  the  first  three  months  of  the  savings  groups’ 
saving  cycle  where  savings  in  the  group  are  particularly  low  and  the  demand  for  loans  is 
high.”  Perspective members by  way  of their graduation through  internal lending  are likely  to 
have enhanced demand for agri-business activities, warranting credit from Banks/MFIs. 
  For the purpose of this pilot, credit linkages can be thought of in special cases, in 200 mature 
and  linked  ASCAs  that  are  in  close  proximity  to  the  Commercial  Banks/Micro  Banks,  where 
members  face  problems  with  the  short  credit  cycles  of  ASCAs  (usually  6-8  months)  not 
85 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
aligning  with  their  crop  cycles  or  where  a  shift  to  commercialisation  and  linkages  with  value 
chains,  will  necessitate  larger  funding  and  longer  duration  financial  products.  The  ASCAs 
could be credit linked in phases and gradually- first 1-2 years could be preparatory phase and 
actual  credit  support  to  be  provided  during  subsequent  4  years.  Under  LOC  to  ASCA,  both 
individuals  and  joint  liability  groups  formed  of  ASCA  members  would  have  access  to  credit 
from banks, preferably in proportion to their savings with them as well as with the bank. The 
issues of governance, group solidarity, peer pressure, accounting, etc.  Will to be taken care 
of  by  the  stake  holders  /promoting  institutions  to  be  engaged.  Financial  Institutions  will  be 
encouraged  to  develop  linkage  products  with  mobile  operators  under  the  innovations  and 
outreach  fund.  The  M-ASCA  product  that  is  being  used  in  Kenya  may  be  considered  for 
replication.  An  exploratory  study  initially  and  impact  study  after  implementation  would  be 
undertaken to document the impact. 
An allocation of USD 3.6 million has been made for this purpose. 
Financing outgrowers: 
This  component  proposes  to  finance  1-3  small  out  grower  schemes  in  new  areas  that  are  part  of 
established, medium to high potential value chains covering small farm holders wherein lead firms or 
medium  farmers  will  impact  300  emerging  small  farmers  by  providing  market  access,  quality  inputs 
and technical support. 
Out-grower  financing  has  been  an  important  source  of  support  for  small  holders  who  sell  to  large 
buyers. The support is normally in kind, in the form of inputs and technology, and has translated into 
good agriculture practices, increased productivity and output and enhanced income. It facilitates small 
farmers’  transition  into  commercial  agriculture,  with  scope  for  innovations  in  delivery.  It  is  a  popular 
mode  of  financing  and  several  Commercial  Banks  are  already  supporting.  Operations  are  well 
organized. 
The justification for this component is as follows: 
  PEDSA’s  implementation  approach  considers  all  activities  linked  to  development  and 
transfer  of  technologies  and  provision  of  agriculture  inputs.  Small  farmers  can  benefit 
from inputs and technology, without taking recourse to bank credit. 
 
 A big barrier to commercial farming in Mozambique is the lack of access to markets for 
small farmers. Medium scale producers, who normally serve as outgrowers, have better 
options to sell their produce to local, regional or national traders and are linked to major 
buyers. They, thus, can provide a market for small producers and augment their income. 
  The  financial  institutions  do  not  need  to  deal  with  individual  farmers,  thereby  reducing 
their transaction costs and making it attractive to them. 
  There have  been  instances of spike in  bank credit  where  lead firm or aggregators have 
played a role. The Agribusiness Indicators , Mozambique (World Bank 2012) has stated 
that a large percentage of  small farmers seen as accessing credit  who in Tete  province 
might be getting credit from MLTC (Mozambique Leaf Tobacco Company).  
  The  costs  strongly  depend  upon  the  kind  of  investment  but  it  could  range  between 
USD 5,000-7,000 per ha. 
The  demand  for  out-grower  financing  has  been  more  prevalent  in  dominant  value  chains  such  as 
cotton,  tobacco  and  sugar  involving  large  companies  such  as  MLTC,  Olam  and  JFS.  However, 
smaller entrepreneur business models promoted by  Ag Dev  Co, such as the ECA, Panda Farm, So 
Soja,  FDO,  Mozambique  Honey  Company  are  examples  of  successful  ventures  with  smaller 
investments.  Out-grower  financing  is  an  important  segment  of  value  chain  financing,  and  with  the 
strengthening of value chains as part of Government policy and private sector initiatives, this route of 
directing finance to smallholder farmers cannot be ignored. 
The allocation for this sub-component is USD 2.0 million. The share of IFAD will not exceed 70% of 
the investment and the loan will be made on commercial terms.  
The Line of Credit will total USD 27.1 million and encompass the four channels stated above. 
5. Selection of Participants 
86 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
5.1 The following criteria have been identified for selection of beneficiaries: 
  ASCA: While selecting ASCAs, the following aspects may be taken into account:   (1) Mature  
and linked ASCAs that have been in existence for3 years and have a satisfactory track record 
in saving and lending to members; (2) The norms envisaged for gender and  youth targeting 
should  be  complied  with;  (3)  The  ASCA  members  meet  regularly  and  maintain  ledgers  and 
passbooks that are audited from time to time; (4) They have been developed by IFAD or other 
Multi-lateral  agencies  under  various  schemes  &(5)  ASCAs  in  close  proximity  to  the  MFIs/ 
banks may be given preference. 
  Farmers: (1) Small farmers having 0-10 hectares landholdings or 10 livestock are eligible for 
participation. (2) Among small farmers, preference may be given to subsistence farmers with 
less  than  1  hectare  and  emerging  farmers  1-2  ha.  60%  of  the  loans  disbursed  to  small 
farmers may  be  earmarked  for  subsistence  and  emerging  famers.  (3)Small  farmers may  be 
individuals  or  those  organised  in  informal  groups  or  formal  associations  or  agricultural 
cooperatives.  (4)  Farmers/  farmer  groups  which  have  been  covered  under  the  “graduation” 
and  “crowding  in”  funds  and  those  who  have  benefited  from  technical  assistance  to  make 
them more bankable may be given preference. (5) Farmers who have been mobilized or are 
proposed  to  be  mobilized  into  value  chains  or  those  with  sporadic  surpluses  that  can  be 
channelled into organised  markets may be funded. And (6) the norms envisaged for gender 
and youth targeting should be complied with. 
  Micro enterprises including traders: (1) Micro enterprises not having more than 4 employees 
with a maximum annual turnover of USD 20,000 (2) They are engaged in off -farm and non- 
farm  activities  in  agriculture  and  allied  sectors  for  a  minimum  of  2  years  (3)  Traders  are 
engaged in the sale of agriculture products. (4) They are registered or licensed operators (4) 
Micro  enterprises  in  the  informal  sector  may  be  eligible  with  group  guarantee  (5)  Micro 
enterprises  are  mobilized  and  arranged/  or  identified  to  be  arranged  along  identified  value 
chains.  (6)  They  have  been  benefited  from  technical  assistance  /  business  development  / 
incubation services/assistance under “graduation” and “crowding in” fund arranged under this 
project  or  other  projects,  (7)  Micro  enterprises  assisted  under  the  “crowding  in”  fund  and 
”incubation  fund”  will  be  prioritized    and  (8)  The  norms  envisaged  for  gender  and  youth 
targeting should be complied with. 
  Out-growers:  (1)  Commercial  farmers  (medium  holders)  producing  commercial  crops  with 
established linkages to markets or agro processing companies which are linked / propose to 
link  with  small  farmers  in  an  out-grower  arrangement  (2)  Value  chain  participants  such  as 
seed  companies  that  already  play  the  role  of  aggregators  and  are  willing  to  support  small 
farmers  in  an  out-grower  agreement  by  providing  other  necessary  inputs  and  technical 
services.  (3)  Out-grower  schemes  in  new  areas  but  linked  to  strong  value  chains  may  be 
given preference 
6. Selection of participating financial institutions (PFIs) 
6.1 The selection of PFIs will be made from among commercial banks with good rural outreach and 
those  with  a  microfinance  focus, micro  banks  and  other  MFIs  through  an  objective  selection  criteria 
and process. The participating FFIs need to be registered under the respective laws and regulations 
of the Bank of Mozambique.  
6.2  In  general,  the  Financial  Institutions  will  be  screened  ,based  on  the  following  criteria:  the 
availability  of  a  strategic  plan  to  reach  out  to  new  markets  in  rural  areas  that  includes  products, 
delivery  channels  and  risk mitigation  measures;  the  institution  is  financially  sound  and  has  a  strong 
management and governance as well as a well- performing loan portfolio that includes agriculture and 
micro finance lending; has a presence in all or most of the provinces ; is adequately capitalized and 
has good operating systems, has the ability to absorb the LOC and is amenable to use it to expand to 
new  markets  and  develop  new  products,  can  abide  by  CGAP’s  Client  Protection  Principles  for 
Microfinance (CGAP 2010), will have  reporting programme while reporting regularly to PMU, has an 
established track record and  is not a Greenfield financial institution and has invested some of its own 
equity  or  shareholders’  funds  in  financing  a  loan  portfolio  before  funding  of  the  LOC  facility.  In 
addition, PFIs would have to comply with suitable norms relating to recovery rate, OSS, PAR, CRAR, 
minimum years of operation, audited book of accounts and relevant financial statements. 
87 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
7. Intermediary Institution: 
7.1 The selection of an union wholesale financial intermediary/fund managing institutional architecture 
is critical for efficient and timely implementation of the LOC. REFP will also offer a structure to tie the 
multiplicity of different existing funds under IFAD projects under one consolidated Umbrella Fund. This 
umbrella  fund  will  manage  the  main  technical  assistance  and  support  funds  including  LOC  under 
REFP. The LOC will be in the form of Rural Refinance Fund under Umbrella Fund which will be used 
for augmenting financial resources of the PFIs for on- lending to target clients and repayments from 
the  PFI  will  be  returned  for  recycling.  The  Fund  will  be  managed  by  a  professional  fund  manager. 
Intermediary  institution  should  bear  the  refinance  risk  and  PFIs  the  credit  risk  for  the  refinance/loan 
provided and, as such, monitor it scrupulously. 
7.2  The  intermediary  body  will  have  to  be  in  charge  of  oversight  and  guidance  of  LOC.  It  will 
strategically  guide  and  control  the  operations  of  the  Fund  Manager/  LOC  Manager.  It  will  be  in 
constant contact with the PMU and report the progress through an MIS. In addition to Fund Manager, 
it  will  also  have  an  Investment/Credit  Committee  which  will  take  all  investment  decisions,  based  on 
LOC Guidelines and decide and approve the loaning operations. The LOC Manager will implement all 
the  required  steps  for  channelling  the  whole  sale  loan  operation  to  eligible  PFIs  engaged  in  the 
lending windows in the project areas. The requirements of the LOC Manager are as follows: 
 
the  capacity  (license,  systems  and  staff )  in  place  to  financially  manage  a  credit  line  and  to 
oversee the whole sale loan operations based on key performance indicators of participating 
FPIs 
  Having a track record in managing credit lines 
  Complying with the documents as per the requirements of the Tribunal Administrative. 
7.3 The LOC Manager will be responsible for the day –to- day management of the LOC. This includes 
advertising,  preparing  the  selection,  disbursement  and  monitoring  of  the  LOC  according  to  pre- 
defined eligibility criteria and respective guidelines. The LOC Manager also ensures alignment of the 
LOC operations with other components of the financial accommodation. The LOC Manager will be in 
charge of the preparatory activities. 
8. Preparatory activities  
8.1  At  the  onset,  an  in-depth  review  of  micro  finance  sector  and  MFIs-  their  institutional  profile, 
products, processes and plans- and their preparedness for lending to the target sector will need to be 
undertaken.  The  study  will  identify  potential  of  PFIs  for  possible  partnerships  in  the  project  and  the 
measures required to strengthen their capacity to utilise the LOC. Based on this study and the criteria 
set for selection of PFI, partner institutions  will be identified. The PFIs will enter into  MOUs with the 
intermediary  institution  specifying  the  rights  and  obligations  of  PFIs  and  the  intermediary  institution. 
They  will  prepare  5  years  Business  Plan  and  Annual  Work  Plans  and  commit  to  accomplish  the 
targets  with  respect  to  outreach,  credit  disbursement  and  other  related  development  services.  A 
training need assessment followed by training, sensitization and orientation of staff for rural delivery; 
familiarization  with    guidelines  for  credit  assessment,    preparation  of  proposals,  sanction, 
disbursement and repayment procedures; and development of loan products, services and processes 
to  meet  the  needs  of  various  categories  of  target  clients  will  be  carried  out.  Model  schemes/project 
profiles  and  process  manuals  can  be  prepared  by  banks  independently  or  in  collaboration  with 
Association of Mozambican Banks/AMOMIF/ Central Bank/identified suitable training institute. 
8.2  Provincial  level  value  chain  assessments  may  be  carried  out  with  specific  reference  to  the 
participants  and  their  credit  requirements.  The  study  would  identify  potential  activities  and 
beneficiaries  and  the  demand  for  credit  along  the  value  chain.  Financial  literacy  campaigns  and 
sensitization  of  clients  about  available 
loan  application  procedures  and 
requirements, will follow. In order to identify bankable clients and ensure smooth flow of credit, service 
providers may be employed along the value chain, for tasks such as handholding farmers through the 
loan  application  process,  providing  assistance  to  micro  enterprises  for making  business  plans,  cash 
flows,  financial  management  and  putting  together  the  documentation  required  for  the  loans,  out 
grower management and linkage and technical assistance to ASCAs. The efficiency and impact of the 
credit line would be enhanced by these initiatives.  
financial  services, 
9. Institutional arrangements: 
88 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
9.1  PFIs  will  be  independent  in  selection  of  clients  and  the  amount  of  loan,  based  on  well  agreed 
framework/ operation manual/project Implementation Manual. The client will be eligible for fresh loans 
on repayment of existing loans. The line of credit will be provided to MFIs and Commercial Banks at a 
pre – determined rate. The PFIs should agree to stipulate reasonable interest rate to clients under the 
project not exceeding the Central Bank’s reference rate. The interest rate will be reviewed annually. 
The  selected  PFIs  should  have  firm  commitment  for  implementation  of  the  project  including  gender 
and  youth  targeting  in  dispensation  of  credit.  ASCAs  supported  may  be  linked  to  any  CB/  MFI.  The 
loan  will  be  given  to  the  specified  banks/MFIs  for  financing  ASCAs  after  they  are  linked  to  the 
bank/MFI. The MFIs should during the course of the project increase the proportion of agriculture and 
agri- business lending in their total credit portfolio and strive to promote savings habit among assisted 
clients 
9.2  The  PFIs  would  be  externally  audited  within  6  months  of  the  closure  of  the  financial  year.  The 
participating  MFIs  should  be  subject  to  statutory  inspection  /offsite  surveillance  of  the  regulator.  All 
PFIs  should  put  in  place  risk  management  systems,  social  performance  management  Standards 
(SPM),  client  protection  mechanism,  disclosure  standards  and  self-regulatory  process.  The  PFIs 
should  comply  with  all  obligations  under  the  regulatory  prescriptions.  PFIs  will  adopt  sound 
governance  and  internal  control  system.  PFIs  should  provide  all  the  other  documents  as  prescribed 
under  PIM.  If  the  PFI  is  permitted  by  the  regulator  to  accept  deposits  from  the  public,  it  should 
undertake a system for improving its own resources and also extend greater financial services to the 
clients.  If  a  PFI  is  not  marginally  complying  with  any  criteria,  it  will  be  given  reasonable  period  to 
comply with the same within the given time-frame. 
9.3 The selection criteria may disqualify some of the institutions. There is therefore a need to provide 
cushion time & developmental support for facilitating their compliance to eligibility criteria. Most MFIs 
suffer from liquidity constraints and high cost  of borrowing  and  do  not have recourse to deposits. In 
that context, a look at alternative solutions such as building linkages between commercial banks and 
Micro  Credit  Operators  (MCO)  can  be  explored.  A  possible  solution  can  be  the  adoption  of  a 
correspondent  banking  system  (BC)  where  MCOs  serve  as  correspondent/agents  of  commercial 
banks  on  a  fee-  based  remuneration.  This  may  have  policy  implications,  but  may  be  worthy  of 
pursuing. The LOC can then be channelled into MCOs for onward lending.  
10. Implementation Manual 
As  a  first  step  of  implementation,  the  important  steps  to  be  taken  by  the  stake  holders  in  the 
implementations process and the conditions to be spelt out in various documents to be evolved under 
the  LOC  arrangement  will  be  outlined  in  a  Project  Implementation  Manual.  The  broad  areas  to  be 
incorporated in the Manual are stated below: 
10.1 Manual Coverage 
  Objectives  of  Line  of  credit  ,Scope  of  the  package-  The  broad  range  of  activities  and 
beneficiaries   
  Broad terms and conditions of LOC 
  Selection of PFIs- eligibility criteria-Due diligence process-selection Procedure 
 
Institutional and Business Development Plan of PFIs- Aspects to  be covered 
  Annual  Work Plan and Budget of PFIs- Areas and preparation Process 
  Agreement between Intermediary Institution and the PMU-contents  
  Agreement between PFIs and Intermediary Institution –coverage 
  Scrutiny Process at Intermediary Institution-Role of LOC Manager- Checklist 
  Accounts Maintenance-  separate Registers  and folio 
  Sanction of Loans to beneficiaries- Procedure , focus and safeguards 
  Documentation at Intermediary Institution and PFIs 
  Withdrawal Procedure- Scrutiny of Application 
  Monitoring the end use of credit- Recovery of loans 
  Prudential norms – Asset classification, provisioning norms , Income recognition 
  Risk Management  System 
89 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
10.2  Role Expectations from PFIs: 
  The  PFIs  will  prepare  5  years’  Business  Plan  and  Annual Work  Plan  and  Budget,  reflecting 
progress  under  outreach,  credit  disbursement,  recovery,  savings  and  other  related 
development services in the prescribed format and submit to Intermediary agency as per the 
time-lines.  
  The  PFIs  should  be  subject  to  statutory  inspection  /offsite  surveillance  of  the  regulator.  The 
PFIs should comply with all obligations under the regulatory prescriptions including prudential 
norms. 
  The PFIs would be externally audited within 6 months of the closure of the financial year.  
  The  PFIs  should  have  put  in  place  risk  management  systems,  social  performance 
management  Standards  (SPM),  client  protection  mechanism,  disclosure  standards  and  self-
regulatory process. It will adopt sound governance and internal control system.  
  PFIs should maintain separate books of accounts and registers/ledger folio for the REFP as 
prescribed and generate data for the purpose of reporting periodically. 
  PFIs should strive to promote savings habit among assisted clients. If the PFI is permitted by 
the  regulator  to  accept  deposits  from  the  public,  it  should  mobilize  savings  for  long  term 
sustainability and also extend greater % of loan to the client from its internal resources. 
  The PFI should during the course of the project increase the proportion of agriculture lending 
in their total credit portfolio.  
  The PFIs should have firm commitment for implementation of the project including gender and 
youth targeting in dispensation of credit. 
  The loan may be given to the specified banks/MFIs for financing ASCAs after they are linked 
to the bank/MFI. The norms for sanction of group loans, micro lending process, appraisal of 
group loans, instalments, etc., should be evolved. The Micro finance best practices should be 
kept in view.  
  PFI  will  be  independent  in  selection  of  clients  and  fixing  up  of  the  amount  of  loan,  grace 
period, instalment ,due date of repayment , borrower’ s  margin, etc based on appraisal of the 
borrower(credit history checking with Credit Reference ) and his business plan/loan proposal 
and activity, cash flow, seasonality, etc.    
  The  PFIs  should  agree  to  stipulate  reasonable  interest  rate  to  clients  under  the  project  not 
exceeding the Central Bank’s reference rate. There should be transparency in calculation of 
interest rate at PFI level. 
  PFIs should bear the credit risk for the loan provided and, as such, monitor it scrupulously. It 
should put in place sound loan tracking and NPA management system. 
  PFIs will support proposals, which are viable, credit-worthy and bankable. 
10.3  Terms and Conditions 
  PFIs will be selected from among commercial banks and MFIs by PMU through an objective 
selection  criteria  and  process.  The  conditions  should  be  evolved  after  thorough  study  of 
CBs/MFIs.   The project should aim at selecting strong, effective and efficient institutions. 
  The  eligibility  for  selecting  PFIs  would  include,  inter-alia,  the  following  stipulations:    annual 
recovery  rate,  OSR  ,    at  least  3  years’  operation,  PAR,  CRAR  (as  stipulated  by  Bank  of 
Mozambique  from  time  to  time),  projected  business/outreach,    maintaining  audited  book  of 
accounts, relevant financial statements and reliable MIS- Financial Management Accounting 
Package.   
 
If a PFI is not marginally complying with any criteria, it will give be given reasonable period to 
comply  with  the  same  within  the  given  time-frame.  Developmental  support  should  be 
extended  under  the  project  for  its  graduation,  transformation  and  upgradation  during  the 
project period. (It is assumed that in the first year the PFIs complying with eligibility criteria 
will  be  less.  The  same  would  increase  progressively  after  institutional  building  measures 
envisaged under the project). 
90 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
for 
  Rate  of  interest  to  PFIs  should  pre-determine.  It  will  depend  on  domestic  interest  rate  and 
inter-bank lending rate. It should not be less than the cost of mobilising savings (to provide 
incentive 
interest  on 
savings/deposits.  It  should  also  take  into  consideration  the  margin  of  the  intermediary 
agency.  The  interest  rate  will  be  reviewed  annually  and  aligned  with  the  prevailing  interest 
rate  structure.  Payment  of  instalments  of  interest-half  yearly/annually  may  have  to  be 
mentioned. 
to  mobilise  savings), 
institution 
including 
financial 
the 
  The period of loan disbursement to Financial Institutions may be evolved after a consultation 
process with GoM. It could be adjusted, based on the liquidity requirements of the bank and 
tapered towards the concluding year of the project. 
  Loan  maturity  period  will  be  clearly  specified,  including  the  proposed  grace  period  in  the 
sanction. 
  The grace period for payment of principal instalments will be stipulated. Interest instalments 
would normally commence from the first year of loan. 
  Advance repayments and their treatment will be specified 
 
In  case  of  non-compliance  with  agreed  terms  and  conditions,  a  penalty  clause  would  be 
added  which  may  include  disqualification  of  the  financial  Institution  until  terms  are  met  or 
remedial measures taken by the institution. 
  Documentation  requirements  such  as 
loan  agreement, 
financial  statements,  Board 
Resolution, Demand Promissory Note for the loan amount, etc., will be specified. 
  The minimum eligibility standards for drawing instalments, progress in implementation of the 
LOC  schemes,  loan  utilisation  certificate  for  previous  instalments,  progress  reports,  etc.  to 
be produced by the Financial Institution. 
10.4  Role expectations from Intermediary Institution 
  The Intermediary Institution will be entrusted  with managing the Refinance Revolving Fund 
by  putting  in  place  an  efficient  fund  management  system  that  would  enable  judicious 
deployment of funds for the project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It would be entrusted with the responsibility for selecting the participating financial institutions 
through objective selection criteria. 
It will execute an agreement with PFIs for spelling out mutual rights and obligations. 
It will evolve all formalities for sanctioning and disbursement of loans. 
It will develop checklists /formats for scrutiny of the PFI’s Plan and Budget, appraisal of loan 
proposals and reporting requirements. 
It should evolve strong monitoring and evaluation and risk management systems and put in 
place  onsite  and  offsite  monitoring  of  the  PFIs  and  assisted  clients  to  ensure  quality  of 
feedback and mid- term corrections. 
It  will  maintain  a  database  on  financial  institutions,  particularly  microfinance  and  MFIs  and 
other participating institutions, through a robust MIS system and enhanced IT capabilities. 
It  should  develop  its  HR  capabilities  by  placement  of  suitable  professional  person(s) 
specialised  in  fund  management,  client  management,  financial  and  technical  appraisal  of 
PFIs’ proposals for credit/grant, Monitoring and evaluation, database management, etc. 
 
It should bear refinance risk.  
Footnote 
It is understood from the PDR that non- farm MSMEs not related to agriculture value chains are also 
being covered. In case, the same are required to be added, the following may be considered for 
inclusion: 
91 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
“It  is  estimated  that  2.1  million  (Finscope  14)  or  15%  of  adult  Mozambicans  are  engaged  in 
Microenterprises. As per Finscope 2012, more than 87% of them are unregistered. A large proportion 
of those engaged in micro enterprises (49%) have more than one source of income, largely because 
of  households  taking  up  additional  activities  to  make  their  ends  meet.  Individual  entrepreneurs  form 
92.7% of the micro enterprises. As 87 % of the MSMEs are located in rural areas, it is possible that 
farmer households are engaged in NFS micro enterprises as a means of earning additional income. 
This income could well be used for investments in agriculture as well. Therefore, it may be synergistic 
to include rural micro enterprises engaged in non- farm activities for financing under LOC.  Individual 
and  micro  enterprises-  these  enterprises  could  include  producers  of  charcoal,  firewood,  alcoholic 
beverages,  handicrafts,  tailors,  builders,  tinsmiths,  carpenters  etc.  that  flourish  in  the  rural  areas 
alongside agriculture. 
Funding  for  the  NFS  individual  and  micro  enterprises  can  be  routed  through  any  of  the  three  sub-
components:  Sub  Component  1  can  provide  working  capital  loans;  Sub-Component  2  can  provide 
both investment and working capital loans; or these enterprises can take the ASCA route.” 
92 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Component 2:  Capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 
Component overview 
Component  2  will  make  available  all  necessary  support  for  capacity  development  at  the  level  of 
financial institutions active in rural areas, and of end users of rural financial services, micro and small 
entrepreneurs, especially women and youth, and also small farmers and agricultural producers, Sub-
component 2.1. Offers a comprehensive capacity development menu AD. 
Sub-component 2.1. Establishment of adapted financial instruments for rural entrepreneurship  
The subcomponent will consist of the following set of activities: 
A.  Institutional and technical  capacity building of  financial  service intermediaries (commercial 
banks,  ASCAs,  MFIs,  credit-only  MFIs,  credit  cooperatives,  etc.).  On  top  of  the  support  required  to 
enhance the mobility of the finance providers in reach remote villages, the program would support soft 
interventions  such  as  skill  upgrading,  product  development  and  innovations  which  will  equip  the 
finance  providers  to  deliver  financial  services  that  match  the  needs  of  the  rural  poor  entrepreneurs 
and  MSEs.    The  specific  activities  supported  by  the  project  include:  (i)  conduct  training  need 
assessment; (ii) produce the training material and deliver 20 training to finance providers (iii) develop 
client-cantered  financial  products  for  banks,  MFIs,  credit-only  institutions,  etc.;  (iv)  organize 
international 2  exposure visits to  policymakers and CEOs of finance providers;  and (v)  enhance  the 
mobility  of  formal  finance  providers  by  providing  100  motorcycles  to  reach  out  remote  districts  and 
villages.  The  project  proposes  outsourcing  a  twinning  partner  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of  the 
capacity building support to financial institutions.  
The  dispersed  settlement  pattern  of  rural  communities  and  the  underdeveloped  infrastructure  and 
public  transport  system  in  Mozambique  constrains  the  movement  of  the  staff  of  formal  finance 
providers  from  opening  branches  in  remote  district  or  remote  villages  within  a  district.  This  will  also 
push the transportation cost of the financial institutions and hinder their mobility. Although innovative 
approaches  such  as  agency  banking  or  digital  finance  are  expected  to  address  the  problem  related 
with  serving  the  remote  areas  and  clients  in  the  long-run,  the  project  proposes  to  provide  100 
motorcycles to encourage the formal finance providers to move into remote districts. The motorcycles 
will  be  provided  in  PY2,  PY3  and  PY4  to  selected  formal  financial  institutions  opening  branches  to 
serve rural entrepreneurs and MSEs in remote areas. 
Strengthening  ASCAs.  ASCAs, managed and owned by members themselves, have proved  in the 
preceding  IFAD  and  AfDB  projects  that  they  are  one  of  the  sustainable  financial  delivery  models  in 
rural  Mozambique.  However,  they  have  very  limited  capacity  to  meet  the  growing  needs  of  their 
members.  The  existing  ASCAs  in  Mozambique  require  a  capacity  building  support  to  improve  their 
accounting and bookkeeping practices, credit analysis, loan collection performance, governance and 
management,  and  saving  mobilization.  The  project  would  strengthen  5,000  ASCAs  by  providing  the 
following support: (ii) linking 5,000 ASCAs to the formal financial institutions to access large loan and 
other innovative financial products; (ii) developing financial products that meet the needs of ASCAs; 
(iii)  develop  a  simplified  (easy-to-use,  cost-effective)  IT  supported  MIS  system  to  improve  their 
performance and develop a transparent reporting system; and (iv) organize 20 exposure visit among 
the  ASCAs.  Capacity  building  of  ASCAS  will  be  provided  through  a  technical  assistance  package 
provided  by  the  project.  Capacity  building  interventions  will  be  delivered  using  a  tiered  approach  to 
ensure  that  the  interventions  are  relevant  and  appropriate  to  ASCAs  at  the  different  levels  of 
development. The PMU will decide on the modalities of delivery of the capacity building services (e.g. 
through  outsourced  technical  service  providers  or  through  use  of  internal  resources).  However,  the 
service  provider  must  have  experience  and  requisite  skills  to  undertake  capacity  building  support. 
Procurement of the services should comply with IFAD procurement guidelines.   
C.  Establishing  and  strengthening  the  Union  of  ASCAs.  In  the  absence  of  a  permanent 
government institution to establish new and strengthen existing ASCAs in Mozambique, the formation 
of ASCAs Unions is a key intervention to ensure the sustainability of ASCA activities after the closure 
of  the  project.  The  project  will  support  the  establishment  of  district  unions  of  ASCAs  which  will  be 
93 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
umbrella bodies for  ASCAs operating in the  various  districts.  Promotion and establishment of ASCA 
Unions  will  be  undertaken  by  FARE.  The  support  of  the  project  include:  (i)  hiring  4  competent 
technical staff; (ii) allocating limited recurrent budget; (iii) develop various manuals and strategic plan; 
(iv) train the staff; (v) avail logistical support such as office equipment, desktops and laptops, printers, 
fax machine, photocopy machine, etc. (vi) cover administrative costs such as office rent, utilities, etc. 
(vii) provide one vehicle (4WD) to enhance mobility; (viii) provide resources to conduct 3 workshops or 
conferences;  and  (ix)  follow  up,  monitoring  and  supervision  of  ASCAs.  A  twinning  partner  would 
facilitate the formation of the Union during the first 12 months. However, assuming that the Union will 
be self-sustaining in the future, the project will only provide technical assistance only for the first three 
years.  
D. Build a database of MFI performance and promote social performance management through 
Mozambican  Association  of  MFIs  (AMOMIF):    The  Mozambican  Association  of  MFIs  (AMOMIF) 
was  established  in  2007  to  support  the  development  of  microfinance  in  the  country.  In  spite  of  its 
limited  resource  base,  the  association  has  been  active  in  policy  advocacy  and  provided  limited 
training to its 44 members. If properly supported by members, donors and development partners, until 
it reaches the matured phase, it has significant potential to serve as the voice of microfinance sector 
and as a centre of excellence to train other Mozambique microfinance stakeholders. The project will 
support  the  association  by:  (i)  providing  a  budget  for  three  training  sessions  in  social  performance 
management  of  MFIs  starting  in  PY2;  and  (ii)  covering  a  five-year  salary  of  the  performance 
monitoring  program  officer  starting  PY2.  The  performance  monitoring  program  officer  of  the 
association is expected to report the outreach and performance of members and non-member MFIs to 
FARE, the national PMU, and other stakeholders on regular basis.  
E.  Supporting  the  transformation  of  FARE.    The  Government  intends  to  transform  FARE  into  a 
sound  and  sustainable  financial  institution  in  order  to  effectively  deliver  its  mandate  of  providing 
financial  services  to  private  sector  banks,  micro-banks  and  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFIs).  The 
support  will  enable  FARE  to  expand  their  services  to  rural  areas  of  Mozambique  and  pilot  and 
mainstream new innovative approaches in rural finance and local/regional development.  The project 
will  provide  technical  and  institutional  support  to  make  FARE  a  self-sustained  and  autonomous 
financial  entity  without  financial  support  from  external  sources.  The  additional  support  of  the  project 
include:  (i)  conducting  a  detailed  study  to  transform  FARE  and  collect  the  loans  disbursed  by  the 
preceding projects: (ii) provide institutional and technical assistance to develop an IT system to track 
and  follow  up  the  loans  disbursement  of  FARE  and  the  skill  development  in  use  of  ICT  in  its  entire 
work  processes;  (iii)  conduct  annual  workshops  where  all  service  providers  and  stakeholders  could 
exchange views and chart the way forward; (iv) training the staff; and (v) knowledge management and 
documentation.  The  project  has  huge  potential  in  providing  learning  and  exchange  of  learning  and 
internalization.  Various  studies  will  be  undertaken  which  will  contribute  to  the  FARE’s  knowledge 
management function. 
F. Establishing and strengthening the "Development Finance Coordination" secretariat under 
the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance  is  one  of  the  key 
players in implementing Mozambique's National Financial Inclusion Strategy. The project will seek to 
strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  ministry  to  develop  and  monitor  the  implementation  of  rural  finance 
policies.  The  project  will  support  the  following  activities  (i)  Policy  studies  to  identify  policy  gaps  and 
emerging issues which require policy interventions (ii) Training of staff to improve their knowledge and 
skills in formulation and implementation of rural finance policies (iii) Knowledge Management system 
on  rural  finance  (iv)organizing  workshops  and  conferences  on  rural  finance.  The  project  will  also 
support  institutional  strengthening  activities  to  enable  the  ministry  to  discharge  its  mandate  of, 
promoting  rural  and  development  finance.  The  project  proposes  supporting  the  formation  and 
strengthening  of  the  secretariat  by  (i)  hiring  4  competent  technical  staff;  (ii)  providing  the  recurrent 
budget;  (iii)  developing  various  manuals  and  strategic  plan;  (iv)  training  the  staff;  (v)  providing 
logistical  support  such  as  office  equipment,  desktops  and  laptops,  printers,  fax  machine,  photocopy 
machine, etc. (vi) cover administrative costs such as office rent, utilities, etc. (vii) provide one vehicle 
(4WD) to enhance mobility.  
G.  Supporting  the  Bank  of  Mozambique  to  assist  the  transformation  of  MFIs  and  promote 
financial literacy and consumer protection The microfinance sector in Mozambique is at its infancy 
94 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
stage, where the growth of outreach is directly related with donor and government support. Although 
the current regulatory framework is not a stumbling block to expand microfinance activities, there is a 
need for regulators to proactively support and guide the MFIs to transform themselves from credit-led 
institutions  to  saving-led  institutions.  Continued  expansion  and  growth  with  sound  operational  and 
financial  disciplines  would  require  changing  the  current  policy  framework,  mind-set  of  policymakers 
and finance providers, and a paradigm on how to promote rural finance in Mozambique. This requires 
interventions, particularly the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Bank of Mozambique. On the 
other hand, the third pillar of Mozambique's National Financial Inclusion Strategy focuses on ensuring 
that financial consumers are informed, knowledgeable and protected. To this end, there is a need to 
improve the levels of financial literacy, information for the general public and protection of existing and 
incoming  financial  consumers.  The  improvement  of  supervision  and  regulation  of  banks,  MFIs  and 
others is directly related with consumer protection.  
The  project  proposes  to  support  Bank  of  Mozambique  in  building  the  capacity  of  microfinance 
regulation and supervision department and promoting financial literacy and consumer protection in the 
country. The specific interventions include: (i) provide 5 training courses to the staff of the regulation 
and  supervision  department  for microfinance;  (ii)  organize  two  international  exposure  visits  in  Africa 
and  Asia  to  the  policymakers  and  senior  staff  of  the  central  bank  and  Ministry  of  Economy  and 
Finance  to  understand  and  appreciate  the  triple  bottom  line  of  the  microfinance  sector  (financial, 
social and environmental); (iii) undertake a study to identify the challenges of MFI  growth (why MFIs 
are  shying  away  from  mobilizing  savings)  and  how  to  address  the  financial  needs  of  rural 
entrepreneurs  and  MSEs  in  Mozambique;  and  (iv)  promoting  the  financial  literacy  and  consumer 
protection.  The  project  will  finance  a  study  in  PY1  to  identify  the  challenges  and  propose  specific 
activities  to  be  undertaken  by  different  stakeholders  to  promote  financial  literacy  and  consumer 
protection. Since the financial literacy and consumer protection interventions are championed by the 
Bank of Mozambique, the bank is expected to disseminate the financial capability information for the 
target  groups  through  printed  and  non-printed  media  such  as  pamphlets,  brochures,  films,  with  the 
help of suitable intermediaries and its own staff and website in various languages through the support 
of this project. Moreover, the innovative financial literacy and consumer protection project proposals 
can be submitted, that will be reviewed and approved committee formed by the Bank of Mozambique 
and Ministry of Economy and Finance to access the resources earmarked for this activity.  
Detailed implementation provisions for the establishment of an ASCA Union.   
Establishing and strengthening the Union of ASCAs. Although the rural finance support program 
IFAD  in  Mozambique  was  successful  in  establishing  1,937  ASCAs  (33,952  members  and  women 
representing  women  representing  58%),  the  major  weaknesses  of  the  approach,  according  to  PCR 
(2014), was the sustainability issue, particularly the challenges to monitor groups of this kind when no 
service  provider  follows  up.  To  this  end,  the  project  will  support  the  consolidation  of  ASCAs  into 
ASCAs Unions. The ASCA Unions are n umbrella bodies for ASCAs which will represent the interests 
of members. Experience from Kenya, Malawi, Ghana and Cameroun has shown that SACCO Unions 
play an important role in strengthening the performance of credit cooperatives. 
Rationale for Consolidation of ASCAs 
When ASCAs operate in an isolated and fragmented manner, they often face challenges in delivering 
services  to  members  including:  (i)  excess  liquidity  for  the  larger  and  better  performing  ASCAs  (ii) 
Liquidity gaps for the smaller ASCAs (iii) Lack of a common platform to represent the interests of the 
subsector  (iv)  High  costs  of  adoption  of  infrastructure  /technology  (v)  Lack  of  a  platform  for  peer 
learning  and  knowledge  management  and  weak  mainstreaming  of  the  ASCAs  into  the  financial 
system. 
To  overcome  these  challenges  and  strengthen  the  performance  of  the  ASCA  subsector  in 
Mozambique, the project will support the consolidation of ASCAs into district Unions Consolidation will 
enhance efficiency by promoting shared infrastructure/technology, enhancing discipline in the ASCAs 
through  promoting  standard  policies,  procedures  manuals,  and  risk  management  policies  and 
practices, providing harmonized training and capacity building to promote long-term sustainability and 
financial independence of ASCAs. .Unions will also increasing the capacity of ASCAs to increase their 
loan  capital  because  of  increased  access  to  loans  from  the  Union  as  well  as  improved  access  to 
payment system and interbank services. 
95 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Diagram 1: Consolidation of ASCAs 
District Union 
of ASCAs 
District Union 
of ASCAs 
ASCA 
ASCA 
ASCA 
ASCA 
ASCA 
ASCA 
As  an  umbrella  body  representing  the  interests  of  members,  the  Union  will  deliver  the  following 
services to its members: 
  Advocacy: Representing member ASCAs on vital decision making institutions  and serves as 
the voice of ASCAs in the country and ensuring that the ASCA subsector is mainstreamed into 
the financial sector 
  Expand ASCA's access to a greater volume of financial resources on better terms  
  Financial Intermediation where member ASCAs which have excess liquidity can save with the 
Union which intermediates the savings to lend to ASCA members with liquidity constraints 
  Lender of last resort for members in financial distress 
  Provide a wide range of capacity building services to  ASCAs  
  Standardization of financial aspects and accounting system of ASCAs 
  Establish performance standards and indicators for ASCAs 
  Provision of shared infrastructure (e.g. ATMS, clearing house services, audit services etc.)  
  Provision of a self –regulatory framework for the industry  
  Collect and disseminate information, including best practices 
  Promotion and marketing of ASCA services through printed and non-printed media 
  Any other support systems that would lead to a vibrant and sustainable MFI sector 
SUSTAINABILITY OF FOR PROFIT ASCA UNIONS 
ASCA unions are member owned and member governed financial institutions and  therefore member 
investments  create  long  term  stability  and  is  key  to  financing  future  development/expansion, 
Sustainability of the ASCAs will be influenced by  (i) Having a strong membership base (ii) Increased 
savings  from  member  ASCAs  (iii)  Increased  share  capital  from  members  (iii)  Income  from  loans 
disbursed  to  members  (iv)  Income  from  non-financial  services  (iv)  Transaction  fees  from  shared 
infrastructure  (v)  Investment  income  ((vi)  achieving  and  maintain  operational  efficiency  (viii)  Strong 
Governance systems 
96 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
The technical assistance package provided for establishment and strengthening of the for-profit ASCA 
Unions  will  focus  on  promoting  sustainability  of  the  ASCA  unions  through  (i)  Product  development: 
ASCA Unions will be supported to develop more savings and loan products which meet the needs of 
the members. ASCA Unions will strive to become one stop shop for the financial needs (ii) encourage 
members to invest in the Union by buying shares. This will provide the Unions with additional capital 
which can be used for on-lending to members. The Unions can also invest surplus capital in order to 
earn returns (iii) Invest in providing shared infrastructure (e.g. ATMS) and shared services (e.g. audit, 
legal, training etc.) to members in order to earn additional income from transaction fees charged for 
those  services  (iv)  Operational  efficiency  will  be  achieved  through  tracking  and  controlling  costs  as 
well  as  establishment  of  strong  operating  systems.  Union  staff  and  Board  of  management  will  be 
trained  on  use  of  tools  to  monitor  the  performance  of  the  Unions  (e.g.  PEARLS  tool  which  tracks 
various performance ratios). (v) Strong Governance will be achieved through sensitization and training 
of members and Board of management. 
FARE  will provide technical support  to  establish and  strengthen the  Union for 12 months. However, 
the capacity building support of the project to the Union would be for three years, where it is expected 
to  be  sustainable  thereafter.    Once  the  Union  is  setup,  the  project  will  provide  technical  services, 
training  and  other  logistic  to  strengthen  and  make  it  sustainable.  Operational,  administrative  and 
financial  manuals  will  be  prepared  through  the  support  of  the  project  to  define  governance  and 
management issues among members, board of directors, management, staff and other stakeholders 
itself  need  will  be  developed  through  the  twinning  arrangement.  Table:  12  months  roadmap  to 
establish and strengthen the Union of ASCAs Unions. 
No. 
1 
Activities 
Formation of a taskforce to establish the Union 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11  
12 
Defining the by-law of the Union 
Developing  operational, 
manual 
Recruitment of the staff 
financial  and  administrative 
furniture,  equipment, 
Logistics:  renting  office,  office 
desktops, laptops, photocopy and fax machines, etc 
A vehicle to enhance the mobility of the staff 
Develop the five year strategic plan and an annual plan 
Conduct  the  general  assembly  to  appoint  the  11  board 
members,  approve  the  strategic  plan  and  the  by-laws  of 
the Union (one ASCA per district represented) 
Official celebration of the establishment of the Union 
various  manuals  and 
Developing 
sustainability strategy of the Union 
Training the staff of the union 
Exposure  visits  for  the  staff  and  board  members  of  the 
Union 
financial 
the 
selected 
Responsible institution 
FARE, 
Ministry of agriculture,  
 taskforce members 
 FARE 
ASCAS, 
Members of the  of the taskforce 
and FARE 
FARE 
FARE 
FARE 
FARE and ASCA members 
Union  staff,  members,  board  of 
directors, taskforce 
Union staff and FARE 
FARE 
FARE 
Provision of Technical assistance: The project will provide a technical assistance package in order to 
expeditiously close the institutional capacity gap of finance providers, ASCA Union,  and FARE,. .  
Objective:  The  main  task  of  the  technical  assistance  package  is  to  make  available  continuing 
expertise to implement the diverse activities of the project by contracting technical providers or from 
its in-house resources. This is expected to improve quality of technical service providers and ensure 
timely implementation.   
97 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Process: The entity to be selected as a technical service provider for the project would be a suitable 
resource  organization  that  has  the  knowledge  base  and  operational  experience  of  solving  problems 
related with financing rural entrepreneurs and MSEs and delivery of inclusive finance through various 
channels,  including  ASCAs.  The  technical  service  provider  would  place  expert/experts  on  long  term 
and short term basis within FARE in accordance with its requirements. The compensation to the TSP 
would be on annual basis for providing a pre-determined number of man days of expertise.  However, 
the expertise required from the TSP could be varied according to the needs of the project. This could 
be adjusted as per the approved annual work plans by the key stakeholders.  
Selection  norms:  The  TSP  should  have  knowledge  and  experience  of  working  in  field  of  research, 
training and consulting for a period of at least five  years in a developing country.  It should have the 
experience  of  working  on  microfinance  projects  relating  to  product  design,  social  performance 
(including  community-based 
management,  governance,  business  models 
organizations such as ASCAs), training to finance providers at various levels and building the capacity 
of  an  Union  organization.  Although  the  key  role  of  the  TSP  is  to  coordinate  the  delivery  of  the  TA 
providers in the project, it is also expected to have adequate number of core-professionals (in-house) 
in the areas related with inclusive finance delivery, who would be placed at National PMU, FARE or 
the Union on  long-term or short-term basis. The TSP is also  expected  to train  local staff (preferably 
through TOT) to develop competence in different core microfinance modules. The TSP, a reputable 
international  technical  service  provider  in  microfinance,  would  be  selected  by  PMU  through  a 
competitive process. The selection of the partner for the twinning arrangement would be implemented 
through a transparent competitive bidding process.  
in  microfinance 
Terms  of  reference  for  the  TSP  :  The  partner  is  would  conduct  training  needs  assessment  of 
financial  service  providers,  including  ASCAs,  develop  the  curriculum,  produce  the  training  material 
and deliver training courses to finance service providers; provide capacity building support during and 
after the formation of the  Union of  ASCAs, coordinate the high-level international exposure visits to 
policymakers  and  CEOs  of  formal  finance  providers;  carrying  out  the  studies  such  as  baseline  and 
impact studies, product development to diversify the demand-driven financial product, linking ASCAs 
to  formal  finance  providers;  support  the  knowledge  management  events  such  as  conferences, 
workshops, and seminars.  
Payment modality for the Technical Service Provider: The technical service provider not expected 
to  have  one  single  contract  to  undertake  all  technical  assistance  required  in  the  project  during  the 
seven  years.  However,  for  coordinating  the  activities  of  the  technical  service  providers  in  various 
areas,  the  project  will  pay  10%  of  the  outsourced  activities  facilitated  by  the  TSP  which  is  about 
330,700 USD over three years. The TSP is expected to place a 12 man months TA at FARE, during 
the  first  year  of  the  project  and  short-term  TAs.    Other  technical  providers  outsourced  for  specific 
activities  should  have  contracts  with  the  national  PMU,  not  with  the  TSP.  However,  the  technical 
partner is expected to ensure the quality of the technical service providers and recommends the final 
payments for other outsourced services.   
Training  courses  for  formal  finance  providers:  Training  support  would  focus  on  building  the 
finance providers’ competency and skills. Since training in this project is delivered through  technical 
service  providers  from  the private  sector,  training  of  trainer  (TOT)  approach  will  have  relatively  high 
potential  to  build  the  in-house  training  capacity  of  the  institutions.  The  training  support  involves 
conducting  training  needs  assessment,  developing  the  curriculum  and  course  design,  producing  the 
training  material,  and  offering  TOT  and  retail  training.  Out  of  the  total  20  microfinance  training 
proposed in the project, 10 would be generic training (5 TOTs and 5 retail training courses) and the 
remaining  10  would  be  identified  and  prioritized  through  the  training  need  assessment.  The  ten 
generic training courses supported by the project include:   
- Corporate governance and management 
- Strategic planning and development 
- Risk management, financial and non-financial 
- Sound performance review mechanism to ensure currency 
- Mainstreaming gender and increasing the participation of women  
98 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
- Social performance management (SPM) practices in the sector 
- Product development, diversification and process refinement 
- Skills for saving product development and saving mobilization  
- Delivering Islamic finance  
- Financial literacy to customers= 
Availing  long-term  TA  to  implement  the  capacity  building  interventions:  The  task  of  the  long-
term  TA  is  to  coordinate  the  training  to  formal  finance  providers,  including  quality  assurance  in  the 
training  needs  assessment  and  developing  training  modules.  The  proposed  12  months  TA  to  be 
available by the  TSP  is expected to develop training  master plan (comprehensive training  plan) and 
coordinate  the  implementation  of  the  TOT  and  retail  training.  The  long-term  technical  assistance 
provider  would  take  the  responsibility  of  establishing  and  strengthening  the  ASCAs  Union  within  12 
months framework. However, depending on the objective conditions on the ground, the 12 months TA 
could be distributed or provided in different phases.  
Exposure  visits:  The  project  proposes  to  support  two  types  of  exposure  visits  with  the  objective  of 
learning  from  the  good  practices  in  microfinance  activities  outside  or  within  Mozambique.  Two 
international exposure visits will be organized/facilitated by the TSP for government policymakers and 
CEOs  formal  finance  providers  during  the  second  year  of  the  project.  These  visits  are  expected  to 
help policymakers and CEOs learn from international best practices, think outside the box and assist 
the project in implementing its activities. On the other hand, in addition to the training support of the 
program,  ASCAs  will  be  exposed  to  good  practices  within  themselves  (such  as  saving  mobilization, 
peer  pressure,  saving  and  loan  products,  economic  opportunities,  etc.)  that  can  be  replicated.  The 
program  will  support  a  3-day  exposure  visit  (within  or  outside  the  District  or  region)  for  20  ASCAs 
within 3 years framework (PY3, PY4 and PY5). Those who participated in the visits will be required to 
document  and  share  their  experiences  from  the  exposure  to  other  ASCAs  within  their  vicinity.  The 
exposure visits among ASCAs are expected to be facilitated by the Union.  
A  study  to  link  ASCAs  with  formal  finance  providers:  Informal  financial  services  and  easily 
convertible "traditional" investments are accessed by 28% of the adult population in Mozambique. In 
terms  of  financial  inclusion  and  potential  expansion,  groups  and  associations  play  an  important  role 
for  all  elements  of  the  society,  including  the  wealthy  even  more  than  the  poor  (Finmark  Trust, 
FinScope study 2014). Generally,  with the oblivious  exception of groups with family accounts, these 
informal  groups  have  no  linkage  to  the  formal  banking  system.  According  to  the  project  completion 
report  (PCR)  of  rural  finance  programs  by  AfDF  and  IFAD,  ASCAs  are  found  to  be  the  most 
appropriate  financial  service  providers,  particularly  for  those  adult  entrepreneurs  in  remote  areas. 
ASCAs have the potential to improve poverty reduction, food security and social inclusion of the more 
vulnerable  groups  in  a  village  community;  they  can  offer  a  pathway  for  women  socio-economic 
empowerment (PCR of IFAD 2014). There is a need to link ASCAs to formal finance providers either 
for safekeeping purpose or for graduating the entrepreneurial members ASCAs to access larger loans 
from banks of MFIs.  
The  PCR  of  IFAD  (2014)  and  AfDB  (2013)  show  that  ASCAs  in  Mozambique  are  very  important 
financial instrument in promoting loan, savings and other financial services in rural Areas. The number 
of ASCA members requiring loan services has been showing an  increasing trend. The high  inflation 
rate  in  the  country  has  also  contributed  to  the  significant  increase  in  the  average  loan  size  and  the 
volume  of  loan  required  by  poor  rural  entrepreneurs  and  MSEs.  Although  the  project  has  a  line  of 
credit  as  an  incentive  to  increase  outreach  in  the  short-run,  there  is  a  need  to  link  the  ASCAs  with 
formal  finance  providers,  at  the  same  time  improve  the  saving  culture  of  ASCA  members.  In  other 
words, since the ASCAs have limited capacity to provide loans from their own sources, particularly in 
the short-term, there is a dire need to link them to commercial banks and MFIs. The objectives of the 
study  are:  to  review  best  practices  in  the  rest  of  the  world  on  how  to  link  ASCAs  with  commercial 
banks  and  MFIs;  identify  innovation  approaches  to  link  ASCAs  with  commercial  banks  and  MFIs; 
examine  the  legal  and  regulatory  challenges  to  implement  the  linkage  approach;  and  propose  clear 
recommendation and roadmap on how to implement the linkage model in Mozambique.  
99 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
TA  to  develop  financial  products  for  inclusive  finance  providers,  including  ASCAs:  It  is 
generally recognized that one of the principal barriers to economic growth and reasons for persistent 
poverty is the exclusion of the vast majority of the population to appropriate financial service provision. 
Emphasis  is  placed  on  appropriateness,  as  financial  services  needs  vary  considerably  between  the 
poorest and wealthier segments of the population. The formal finance providers and ASCAs lack the 
institutional  capacity  and  the  skills  to  develop  appropriate  loan,  saving,  and  other  financial  products 
that  matches  the  needs  of members/clients.  For  example,  there  are  very  limited  studies  to  examine 
the shortcomings of the existing saving products and how the saving behaviour of members of ASCAs 
and clients of formal finance providers is changing. Before developing the saving products, there is a 
need  to  study  how  saving  behaviour  is  linked  to  financial  literacy  and  educational  level,  money 
management skills, household income, culture and tradition, trust on the finance providers, exposure 
to banks and other finance providers, gender, settlement type, etc. The program proposes supporting 
ASCAs in developing financial services such as saving, loans and other products that are tailored to 
the needs of poor rural entrepreneurs and MSEs in rural areas. To this end, the program will provide a 
technical assistance to help the formal finance providers and ASCAs to develop the right products for 
the direct beneficiaries of the project in PY1.  
Develop a simple, cost effective and easy to understand IT supported MIS for ASCAs: given the 
limited capacity of ASCAs in Mozambique, in adequate accounting and reporting system and tracking 
loans  are  serious  challenges  of  the  associations.  The  project  proposes  supporting  the  ASCAS  by 
developing an IT supported MIS that is compatible and capable to be upgraded with growing volume 
of  transactions  and  introduction  of  new  products  of  the  associations.  It  is  also  expected  to  produce 
various  reports  to  be  used  by  management  and  regulators  such  as  the  Bank  of  Mozambique. 
However, the MIS  is expected to be simple, cost effective and easy to understand the  loan tracking 
and  accounting  for  ASCAs.  It  should  generate  data  on  the  performance  indicators  of  ASCAs.  The 
project would provide technical assistance or a consultant for six months during PY1 to develop the IT 
supported MIS for ASCAs.  
A study to mainstream the activities of ASCAs to address the needs of women:  Women in rural 
Mozambique play a major role in producing, processing, and marketing food and managing the family 
budget. Women  have  a  major  role  in  planning  cultivation,  undertaking  a  large  portion  of  agriculture 
operations, livestock and animal care and are often in charge of marketing the products. Despite the 
success  in  the  previous  IFAD  rural  finance  program,  where  women  accounted  for  58%  of  the  total 
members of ASCA, there is a need to develop tailored financial products for women in order to foster 
accessibility and eligibility of loans to women. There is also a need to mainstream the activities of both 
formal finance providers and ASCAs to serve women in the rural areas. The project supports a study 
to identify the challenges in increasing  women outreach more than the current  available figures and 
identify innovative interventions to address the financial needs of women through ASCAs and formal 
finance providers in Mozambique.  
Enterprise  and  business  development  for  rural  entrepreneurs  and  MSEs:  The  sub-component 
2.2    (see  below)  will  build  capacity  to  ensure  delivery  of  basic  entrepreneurship  training,  support  in 
utilizing  more  productive  technology,  coaching  and  mentoring  and  business  information  to  growth 
oriented  rural  entrepreneurs,  particularly  poor  women  and  youth,  eager 
their 
entrepreneurial skills, improve the quality of their products and services, and invest in more productive 
technology or access new markets. Although the support of the program would hire technical service 
providers  on  competitive  basis  to  deliver  the  technical  assistance,  it  would  also  provide  capacity 
support to the Institute for the Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises (IPEME) that would extend 
the services in a sustainable way.  
to  develop 
Capacity  building  for  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  and  regional  PMUs:  The  PMU  would  be 
able  to  coordinate  the  activities  of  the  program.  The  PMU  would  have  a  slim  staff  to  carry  out 
appraisals,  monitoring  and  preparation  of  periodic  reports  for  consideration  at  project  level  and 
reporting.  The program will support the services of a national program coordinator in the  BNI for the 
full program period (PY1 to PY6). Since there will be three regional PMUs, the project would allocate 
funds  to  hire  regional  technical  staff.  The  specific  support  of  the  project  to  the  national  PMU  and 
regional PMUs include: (i) staffing; (ii) training and exposure visit for the staff; (iii) enhancing mobility; 
(iv)  conducting  annual  workshops  on  the  performance  of    the  project  activities;  (v)  follow  up, 
100 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
monitoring  and  supervision  of  the  activities  of  the  project;  (vi)  annual  audit  and  evaluations;  (vii) 
logistical support to buy office equipment, desktops, laptops, fax machines, photocopy machine, office 
equipment, etc.; (viii) recurrent budget to cover salaries, overhead costs, stationary, etc. 
Baseline  study:  The  objective  of  this  study  is  to  provide  a  baseline  data  on  income,  asset,  gender 
mix, access to finance, reasons for financial exclusion of members, current of status of formal finance 
providers and ASCAs and potential members of ASCAs before starting the implementation of project 
activities. The study  is based on a sound data collection methodology and survey formats to collect 
primary information from members of ASCAs, formal finance providers (including banks, micro-banks 
and  NGO  microcredit  programs  or  only  credit  institutions)  and  clients.  Since  the  baseline  study  will 
provide the benchmark data to regularly assess the impact of the project activities (components and 
subcomponents),  there  is  a  need  to  consider  manageable  and  representative  sample  size.  The 
baseline survey will be conducted in PY1, before the implementation of the project activities.  
Impact studies: Once the baseline data is collected, the project will provide TA support to undertake 
two impact evaluation studies - one in PY4 and the second in PY7 (final impact evaluation). The main 
objective of the study is to critically assess the incremental value addition of the project intervention by 
comparing them with the baseline database. The study is also expected to assess the impact of the 
capacity  building  interventions  of  the  project  on  the  target  beneficiaries  (rural  entrepreneurs  and 
MSEs).  The  method  of  data  collection  involves  the  use  of  structured  individual  interviews  with  the 
beneficiaries  of  the  project,  policymakers,  facilitators,  CEOs  of  formal  financial  institutions,  and 
leaders of ASCA and analysis of secondary data built up by M&E units of PMU, regional PMUs, BNI,  
finance providers, etc. Eight is required to undertake each of the impact studies.  
Sub-component 2.2 Business development support 
Objective:  Agricultural  and  non-agricultural  SMEs  require  non-financial  and  business  development 
services  to  improve  their  perspectives  of  accessing  financial  and  other  technical  support.  In  many 
cases  this  support  is  required  for  assistance  in  preparing  loan  applications  and  business  plans. 
PROMER,  PROSUL,  and  PROPESCA  PSP,  BAGC  and  IPEME,  are  all  currently  committing 
significant  resources  in  the  implementation  of  project  activities  of  agricultural,  fisheries  and  non-
agricultural  enterprises  and  entrepreneurial  capacity  development.  Alignment  of  REFP  with  these 
ongoing  projects  and  initiatives  would  likely  lead  to  collective  economies  of  scale  through  such 
collaborative actions; and importantly for the REFP provide incremental value addition to these other 
projects.  The  target  group  for  REFP,  25,000  direct  beneficiaries  have  the  potential  to  expand  their 
market-related activities, thereby providing improved market opportunities for smallholder farmers. In 
addition to improved market integration of the REFP targeted economic units, business development 
support  can  result  in  reduced  market  transaction  costs,  and  alignment  of  production  decisions  with 
businesses and market opportunities along the agribusiness value chain. 
Approach  and  definitions:  Business  development  is  generally  defined  as  business  growth  at 
enterprise  level,  over  a  given  period  of  time.  A  diagnostic  of  what  is  the  reality  on  the  ground 
regarding  agricultural  finance  in  Mozambique  was  recently  undertaken  by  the  FinMark Trust127.  The 
key  finding  was  that  there  is  demand  for  increased  agricultural  and/or  rural  financial  services  that 
could  potentially  support  agricultural  productivity  and  consequently  increased  household  incomes. 
Further,  enhancing  capacity  development  in  the  areas  of  financial  literacy  and  on-farm  productive 
techniques and extension services would prioritise linkages to markets and productive value chains.  
The support by the REFP to agribusiness, fisheries and other business development can be achieved 
through  the  implementation  of  a  systematic  planning  and  capacitating  process  or  model,  utilising 
business  development  models/techniques  that  open  channels  for  the  target  group  of  smallholder 
farmers, fishermen and non-agricultural members of the target group to gain better access to finance - 
provided  by  Components  One  of  the  REFP  and  other  IFAD  projects  such  as  PROMER,  PROSUL, 
PROPESCA and PROAQUA -  and establish sustainable market opportunities.  
fishery 
This  sub-component  will 
associations,  registered  farmer  cooperatives,  informal  farmer  and  fishery  organizations,  and  agri-
target  commodity-based  smallholder 
farming  and 
farmers, 
127 FinMark Trust: Status of Agricultural and Rural Finance in Mozambique; July 2012. 
101 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
businesses, at local, district and provincial levels. In order to ensure that this intervention is informed 
by  the  needs  of  the  target  group  on  the  ground,  prior  to  any  REFP  support  interventions  being 
implemented,  a  study  for  mapping  smallholder  farming  agribusiness,  fisheries,  agro  and  aqua-
prenuerial  opportunities,  other  enterprise  opportunities  along  the  value  chain  in  Mozambique  will  be 
commissioned. It is made very clear that this mapping study is not designed to  be a ‘re-invention of 
the  wheel’;  rather  a  confirmation  of  what  work  in  this  regard  is  currently  being  undertaken  in 
Mozambique and what added value - through collaboration and cooperation  – can the BDS process 
within  the REFP provide.   It is broadly  anticipated that this national mapping study  will identify  BDS 
capacity development interventions that will include, but not limited to the following:  
(i)  Functional literacy and numeracy, 
(ii)  Agribusiness /aqua-business setup/formalisation/registration,  
(iii)  Business planning development and preparation,  
(iv)  Agribusiness/aqua-business management training 
(administration/operational/financial/recordkeeping),  
(v)  Appropriate  local  and  international  agribusiness/aqua-business  study  tours  (e.g. 
Botswana, Kenya, Malawi, Zambia, South Africa, Ethiopia, etc.),  
(vi)  Agribusiness/aqua-business marketing and sales training,  
(vii) Market  analysis  to  identify  agribusiness/aqua-business  and  agro/aqua-prenuerial 
opportunities along the agricultural value chain, 
(viii)  Establishment  of  a  mentoring  service  (through  the  identification  of  national  and 
international  experts)  providing  direct  field  support  to  target  group  smallholder 
farmers,  agribusinesses/aqua-business,  and  other  agricultural  business  value  chain 
participants, helping them to understand and  adopt technologies in accordance  with 
market requirements (e.g. food safety, product handling), 
(ix)   A market linkage system that will create a national public market information system 
for the agricultural sector in Mozambique; this will be managed by  the IPEME of the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry; seeking to improve information quality and services by 
providing  training,  supporting  sub-sector  and  agricultural  commodity  studies,  and 
introducing  IT-supported  data  and  information  exchange  (e.g.  web-based  data 
exchange and Short Message Service (SMS), and 
(x)  Bolstering  market  linkages  through  the  organisation  of  agricultural  trade  fairs  (in 
partnership with the Ministries of Agriculture, finance and Economics, and Trade and 
Industry, and as well as IPEME) at district and provincial levels. 
Gender and youth mainstreaming: A key element of inclusion and targeting is the focus on women 
and youth, and the application of mechanisms to facilitate their involvement in the REFP interventions.  
REFP  will  strive  to  be  an  equal  opportunity  project,  by  availing  youth  and  gender  mainstreaming 
opportunities at the project intervention level, and where possible, within project management. Youth 
and women farmers are an important part of the target group.  
Further,  the  REFP  will  be  informed  by  and  support  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  through 
the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  (MASA)  in  its  effort  to  create  decent  employment 
opportunities  for  young  people  in  rural  areas  .  The  government  policy,  in  its  first  five  years,  has 
objectives of creating an enabling environment for young people that will focus on: i) strengthening of 
their  capacity  and  entrepreneurial  skills,  ii)  the  promotion  of  investment  in  agriculture,  and  iii)  the 
promotion  of  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (SMEs)  along  selected  agriculture,  fisheries  and  non-
agricultural value chains. 
Service Delivery Model as a Guide for Implementation: This REFP implementation model for BDS 
provision  to  the  target  group  is  referred  to  as  a  Service  Delivery  Model.  A  simplified  version  of  this 
model  is  under  implementation  in  the  IFAD  supported  Rural  Markets  Promotion  Programme 
102 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
(PROMER)128. In this Mode, agribusiness development support services are deliberately designed to 
be implemented within a supply chain process  to enhance smallholder farmer productivity and value 
creation through agriculture. The types of services that can make up a service delivery model include:  
I. 
II. 
III. 
Training  –  quality  and  productivity  training,  as  well  as  training  on  farm management 
practices,  such  as  recordkeeping  and  business  planning  (usually  from  the  Service 
Provider/Agri-preneur). 
Inputs  – planting seed, fertilizer, crop  protection products and insecticides (provided 
by the Aggregator/Trader). 
Financial  services  –  inputs  on  credit,  cash  advances,  pre-harvest  finance  (usually 
from the Off-taker/Wholesaler). 
IV.  Marketing  –  bulking  of  produce  and  creating  access  to  markets  (services  to  the 
V. 
farmer from the Aggregator/Trader). 
Value  adding  services  –  services  that  add  value  to  the  product  of  smallholder 
farmers,  such  as  mechanisation  (use  of  tractors),  processing,  post-harvest  handling 
and storage services (Off-taker/Wholesaler and Aggregator/Trader). 
Training, inputs and farmer credit are interdependent, as extension and training informs and affect the 
types of inputs used which is in turn shaped by access to credit. These services are often combined 
during  delivery  in  an  effort  to  maximise  the  impact  of  the  training  provided.  Finally,  in  this  Service 
Delivery  Model,  the  Off-taker(s)/Wholesaler(s)  –  could  be  a  number  of  clusters  of  groups  brought 
together  to  supply  a  market  niche  -  are  encouraged  to  invest  in  value  chains  (thus  giving  farmers 
comfort  that  they  are  committed  to  purchase  produce  in  advance),  and  also  offering  services  to 
farmers, as a means to secure the required volume and quality of supply. The simple diagram below 
simplistically outlines the Service Delivery Model process:  
Farmers/ 
Agribusiness 
Farmers/ 
Agribusiness 
Aggregator/Trader 
(Agri-preneur) 
Technical Service 
Provider (Agri-
preneur) 
Off-Taker 
/Wholesale 
Buyer 
The  Aggregator/Trader  (Agri-preneur)  is  central  to  the  effective  implementation  of  this  Service 
Delivery  Model  for  the  rollout  of  Business  Development  Services  to  the  farmer/Agribusiness.  The 
identification of both the Technical Service Providers (who will have evolved into being  Agri-preneurs 
along  the  value  chain),  and  how  they  support  the  improved  productivity  of  the  farmer/agribusiness, 
and the Off-taker/ Wholesale buyer are also the role of the Aggregator Trader. He/she brings all the 
parties  along  the  value  chain  together,  and  facilitates  all  the  required  imputes  and  outputs  for  a 
sustainable business relationship. The model works along the following lines:  
i. 
ii. 
Aggregator/trader identifies the farmer and confirms his/her produce and market price, 
Aggregator/trader  identifies  an  Off-taker/Wholesaler  for  the  farm  produce,  and  determines 
what (technical) inputs maybe required to allow the farmer to: 
a.  Meet the supply quantities required by the Off-taker/Wholesale buyer, 
b.  Meet the quality of produce expected by the Off-taker/Wholesaler,  
c.  Agree  on  what  technical  services  and/or  inputs  are  required  to  meet  the  quantity  of 
produce required by the Off-taker/Wholesaler, and 
128 The Rural Markets Promotion Programme (PROMER) represents a partnership between the Government of 
Mozambique and IFAD aimed at improving the livelihoods of smallholders in the Northern Region of Mozambique 
through pro-poor rural markets promotion; (2008-17). 
103 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
iii. 
Aggregator  negotiates  and  agrees  (with  all  four  parties)  on  a  pricing  structure  that  includes 
upfront  payments  for  produce,  input  requirements  (seeds,  fertilizer,  etc.)  and  fees  (for  the 
Aggregator and Technical Service Provider. 
It  should  be  noted  that,  like  all  efforts  to  address  and  stabilise  on-farm  productivity  in  terms  of  yield 
and  quality,  the  success  of  this  model  is  dependent  on  tackling  of  a  number  of  challenges  and 
managing  expectations  from  all  participants  in  this  model.  For  instance,  significant  investment  in 
delivery of services to smallholder farmers does not always result in better agricultural product supply. 
Some of these challenges include:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Ineffectiveness  of  service  delivery  –  for  instance,  due  to  diversion  of  inputs  to  subsistence 
crops. 
Side-selling – by farmers – of produce originally destined for the off-taker/wholesaler. 
Poverty  –  service  delivery  models  tend  to  focus  on  the  contract  crop  (to  the  off-
taker/wholesaler),  but  smallholder  farmers  manage  a  whole  farming  system  that  includes 
subsistence  crops  for  own  consumption  and  sale.  When  farmers  cannot  afford  to  feed  their 
families adequately, production of contract crops is also affected. 
Inequality – out-grower schemes can lock smallholder producers into relationships where they 
bear  an  unequal  burden  of  cost  and  risk  with  limited  returns;  unequal  bargaining  power  in 
particular results in farm-gate prices being forced down and ultimately to under-investment in 
their farms. Where they fail to meet commitments, farmers are frequently locked out of future 
engagement with specific off-takers/wholesalers. This particular challenge can be addressed 
through  an  effort  to  better  understand  and  meet  the  demand  for  services  by  smallholders, 
through  building  up  and  establishing  more  equal  relationships  during  the  implementation  of 
this model.  
The  potential  overall  results  of  addressing  these  above  challenges  could  be  to  increase  the 
consistency of volume and quality of supply of produce availed to the Off-takers/Wholesalers by the 
farmers, and ultimately secure the value chain.  
Business  Development  Services  (BDS)  Capacitation  for  the  Target  Group:  Due  to  the  limited 
opportunities  for  agribusiness  and  other  non-agricultural  income  generating  activities,  REFP  will 
directly target 5,000 youths aged 18-35, and 5,000 women from all the provinces. However, through 
collaborative actions in this regard with ongoing IFAD projects and government entities and initiatives, 
the  target  group  for  BDS  training  could  easily  be  doubled  to  10,000  (dependant  on  what  additional 
budgets  that  can  be  identified  through  the  collaborative  process).  The  REFP  will implement  an 
Incubating  Start-up  Agri/aqua-preneurial  and  other  sectorial  entrepreneurial  national  youth  and 
women  programmes  that  are  aimed  at creating  agribusiness,  agri-preneurial  and  non-agricultural 
opportunities for youth and women primarily in the rural areas.  
These  incubating  agri/aqua-preneurial  and  other  sectorial  entrepreneurial  programmes  will  be 
informed  by  the  mapping  start-up  study  that  will  soon  be  required  to  be  undertaken  at  REFP  stand 
thus designed to empower the target beneficiaries of the REFP, and in particular, youth and women 
with vocational skills, seed capital and mentorship to become agri/aqua-preneurs and other sectorial 
entrepreneurs.  Through  its  defined  youth  women  targeting  strategies,  REFP  will  undertake  the 
following for potential young and women agri/aqua-preneurs and other sectorial entrepreneurs in the 
10 districts implementing the REFP:  
i. 
ii. 
Tailored  agri-vocational  training  for  1,500  of  the  youth  and  1,500  women  target  groups  as 
agribusiness development and other sectorial business private sector service providers to the 
targeted beneficiary farmers; 
The  identification  of  1,500  youth  and  1,500  women  start-up  of  agr/aqua-preneurs/agr-
businesses  and  other  sectorial  entrepreneurial  opportunities  for  the  supply,  operation  and 
maintenance  of  various  SME  assets,  lease  of  small  equipment,  repair  and  maintenance  of 
post-harvest equipment and mechanization.  
iii. 
Upon graduation, which will culminate in the completion of an agribusiness and other sectorial 
business plans, each youth will be provided with an equipment kit to start their business, and 
104 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
receive an  allocation  of seed capital start their own small to medium scale  agro-business of 
their choice along the agriculture value chain. 
iv. 
The  Identification  of  2,000-targeted  youth  and  2,000  targeted  women  trained  to  become 
aggregators,  agro-dealers,  traders  or  agents  between  market-oriented  producers  and  off 
takers or large agro-industries and/or wholesalers. 
Implementation  arrangements:  The  implementation  will  be  led  collaborative  arrangement  between 
the  BAGC  (taking  the  lead  due  to  its  experience  and  current  capacity  levels)  and  the  Ministry  of 
Economy and Finance’s Institute for the Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises (IPEME). There 
are clearly visible market opportunities in all sectors of the economy, and the REFP will definitely tap 
into them. World Bank data shows that SMEs account for 98.7% of the private sector in Mozambique; 
the  IPEME  has  contributed  to  the  improvement  of  the  business  environment  for  SMEs  through  the 
provision  of  relevant  information  and  assistance  for  business,  and  thus  make  an  appropriate  BDS 
implementation partner, in collaboration with the BAGC, for the REFP on behalf of the GoM.  
1. 
The  PMU  will  include  a  full  time  Agro-business  Development  and  Marketing  Linkage 
Officer129, who will manage the agribusiness development technical assistance, market linkages and 
training  procurement  of  service  providers  and  management  of  contracts.    Key  deliverables  of  the 
Officer will include, but not be limited to:  
a)  Will work closely with the Ministries of Agriculture and Trade and Industry, and the specifically 
IPEME in building agribusiness development services for the REFP target group; 
b)  The  relevant  officials  in  the  designated  Ministries  as  well  as  the  IPEME  will  be  the  main 
counterparts, and they will facilitate interaction with the District Ministry and IPEME officials; 
c)  The  Officer  will  prepare  training  plans  and  TORs  for  the  mentoring  experts  and  identify 
suitable service providers and experts to implement all sub-component activities; 
d)  He/she will organize the district trade fairs, and other meetings that foster market linkages, in 
close cooperation with the Ministries of Agriculture and Trade and Industry and the IPEME; 
e)  He/she  will  be  required  to  travel  extensively  to  the  districts  and  sub-centres  and  proactively 
interact with stakeholders, Ministry officials, and other partners. 
2. 
Risk  and  Mitigation  Measures:  Key  risks  and  associated  mitigation  measures  for  the 
project  are  detailed  in  the  risks  section  of  the  main  report.  The  overall  risk  rating  for  project 
implementation is significant. This is due to the risk associated with the economic and political events 
since 2015.  The two main risks confronting the project are described below.  
Low Implementation Capacity.  The project is confronted with weak implementation capacity 
3. 
particularly at provincial level; the challenge will be one of attracting suitably qualified staff to man the 
provincial  offices.  The  Government  of  Mozambique’s  debt  crisis,  has  impacted  on  its  ability  to  fund 
existing commitments. Finally, the high market priced interest rates may result in the number of loan 
repayments  default  rates.  The  experience  of  many  other  projects  (past  and  present)  suggests  that 
these capacity constraints could seriously affect the pace and quality of project implementation.  
4. 
following risk mitigation measures:  
To mitigate this risk, which is considered substantial, the project design will incorporate the 
(a)  Provision for training and capacity building for participating private sector service 
providers and participating government support Ministries and parastatals; 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Inclusion within the PMU technical staff with responsibility for component implementation; 
Embedding of the PMU within the Ministry of Finance and Economics, which should 
strengthen the skills of senior government officers;  
Inclusion of performance-based elements in contracts (particularly with service 
providers), agreements, and memoranda of understanding; and  
129 Agri-business Development and Marketing Linkage Officer Terms of Reference (TOR) are included in Annexure…. 
Project Management. 
105 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Use of project management mechanisms (at national, provincial  and  district  levels) that clearly spell 
out responsibilities for oversight and coordination. 
106 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
The successful implementation of this project will require the active participation of both government 
institutions  with  collaboration  and  support  from  carefully  identified  private  sector  institutions  with 
strong developmental pedigree. The responsibilities of each are outlined below:  
A.  Government Institutional Responsibilities 
Ministry of Economy and Finance 
The  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance  will  have  the  overall  responsibility  of  the  Rural  Enterprise 
Finance  Project  (REFP).  The  Ministry  will  serve  as  the  Borrower  and  accountable  for  the  project 
funding.  Oversight  and  implementation  of  the  project  shall  be  vested  in  Banco  Nacional  de 
Investimentos  (BNI),  a  100%  Government  owned  development  bank.  The  MOF  will  enter  into  a 
subsidiary loan agreement with BNI assigning it responsibilities as project lead agency. The Ministry 
of Finance, through its Permanent Secretary will chair the Project Steering Committee. 
The  project  shall  also  contribute  to  the  strengthening  of  the  Technical  Backstopping  Unit  of  the 
National Directorate of Treasury. This unit will serve as the liaison unit within MEF in support of all the 
IFAD-funded projects to i) improve coordination and creation of synergy among projects and sectors; 
(ii) to ensure efficiency and effectiveness in project implementation oversight through improved M&E 
and efficiency of financial management; iii) to improve the knowledge management and expertise as 
well as best practices in project management. 
The MEF is also host to the Fundo de Apoio ao Rehabilitacao da Economia (FARE). The experience 
of FARE in managing the Rural Finance Project will be tapped in order to allow for a quick start to the 
project.  If  required  by  BNI  and  deemed  desirable,  FARE  will  enter  into  an  agreement  with  the  lead 
Agency,  BNI,  as  sister  government  agencies,  to  allow  it  to  contribute  to  the  implementation  of  the 
project  especially  in  the  early  years.    There  are  experienced  staff  in  FARE  who  can  add  value  in 
implementing  many  of  the  activities  of  the  project  and  adherence  to  and  compliance  to  IFAD  policy 
and  guidelines.  FARE  also  has  a  potential  strategic  role  to  play  in  coordinating  knowledge 
management activities in rural finance. 
Ministry of Trade and Industry 
The  Ministry  of  Trade  and  Industry  through  the  Institute  for  the  Promotion  of  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises (IPEME) supports the development of small and medium sized enterprises. Availability of 
Rural Financial services is a central concern of the SMEs involved in agricultural value chains – input 
suppliers, produce traders, processors,  and transporters.  REFP  will  partner  with IPEME in capacity 
building of rural entrepreneurs in various subjects such as book-keeping, accounting, business plans 
preparations etc. and their links with financial institutions.   
Ministry of Fisheries  
The  extent  to  which  the  REFP  is  able  to  address  the  financial  needs  of  actors  within  fishing  value 
chains, is an area where the Ministry of Fisheries has been making interventions, but requires more 
support  and  partners..  As  the  REFP  activities  will  also  target  fishermen  and  aquaculture  in  general, 
the Ministry has a strategic interest in being a member of the National Project Steering Committee, as 
well as the project reference groups at regional levels.. 
Ministry of Land and Rural Development 
The  National  Directorate  of  Rural  Development  (DNPDR)  currently  hosts  the  Rural  Markets  Project 
(PROMER). The directorate shall therefore have an active in the activities of the REFP and its ability 
to meet the demands of rural actors involved in PROMER supported value chains. PROMER service 
107 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
providers  are  expected  to  contribute  to  the  implementation  of  Component  2.1  The  Directorate  will 
participate in the project steering Committee. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security. This ministry is implementing two IFAD funded projects 
–  PRONEA  and  PROSUL  both  with  activities  relevant  to  this  Project.  The  Agricultural  Development 
Fund  (FDA)  and  the  Beira  Agricultural  Growth  Corridor  (BAGC)  both  institutions  of  MASA  provide 
agribusiness support activities to SMEs and will therefore partner with REFP and play a strategic role 
in the implementation of Component 2.1 in the areas of extension services and localised data sharing.   
B.  Private Sector Institutions 
Implementation  delivery  under  REFP  will  be  through  contracted  service  providers  drawn  from  the 
private  sector  and  other  non-state  actors.  Under  such  arrangement  the  role  of  the  PMU  is,  as  it 
implements  the  components  of  the  REFP,  to  provide  oversight,  facilitation,  management  and 
monitoring support. Rural Financial Service Provides will be carefully evaluated and those that fit into 
the  ethos  and  developmental  objectives  of  the  REFP  will  be  expected  to  play  an  active  part  in  the 
implementation of the project serving as intermediaries for delivering project services to beneficiaries.   
C.    Project Oversight and Coordination 
Project management units at national and three decentralised in key regions of the country, shall be 
set  up  to  ensure  effective  implementation  and  oversight  across  the  central,  northern  and  southern 
regions of the country. The project shall on the one hand seek to provide a consolidated response to 
the  demand  for  financial  services  and  technical  business  development  support  within  existing  IFAD 
on-going projects in the central, northern and southern regions of the country; and at the same time 
invest a greater proportion of its resources in the central provinces of Sofala, Manica and Tete. The 
central  region  is  under-served  by  rural  finance  services  and  yet  has  in  recent  years  been 
demonstrating  increased  agribusiness  and  fisheries  activity  and  thus  increased  demand  for  rural 
financial services. The region also has high agricultural potential presenting opportunities for investing 
in value chain development that benefit the rural poor.  
C1.  Project Lead Agency 
The Ministry of Economy and Finance will be responsible for overseeing overall implementation of the 
Project.   The day to day oversight will be assigned to the Banco Nacional de Investimentos (BNI), at 
the national  PMU housed  at BNI offices in Maputo City,  which  will serve as  the lead project agency 
implementing the project on behalf of the MEF, the borrower. BNI is a 100% owned investment bank 
whose developmental mandate requires that it participates in the financing of projects contributing to 
the  sustainable  development  of  Mozambique.  BNI  operates  as  a  wholesale  investment  and 
development  bank,  mobilising  and  channelling  resources  to  projects  that  have  been  determined  to 
have  potential  to  contribute  to  national  economic  development.  Given  the  nature  of  its  current 
activities, its structures are currently centrally based in Maputo (although there medium to long term 
strategy is to have strategic outlets in key centres nationally).   
BNI  shall  serve  as  the  lead  agent  for  the  PMU;  through  this  institutional  arrangement  the  BNI 
executing  role  is  one  of  overall  oversight  and  fiduciary  accountability  for  the  implementation  of  the 
REFP and not just merely housing a PMU that would implement REFP.  It is acknowledged that BNI 
has wholesale banking and financial administrative skills and capacity, it has limited exposure to the 
type  of  development  funding  activities  that  will  be  required  in  the  execution  of  the  REFP. To  negate 
this challenge, BNI and FARE (bother entities having the GoM as the shareholder) shall enter into an 
MOU,  whereby  FARE  will  provide  project  start  up  support  and  technical  assistance  in  the 
establishment of developmental project management systems, as well as the physical establishment 
of regional PMUs and the mobilisation of project implementation units.  
108 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Based  on  its  current  experience  and  activities,  BNI  will  also  be  able  to  serve  as  the  Umbrella  Fund 
Manager,  providing  a  framework  for  the  management  of  the  fund  windows  envisaged  under  this 
project. It is important to note that there will not be a conflict of interest in respect to thedual roles of 
Lead  Agency/host  of  the  PMU  and  being  the  Umbrella  Fund  Manager..  The  BNI  will  not  be 
implementing  any  of  the  planned  fund  activities,  only  wholesaling  the  various  funds  to  financial 
intermediaries. 
C2. Project Governance  
The project shall establish a National Project Steering Committee to serve as the governing body of 
the  project. The Steering  Committee shall be chaired by the  Permanent  Secretary  of the  Ministry  of 
Economy  and  Finance  and  made  up  of  representatives  of  the  Ministries  of  Agriculture,  Fisheries, 
Industry and Trade and Labour; Confederation of Business Associations of Mozambique – (CTA), civil 
society  organizations,  National  Union  of  Farmers,  Bankers Association,  Central  Bank,  MFI  and  the 
CEO  of  BNI  (or  his  designate)  Director  of  FARE.  This  will  provide  strategic  guidance  towards  the 
achievement of project objectives and contribute to the higher-level sector policy and strategic goals.  
The NPSC will meet two times a year and on an ad hoc basis as and when necessary. Its role will be 
to: 
  Review and approve project annual work plans and budgets (AWPB); 
  Approval of the REFP Procurement Plan for the first 18 months, then annually; 
  Monitor the implementation, review physical and financial progress the project  
  Debate and recommend solutions on constraints affecting the project, 
  Reviewing project approaches and recommend strategies to improve effectiveness; and 
  Facilitate  coordination  with  participating  government  departments,  beneficiaries  and  other 
rural finance actors; 
  Make  recommendations  to  government  policy  initiatives  that  will  help  create  a  positive 
environment for improved smallholder market linkages; 
  Decisions of the NPSC pertaining to the REFP should be unanimous. 
Regional Project Consultative Groups (RPCGs) would be set up in each of the three regions of the 
project.  They  will  be  resource  bodies  for  the  project  to  allow  the  PMU  and  BNI  to  address 
implementation    issues,  debate  constraints  affecting  the  project,  reviewing  project  approaches  and 
progress,  strategies  and  AWPBs,  and  act  as  a  forum  for  coordinating  financial  service  institutions, 
government  bodies,  and  other  parties  and  organizations  operating  in  the  project  area.  Each  RPCG 
would be chaired by chaired by representatives.  
C3.  Project Management 
A  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  set  up  at  BNI,  will  be  responsible  for  overall  project 
implementation. The  main  responsibilities  of  the  National  PMU  will  include:  (i) annual  work  planning 
and budgeting (ii) financial management; (iii) procurement, including contracting of service providers; 
project  facilitation  in  the  three  regions  –  through  the  three  regional  PMUs  -    and  (vi) Reporting, 
monitoring,  evaluation  and  knowledge  management.  The  PMU  will  be  composed  of  a  team  of 
individual consultants contracted through competitive bidding and managed by a Project Coordinator. 
The  PMU  will  be  organised  into  three  units  covering  the  planned  target  geographical  regions.  The 
core project management unit will be based in Maputo City. Three regional project management units 
will be established as follows: one unit will be based in Beira and will oversee project implementation 
within  the  central  region  covering  Manica,  Sofala,  Zambézia  and Tete;  another  unit  will  be  based  in 
Nampula and will be responsible for coordinating project activities in three (3) Northern provinces of 
Nampula,  Cabo  Delgado  and  Niassa;  a  third  unit  will  be  based  in  Xai  Xai,  Gaza  and  will  be 
responsible for overseeing project activities in the Southern Region.  It is considered not effective to 
109 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
assign responsibilities for coordinating the Southern Region to the National Project Management Unit 
as  the  unit  may  not  have  adequate  time  to  engage  stakeholders  spread  across  three  provinces  in 
addition to discharging its national responsibilities.   
National Project Management Unit (NPMU): Members NPMU will be recruited as individuals by BNI 
through  an  open  bidding/tender  process  that  complies  with  national  general  accepted  public  sector 
recruitment processes or those of IFAD (whichever is the more appropriate).Physically, the NPMU will 
be housed at BNI offices in Maputo City. The main responsibilities of the NPMU will include: (i) annual 
work  planning  and  budgeting  (ii) financial  management;  (iii) procurement,  including  contracting  of 
service  providers;  project  facilitation  in  the  three  regions  and  (vi) Reporting,  monitoring,  evaluation 
and knowledge management.  Staffing of the unit will include: 
  Project  Coordinator:  Serves  as  the  operational  head  of  the  PMU  with  responsibility  for 
guaranteeing delivery of planned outputs, planning, monitoring and reporting; 
  Finance Manager with overall responsibility for financial management and financial reporting 
  Procurement Officer:  Responsible for developing  the annual project procurement plan  and 
facilitating all procurement activities 
  Accountant  to support financial manager in maintaining  accounting records and day to  day 
management of accounts; 
  M&E/Knowledge Management Specialist: designing M&E system, overseeing baseline and 
impact studies and surveys, preparation of progress reports; 
  Rural  Finance  Specialist  to  oversee  implementation  of  project  financial  instruments,  ; 
 
capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 
Innovation  and  Outreach  Officer  to  oversee  implementation  of  innovation  and  outreach 
activities; capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 
  Support Staff (Administrative Assistant and driver); 
The project will also have part time experts that will be recruited and mobilised as required. This will 
include a senior Environmental and Social (E&S consultant hired on a retainer basis within the PMU 
who will be responsible for the i) implementation of capacity building on climate and environmental aspects 
of  REFP,  and  ii)  the  monitoring  of  social  and  environmental  compliance.,  a  Women/Youth  Officer  to 
ensure that REFP activities adequately mainstream women and youth priorities/targets; and a Human 
Resources Specialist who will liaise with the BNI Human Resource Management and Procurement  
on  all  contracting  matters.  Provision  has  been  made  in  the  budgets  to  mobilise  other  unspecified 
experts that may be required during implementation of the project.  
Regional  Management  Units  (RMUs).  These  units  will  be  responsible  for  identifying  project 
investment opportunities as well as monitoring activities under implementation. The regional units will 
also have responsibility for developing mechanisms for ensuring complementarity of donor- and NGO-
supported rural finance activities in the region. The RMU will be hosted by the Provincial Directorate 
of Finance in the respective Provincial Governments where they  will be operating. Each  Unit  will  be 
made up of: 
  Regional  Coordinator: 
investment  opportunities,  providing 
implementation  support  to  service  providers,  coordinating  REFP  activities  with  other  rural 
finance initiatives  
identification  of  project 
  M&E Officer: Collection of regular data and information on the project, preparation of regional 
 
progress reports, coordinating regional knowledge management activities  
finance/administrative  officer:  office  management, 
resources assigned to the regional office 
financial  management  of 
financial 
  Support Staff  (driver, secretary) 
D.   Subcomponent Implementation Arrangements 
110 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
a)  BNI will offer an umbrella structure for the management of the IO elements of the Graduation 
Promtion and Outreach Programme, the CIF and the LOC. In the implementation of IOF and 
the  LOC,  BNI  will serve as a  wholesale Agent  providing funds to competent  institutions that 
will be selected through competitive bidding.  
b)  The  management  of  the  CIF  will  be  subcontracted  by  BNI  to  a  competent  service  provider 
with  both  grant  management  as  well  as  agricultural  technical  experience.  This  could  be  a 
consultancy company with experience in offering such services. Some of the larger firms with 
local  experience  with  similar  programmes  include  KPMG,  Price  Waterhouse,  COWI  and 
Technoserve. Such service providers will be recruited through competitive bidding.   
c)  The  Graduation  Fund  will  be  contracted  out  to  competent  service  providers.  To  minimise 
implementation risk for the project at least three such providers will be recruited one for each 
region. A number of such providers are active including Aga Khan, Fundação Capital, OIKOS 
E.  Technical Assistance for Line of Credit and Crowding In Fund 
The  project  will  set  aside  funds  to  support  technical  Assistance  to  support  the  CIF  and  the  LOC. 
Technical  Assistance  is  required  to  provide  support  to  beneficiaries  in  preparing  and  submitting 
proposals  for  funding.  Such  technical  assistance  will  include  promoting  the  program,  ensuring  that 
applicants  meet  established  project  criteria,  help  potential  beneficiaries  prepare  business  plans  and 
proposals  for  financing  as  well  as  providing  ongoing  support  and  mentoring  beyond  the  initial 
business  plan  and  financing  proposals.  The  TA  resouces  will  be  managed  by  the  PMU  and  will  be 
delivered  through  public  and semi-public sector strategic. To spread  delivery risk for the project and 
minimise  costs.  service  providers  will  be  identified  based  on  their  regional  competence  and  will  be 
supervised  by  the  respective  Regional  PMUs.    Available  public  business  development  service 
providers  include  Instituto  para  Pequenas  e  Médias  Empresas  (IPEME),  CEPAGRI  (now  FDA)  and 
Beira Agricultural Growth Corridor. The project will enter into MOUs with the respective governments 
organisations.  Prior  to  such  partnerships  it  will  be  necessary  to  conduct  a  thorough  institutional 
assessment  and  to  provide  for  capacity  building  of  the  partner  institution  to  guarantee  effective 
delivery  of  required  services.  In  order  to  minimise  risk  for  the  project,  different  implementation 
partners will be identified for each of the three regions.   
The TA  requirements  for  implementing  the  graduation  fund  will  be  imbedded  in  the  service  provider 
selected to implement the  activity. The service provider  will be responsible for all  the core  elements 
envisaged: targeting and selection, skills training, savings, enterprise selection and enterprise specific 
training,  provision  of  start-up  loans,  regular  coaching  and  mentoring,  establishment  of  VSAs/ASCAs 
and  linkage  to  mainstream  service  providers  (financial  institutions,  market  linkages,  value  addition 
etc).  
111 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 6: 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
The  integrated  participatory  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E),  Learning  and  knowledge 
management  (KM)  system  will  be  developed  in  accordance  with  the  government  frameworks  and 
within  IFAD  guidelines.  It  will  have  three  main  objectives:  steer  project  implementation;  support 
economic decisions and policymaking; and share knowledge and scale up good practices in line with 
the economic, social, technological environment that the Project will operate.  
Planning and Budgeting 
The planning is a necessary condition for good management and the Annual Work Plan and Budget 
(AWPB) is the outcome of the annual project planning process. Through annual work planning, the 
project decides what activities will be carried out over the next  12 months, by whom, the resources 
and the time needed to complete them. The AWPB is therefore a planning and management tool that 
specifies what is expected to be done during the  year, how and at what cost are involved. Overall, 
the  Project  Planning  Cycle  will  be  led  by  the  PMU  hosted  in  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance 
(MEF)  in  collaboration  with  the  Economy  Rehabilitation  Support  Fund  (FARE)  as  the  Lead 
Implementing  Agency  in  coordination  with  the  Provincial  Directorate  of  Economy  and  Finance 
(DPEF) at provincial level and will follow the Government Planning and budgeting cycle. 
1.  The process for preparation of the AWPB will be inclusive and ensure the active participation of 
the  relevant  key  stakeholders  and  other  implementing  agencies  under  the  two  main 
components. These components-based AWPBs will then be collated by the PMU, M&E Officer 
under the supervision of the Project Coordinator into a global AWPB. The consolidated AWPB 
will be submitted to the Project Technical Committee130 for final approval. The M&E Officer will 
work in close liaison with the Finance Officer to ensure adequate budgeting. The PMU through 
the M&E Officer under the supervision of the Project Coordinator should have some flexibility to 
review  the  AWPB  in  mid-year  if  necessary  upon  prior  approval  by  the  Project  Technical 
Committee and IFAD.  
2.  Since the Project will be nationwide with initial emphasis on selected pilot provinces, it could be 
advisable  to  have  the  main  PMU131  of  PEFP  located  at  the  Head  Quarter  (HQ)  of  the  Lead 
Implementing Agency. The main PMU could be supported by two decentralised PMUs (regional 
PMUs)  which  will  primarily  be  regional  based  i)  in  Beira  and  ii)  Nampula.  The  M&E  Officers 
assigned  to  these  two  regional  offices  will  play  a  key  role  in  process  for  preparation  and 
consolidation of the AWPB in collaboration with the P,M&E Officer from main PMU.  
3.  Thus,  detailed  planning  and  budgeting  of  REFP  activities  would  be  through  the  AW PB 
involving  the  PMU,  FARE  and  other  implementing  agencies/  stakeholders  in  participatory 
process  where  the  Provincial  Directorate  of  Economy  and  Finance  (DPEF)  through  the  focal 
point  or  FARE's  provincial  Outreach  Officer  has  a  key  role  to  play.  The  PMU  would  be 
responsible for preparing the annual budget and work programme for the two main components 
including  its  subcomponents.  In  addition,  the  PMU  of  REFP  in  coordination  with  FARE  will 
make the overall consolidation of the AWPB.  The PMU after approval of all  stakeholders will 
send  the  AWPB  to  IFAD  30  days  prior  to  the  end  of  each  Programme  Year  for  no  objection. 
130  The  PTC is  expected to be a  functional  consultative  and  oversight  board  which  will  comprise  of  designate 
Senior  Government  Officials  (Directors)  and  focal  points  of  key  implementing  agencies  including  relevant 
private  sector  actors, farmer organization and  Non-Governmental Organizations. The  PTC  will  meet  quarterly 
and  would  provide  technical  and  operational  guidance,  discuss  and  resolve  operational problems, provide 
technical review of AW PB, Reports  including its approval and reinforce knowledge sharing across ministries. 
131  The  main  PMU  will  also  be  responsible  for  coordinating  the  elaboration  of  AWPB  in  the  southern  region  in 
liaison with the Provincial Directorates of Economy and Finance.   
113 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
The  PMU  will  consolidate  the  Project’s  quantitative  financial  and  physical  output  data  in  the 
planner tool template, which could be excel based on Management Information System. 
4.  During  the  participatory  process  with  different  stakeholders  and  other  implementing  agencies 
the  use  of  the  AWPB  format  template  as  illustrated  in  figure  1  will  be  further  fine-tuned  and 
adopted for the compilation of AWPBs in subsequent years. The essential linkage of the AWPB 
to  the  quarterly  reporting  and  subsequently,  the  semi-annual  and  annual  reporting  are  the 
reference  codes,  the  planned  activities  and  the  budgets  or  cost  estimates.  All  forms  of 
transactional  controls  such  as  the  quarterly  activity  scheduling  and  disbursements  must  make 
reference and be based on the three parameters quoted directly from the approved AWPB.  
Table 4: Format Template for the elaboration of AWPB 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
The  M&E  system  will  have  a  three-level  structure,  consisting  of  output  monitoring,  outcome 
monitoring  and  impact  evaluation. Output  monitoring  will  comprise  the  monitoring  of  physical  and 
financial inputs, activities and outputs, both planned and actual. Outcome monitoring will assess the 
use  of  outputs  and  measure  their  benefits  at  beneficiary  level.  Impact  evaluation  will  assess  and 
measure  the  change  in  selected  variables  between  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  Project  or  a 
later  selected  date.  The  main  instruments  for  the  impact  evaluation  are  the  Project’s  Baseline 
Survey  and  Project Completion Report.  A  list  of  the  final  indicators  will  be  defined  in  the  start-up 
workshop  using  the  log  frame  as  a  starting  point.  This  will  include  relevant  first,  second  and  third 
level  indicators  of  IFAD’s  Results  and  Impact  Management  System  (RIMS)  and  will  be  sex 
disaggregated as appropriate. AW PBs will provide the annual  targets for first level monitoring. The 
PMU  M&E,  under  the  supervis ion  of   the  Project  Coordinator  will  have  lead  responsibility  for 
the coordination of all M&E activities of the Project and consolidating relevant information.  
The PMU/REFP in collaboration with  FARE as Lead Implementing Agency would be responsible for 
collecting  and  storing  key  M&E  data  on  their  activities.  These  data  would  be  analyzed  and 
consolidated  by  the  PMU  at  HQ  in  collaboration  with  the  regional  PMUs  for  purposes  of  the 
AW PB and Progress Reports. Monitoring of outcomes and impact could be outsourced to consultants 
whose activities would be  coordinated by the PMU’s  M&E staff. The indicators would be defined in 
compliance  with  IFAD’s  Results  and  Impact  Management System  (RIMS)  as  it  can  be  depicted  in 
figure 3. 
114 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Reporting 
Progress reports will have two main objectives: (a) to record the progress of implementation, for  the 
period under review, compared against the  targets  and  objectives  including key selected indicators 
from  IFAD’s  Results  and  Impact  Management  System  (RIMS)  set  out  in  the  Design  Project 
Document  and  the  AW PB;  and  (b)  to  confirm  the  degree  to  which  the  Borrower  is  in  compliance 
with  the  conditions  of  the  financing  agreement.  The  key  quantitative  tables  of  the  Progress 
Reports  will  be  generated  using  a  simple  excel  template  to  follow  the  same  structure  as  the 
standardised AWPB as it is illustrated in figure 2. 
Table 5: An Illustration of Physical Implementation Progress Reporting Template 
In order to comply with the government of Mozambique reporting systems are important. There would 
be  three  reports  namely  i)  quarterly  ii)  semi-annual  and  iii)  annual  report. This  reporting  of  physical 
progress  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Project  Focal  Persons  or  Provincial  Outreach  officers  at 
Provincial and District level132 in coordination with PMU and FARE HQ.  In addition other partnering 
stakeholder and institutions will also be involved in physical monitoring. 
It  is  clear  therefore,  that  monitoring  progress  of  this  project  will  be  done  through  the  established 
government  system  mechanisms,  and  will  be  led  by  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Officer  at  PMU 
level  in  collaboration  with  the  entire  PMU  team  and  implementing  partners  to  ensure  a  backward 
linkage to the outputs in the physical progress reports. The overall the responsibility for project M&E 
activities  would  rest  with  the  PMU  Project  Coordinator,  the  M&E  Officer,  implementing  partners, 
M&E focal point or assigned staff to the project. They would be overseen by the PMU M&E Officer 
while reporting to the PMU Project Coordinator. In addition, M&E responsibilities will be assigned to 
everybody  involved  in  the  implementation  of  project  activities.  The  implementing  partners  M&E 
Officers would also be responsible for collecting and analysing data gathered from service providers 
and  implementing  partners  in  each  district  or  province  on  the  basis  of  an  agreed  reporting  format 
and timeframe. Against a  baseline the  reporting system to track physical/financial performance and 
emerging impact would be implemented in each implementing partner and for the Project (PMU) as a 
whole. 
132  At  provincial  level the programme focal  persons based  at DPEF  will  play  a  key  role in gathering the 
information and compiling it. In order to perform well, some training will be provided for by the P,M&E from 
PMU 
115 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Special  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  the  need  to  integrate  planning  and  monitoring  as  standard 
responsibilities in the work of project implementers, and ensuring that recording progress information 
is  done  regularly  and  consistently.  In  principle,  the  designated  focal  persons  from  each  of  the 
implementation units/partner institutions will be the responsible person at the respective levels and will 
among other things, collect and enter in spreadsheets annual planning data and monitoring data. Files 
with data will then be submitted to the PMU for final analysis and proper consolidation 
The progress information will be carefully analysed by the M & E Officer at the PMU. The analysis will 
seek  to  identify  any  implementation  constraints  to  be  addressed  by  the  project  management.  The 
same information will be used to prepare quarterly, half yearly and annual reports, which will contain 
the full tables with detailed, activity by activity progress information. These reports will be produced by 
the  respective  implementing  units  with  formal  reporting  responsibilities  to  the  PMU.  Reports  will 
provide  information  such  as  (i)  overview  of  intervention  activities  undertaken  in  the  last  quarter  and 
cumulatively over the fiscal year; and: (ii) progress and outputs in terms of the agreed M&E indicators, 
provide lessons learnt, and knowledge gaps identified.  
It should be noted that  progress information  will be from the beginning  of the  year to date  to reflect 
cumulative  progress.  In  addition,  information  will  be  provided  on  the  cumulative  progress  since  the 
beginning of the project. This is meant to assess the progress towards achieving project targets in line 
with the IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS).  
Evaluation of Outcomes and Impact (Impact Assessment) 
Project evaluation of outcomes and impact will assess the activities impact on the target group, with 
a  particular  focus  on  household  assets  ownership  improvement,  increase  in  income  and  food 
security/  nutrition  improvement  among  others.  It  would  be  the  PMU's  responsibility  to  undertake 
periodic and activity-specific assessments and case studies to guide the implementation proc ess. 
Evaluations  would  follow  a  participatory  approach  through  active  involvement  of  the  target  group 
and covering mainly the components. Specifically, the PMU team would assess the extent to which 
project  outcomes  and  impact  have  been  achieved  using  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  methods. 
This is a key process that will involve a combination of impact assessment, planning and monitoring 
and  is  linked  closely  to  indicators  for  the  overall  project  goal,  objective  and  outcomes133  will  include 
but not limited to the following;  
a)  Percentage  of  female  and  male  headed  households  that  experience  an  increase  in  income 
and household assets ownership 
b)  Percentage increase in household  income from viable models 
c)  Proportion of households for which food security has improved 
d)  Number of persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project 
e)  Proportion of rural entrepreneurs satisfied with the types and quality of services available 
A  comprehensive  baseline  will  be  carried  out  in  the  first  year  of  project  implementation  to  provide 
benchmarks  that  will  guide  the  eventual  impact monitoring.  Data  collection  on  the  different  impact 
indicators will be the responsibility of the PMUs (both regional and at the HQ) and the focal persons 
from  the  respective  implementation  partner  units/institutions  with  occasional  use  of  external 
consultants.  Secondary  sources  of  data  will  be  used  particularly  to  provide  information  on  the 
overall sector goal indicators. Such sources will include annual statistics reports, annual household 
surveys as well as poverty and gender studies. 
The case studies would aim at ensuring that the analysis and information generated allow the PMU 
and other stakeholders to fine-tune the Project, particularly in its responsiveness and effectiveness 
133  It  considers  the  extent  to  which  activities  and  outputs  have  resulted  in  reaching  outcomes  –  assessment  of 
effectiveness – and the extent to which the benefits are likely to be sustainable after the end of the programme – 
assessment of sustainability. 
116 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
in dealing  with gender, including  youth employment, HIV/AIDS and poverty issues in the provision 
of  financial  services.  In  particular,  the  system  would  cover  the  impact  on  economic  and  s ocial 
conditions of the rural households. The results of the evaluation activities  would be entered in the 
MIS and presented to the stakeholders in participatory evaluation workshops, during which lessons 
learned, would be extracted and agreed. 
Table 6: An illustration IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) 
1st and 2nd level monitoring indicators 
3rd level Evaluation Indicator 
  Why: 
To track project outputs (nr. people trained in 
financial service; nr. people trained in business 
and entrepreneurship   etc.) and monitor 
processes (Likelihood of sustainability of 
enterprises – nr. of enterprises operating after 
three years, etc.). 
  How: 
Counting / aggregating. 
  When: 
Continuous, with annual reporting. 
  Why: 
To identify factors in rate of progress 
(rapid / slow) and attitudes of project 
participants. 
  How: 
Flexible mix of qualitative methodologies 
I
N
O
T
A
M
R
O
F
N
I
  Why: 
To track any changes in anchor 
indicators of impact (poverty & hunger). 
  How: 
Representative HH surveys. 
  When: 
At benchmark, mid-term and project 
completion evaluation (PCR). 
  Why: 
To explain context and perceptions of any 
changes in anchor indicators of impact. 
  How: 
Flexible mix of qualitative methodologies, 
(refer IFAD Guide for Project M&E). 
  When: 
At mid-term and completion evaluations, 
and as needed. 
S
R
O
T
A
C
D
N
I
I
I
I
E
V
T
A
T
T
N
A
U
Q
I
E
V
T
A
T
L
A
U
Q
I
Learning and Knowledge Management 
Learning  and  Knowledge  management  will  be  implemented  as  an  integral  part  of  the  REFP,  in 
recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  Project  will  be  identifying,  testing,  demonstrating  and  disseminating 
approaches with innovative technologies. The Project will therefore support a major learning process 
to  overcome  some  of  the  conceptual  barriers  and  raise  awareness  about  the  piloted  models.  The 
REFP M&E system will form the foundation of the Knowledge management and learning system and 
be a primary instrument of information capture and storage, based on the indicators detailed in the 
results  framework.  Tools  such  as  case  studies,  stakeholder  interviews  and  surveys  will  be  used  to 
deepen  understanding  of  factors  contributing  to  success  and  failures,  and  to  enable  full 
documentation of impacts from the field and beneficiaries.  
The  learning  and  knowledge  management  activities  will  include  (i)  impact  studies  comprising  a 
Baseline  Survey  and  Completion  Report;  (ii)  Thematic  and  Technical  Studies  on  the  Innovation 
and Outreach Fund as well as Project Graduation Fund; (iii) information dissemination campaigns 
about the Programme; (iv) preparation of publications and visibility/video materials; (v) in -country 
knowledge networking through periodic seminars and workshops; (vi)  Progress Reports; and (vii) 
capacity  building  activities  of  PMU/REFP  and  FARE  staff.  In  turn,  all  these  are  expected  to 
ensure  that  knowledge  being  captured  by  the  PMU  and  implementing  partners  are  utilised  to 
generate  lessons  and  best  practices  to  be  widely  shared  with  all  key  players  including  public 
institutions, the IFAD country team and others.  
117 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
REFP’s sequential approach to scaling up will also follow an in-built learning loop, with M&E and 
knowledge  management  playing  key roles.  The  project  M&E would  collect  regularly  the  results 
and  lessons  learned  in  order  to  fine  tune  its  approaches,  especially  the  innovative  models.  As 
such,  once  these  critical  elements  have  been  effectively  operationalised,  the  project  can  be 
scaled up to all 10 provinces of the country.  
During  the  final  year  of  Project  implementation,  as  part  of  the  preparation  of  the  IFAD-  required 
Project  Completion  Report/Impact  Assessment  (PCR),  the  M&E  data  collected  over  the  Project 
implementation  period  will  be  used  as  part  of  a  thorough  assessment  of  Project achievements. 
In  particular,  this  will  compare  changes  in  the  livelihoods  of  beneficiaries  that  relate  to  the 
implemented Project activities  against the  situation documented in  the  Baseline Study.  The Project 
Completion Report shall share lessons learned and development experience. 
The  Project will  carry  out  some  feasibility studies  of  possible  developments of  geographical areas 
for which local communities have requested Project interventions. The studies would investigate the 
viability of business enterprises or entrepreneurship interventions and identify the types of activities 
that can be supported through component 2 ( Capacity building and support for institutions and rural 
entrepreneurs) 
In summary the purpose of knowledge management is to ensure that knowledge generated within 
the REFP’s activities are systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared. Therefore, 
particular attention will be given to documenting; innovative models; information to be shared with 
and  discussed  by  all  key  stakeholders  with  a  view  to  assessing  progress  and  discussing 
measures to improve performance; and Learning Routes, which will be organized to support the 
exchange of knowledge and good practices among key stakeholders.  
118 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7: 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
A. 
Summary of Financial Management arrangements 
A  Financial  Management  Assessment  (FMA)  has  been  undertaken  at  REFP  design  in  accordance 
with  IFAD  requirements  and  Financial  Management  Division  (FMD)  guidelines  on  financial 
management  assessment  at  design.  The  assessment  is  based  on  a  review  of  operations  of  Banco 
Nacional de Investimento (BNI), S.A./National Investment Bank and the Fundo de Apoio a Reabilitção 
da  Economia/The  Economic  Rehabilitation  Support  Fund  (FARE).  BNI,  GoM’s  investment  and 
development bank has been designated by the Ministry of Economy and Finance, as a Lead Project 
Agency,  and  as  an  Umbrella  Fund  Management  Agency.  It  will  establish  a  separate  NPMU  for 
implementation  of  the  REFP,  and  establish  an  independent  (from  the  NPSC)  Umbrella  Fund 
Management Agency within its banking infrastructure.  
Whereas  BNI  is  a  relatively  new  institution,  government  has  invested  in  it  and  put  up  management 
and governance systems to operate in the financial services sector. BNI being a young institution has 
limited  experience  in  project  management  but  has  been  slowly  taking  on  government/development 
partners  financed  projects  like  the  Zambezia  Valley  project,  an  agribusiness  and  entrepreneurship 
investment.  FARE  was  the  LPA  for  the  Rural  Finance  Support  Project  (RFSP/PAFIR)  that  was  co-
financed  by  IFAD  and  AfDB  and  is  also  implementing  an    African  Development  Fund  supported 
Women Empowerment and Skills Development Project Consolidated Phase 2 (WESDPII).  
The  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  these  institutions  inform  the  financial  management  arrangements 
that are being proposed. Lessons have also been drawn from the operations of Pro-poor Value Chain 
Development Project in the Maputo and Limpopo Corridors (PROSUL) to put the assessment in the 
country portfolio context. The assessment, prior to application of mitigating measures has returned a 
high risk.  The fiduciary risk on the basis of FARE operations with application of mitigation measures 
returns a medium risk.  
The major fiduciary lessons learned from operations of FARE and PROSUL has been applications of 
parallel  accounting  systems.  FARE  has  been  using  the  GoM  e-SISTAFE  a  Government  integrated 
financial  management  information  system, TOMPRO  and  PREMAVERA  depending  on  the  reporting 
needs.  PROSUL  is  also  using  the  GoM  e-SISTAFE  system  in  parallel  with  TOMPRO  accounting 
software.  This  mix  up  does  not  only  cause  differences  in  the  accounting  data  produced  but  is  also 
cumbersome to the users. GoM is encouraging the use of the e-SISTAFE system, which development 
partners  have  been  progressively  adopting;  unfortunately  this  has  not  been  configured  to  produce 
reports  in  the  required  format  by  IFAD  and  is  also  characterised  by  operational  down  time  that  has 
negative implications to project disbursements. Discussions on the configuration have been on- going 
but no conclusions have been made so far on the possibility of this configuration.  In order not to bring 
these  complications  in  a  complex  project,  stand-alone  financial  accounting  software  has  been 
proposed. 
B. 
Summary of strengths and weaknesses of the proposed FM arrangements 
Summarised  below  are  the  key  strengths  and  weaknesses  on  the  basis  of  which  financial 
management arrangements have been designed. 
Strengths: 
a)  Under  statute,  BNI  is  a  financial  institution  with  a  mandate  to  manage  public  investments  and 
development.  In  the  course  of  its  activities,  it  is  involved  in  advisory,  capital  markets,  fund 
management, and other banking operations.  
b)  FARE,  on the other hand,  is mandated to  wholesale financial products to financial intermediaries 
such as micro finance institutions, strengthen their capacity and offer innovative financial products 
and services, among others which this project is a focus of; 
i.  FARE  has  experience  with  IFAD  financial  management  requirements  having 
implemented PAFIR that was co-financed by IFAD and AfDB; 
119 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
ii.  FARE  has  implemented  use  of  TOMPRO  accounting  software  that,  when  well 
coded has been rated as satisfactory for meeting IFAD reporting requirements; 
c)  Project specific staff will be recruited, thus they will be dedicated to the project operations which 
should facilitate timely implementation and reporting; and  
d)  A  private  audit  firm  has  been  conducting  the  statutory  audit  of  REFP.  This  arrangement  will 
continue  and  should  mitigate  against  delays  that  may  arise  out  of  GoM  requirement  to  submit 
draft  financial  statements  to  Tribunal  Administrativo  (TA)  is  on  31/May.    A  review  will  be  made 
during implementation to determine whether the audits can be done by TA, and 
e)  BNI  will  bring  on  board  its  fund  management  experience  that  will  be  complemented  by  FARE’s 
rural financial services experience. 
f) 
Weaknesses: 
a)  BNI does has limited experience with project management and does not have experience working 
with IFAD systems; 
b)  The  project  has  many  products  and  is  to  be  implemented  through  many  partners  and  multiple 
locations which pose a challenge in financial management; 
c)  FARE  currently  has  a  lean  structure  that  is  responsible  for  both  corporate  and  project.  There  is 
limited financial management staff capacity at to handle accounting and reporting requirements of 
the project; 
d)  Low disbursement of IFAD loan resources arising from slow procurement as has been the case 
with PROSUL; 
e)  The current coding and configuration of the e-SISTAFE software will not adequately address the 
accounting needs of the project; and 
f)  Based  on  the  experience  of  ongoing  IFAD  operations  in  Mozambique,  and  request  from  the 
Government, GoM will not be able to cover taxes and duties during project implementation.  
1. 
Capacity constraints to be addressed and operating changes to be made. 
a)  The  major  capacity  gaps  to  address  will  be  capacity  of  the  finance  staff.  At  NPMU  and 
implementing agencies. BNI staff who will be overseeing the day to day operations of the project 
do  not  have  experience  with  IFAD  systems.  A  qualified  and  experienced  Project  Financial 
Management Specialist, assisted by an Accountant at NPMU fully dedicated to the project will be 
competitively recruited; 
b)  A choice  of accounting software  will  have to  be made to mitigate against the challenges  arising 
out  of  use  of  multiple  software.  The  use  of  accounting  software  that  has  been  used  by  other 
projects  is  recommended.  This  should  facilitate  knowledge  transfer  and  reduce  cost  of  shared 
services such as software licence and training; 
c)  To  mitigate  delays  in  start-up  with  possible  failure  by  the  project  to  fully  disburse  the  allocated 
funds  and  a  risk  to  fail  the  project  objective,  a  start-up  fund  facility  is  proposed.  This  should 
facilitate the project to prepare and meet disbursement conditions well in good time; and 
d)  There  will  need  to  implement  robust  internal  audit  arrangements.  Internal  audit  arrangements 
within  BNI  appear  to  be  adequate.  However,  there  will  be  need  for  internal  assurance  where 
internal  audit  will  cover  the  project  at  least  once  in  a  year  with  results  of  the  audit  or  at  least 
implementation  action  plan  and  status  of  implementation  of  results  shared  with  IFAD  as  part  of 
reporting requirements. 
Mozambique’s  inherent  risk  is  high  as  measured  by  Transparency  International’s  (TI)  Corruption 
Perceptions Index (CPI) for 2016 that returned a score of 27 with a rank of 142 out of 176 Countries 
assessed.  This  ranking  puts  Mozambique  in  the  high  risk  category.  The  last  PEFA  assessment  of 
2015  identified deficiencies in procurement practices  which continue to  lag behind international best 
practices. 
At project level, the residual risk taking into account mitigation measures based on BNI and FARE has 
been  assessed  as  medium.  Project  design  has  taken  into  consideration  this  risk  profile  while 
designing  financial  management  aspects  of  the  project.  The  main  considerations  made  include  the 
following. 
120 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
a) 
Implement  a  stand-alone  mainstreamed  NPMU  under  the  supervision  and  oversight  BNI  with 
project staff who are competitively recruited and fully dedicated to the project; 
b)  Open  a  designated  account  and  a  project  specific  operating  account.  There  will  be  authorised 
allocation,  advanced  from  the  loan.  Disbursement  will  be  on  a  replenishment  basis  operated 
under  SMART  SOEs;  To  mitigate  risks  associated  with  funds  flow  and  justifications  by 
implementing partners, the Umbrella Fund and the ASCAs agency will open accounts to receive 
funds from the NPMU for their activities; 
Internal audit of the project will be at least once a  year and IFAD will request GoM to share the 
audit reports or as shall be agreed at negotiations; and 
c) 
d)  The Project statutory audit will be carried out by a private audit firm, who will audit the project in 
accordance with IFAD audit guidelines. 
The  following  Financial  Management  conditions  or  covenants  for  Board  presentation  and  conditions 
for withdrawal.  
a)  There shall be a designated account denominated in USD to receive the loan and grant funds to 
the  benefit  of  BNI  and  the  account  shall  be  held  in  the  Bank  of  Mozambique.  An  operating 
account  for  the  benefit  of  of  REFP  NPMU  and  sub  accounts  opened  for  the  Umbrella  Fund, 
ASCAs  activities  and  PPMUs.  The  operating  account  will  be  opened  for  purposes  of  receiving 
funds from the designated account in local currency/Mozambican Meticais (MZN). Funds shall be 
received  in  the  designated  account  and  transferred  into  the  operating  account  from  which 
expenditure at NPMU level,  transfers to the implementing partners and reconciliations are done; 
b)  The  PMU,  headed  by  the  Project  Coordinator  shall  have  been  fully  constituted  and  adequately 
staffed  with  in  addition  to  the  Project  Coordinator,  a  Financial  Manager  and  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation Officer will have been recruited; 
c)  A  draft  PIM/financial  procedures  manual  will  have  been  developed  for  purposes  of  REFP  in  the 
d) 
form and substance acceptable to the Fund and submitted to IFAD for approval; 
Implement the use of accounting software - should be coded with the REFP comprehensive chart 
of accounts to facilitate generation of reports as required by the IFAD; 
e)  Should the proposed liquidity risk mitigation in respect of counterpart contribution be considered, 
as  an  exception  to  Section  11.01(a)  of  the  general  conditions,  based  on  the  experience  of 
ongoing  IFAD  operations  in  Mozambique,  and  request  from  the  Government,  the  IFAD  loan  will 
cover taxes and duties as a mitigation measure to curb the ongoing financial crisis in Mozambique 
that started in 2015, with a significant depreciation of the Metical against the US dollar which has 
constrained GoM’s ability to meet its direct monetary contribution to IFAD projects in the form of 
funds to cover taxes and VAT. During Mid-Term Review of REFP, IFAD and GoM will review the 
overall economic and financial situation of the country and agree if the IFAD loan should continue 
to cover taxes; and 
f)  The provision under Section 11.01(c), the use of any proceeds of the financing to pay for taxes is 
subject  to  the  IFAD’s  policy  of  requiring  economy  and  efficiency  in  the  use  of  its  financing. 
Therefore  if  IFAD  determines  that  the  amount  of  any  such  tax  is  excessive,  discriminatory  or 
otherwise  unreasonable,  the  fund  may  by  notice  to  the  borrower  reduce  the  percentages  of 
eligible expenditures to be financed under the financing agreement.  
I.  Project Financial Profile 
Nature  of  project  eligible  expenditures  -  REFP  expenditure  categories  have  been  assigned  in 
accordance  with  the  standard  flex  cube  expenditure  categories.  Eligible  expenditures  include  the 
following  expenditure  categories:  (i)  equipment  and  materials,  (ii)  consultancies,  (iii)  salaries  and 
allowances, and (iv) operating costs. The summary costs and financing  plan are shown in the table 
below. Detailed cost tables are presented in appendix 9. 
Financing  Plan.  REFP  will  be  financed  by  GoM  and  IFAD  with  a  combined  project  direct  costs 
estimated  at  about  USD  62  million  over  a  five-year  Project  implementation  period  will  be  funded  as 
follows: IFAD loan USD 53 million under concessionary terms, the private sector/ financial institutions 
and financial Intermediaries are expected to contribute USD 5 million, beneficiary contribution of about 
USD  1  million  and  GoM  will  finance  a  counterpart  contribution  of  USD  3  million  to  cover  salaries  of 
own staff involved in implementation of the project.  
II. Implementation arrangements 
121 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
A.  Implementing and participating organisations with fiduciary responsibilities 
BNI will be the lead project agency implementing the project on behalf of the MEF, the borrower. The 
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for overall project implementation in consultation 
with other relevant national agencies and ministries to ensure consistency with national policies. The 
NPMU  established  by  BNI  at  National  level  will  be  composed  of  project  specific  staff  recruited  and 
fully dedicated to the projector headed by a Project Coordinator. The PMU will be accountable to the 
Chief  Executive  Officer  of  BNI,  who  will  be  the  executive  level  head  responsible  for  the  strategic 
direction  of  the  project.  The  BNI  Chief  Executive  Officer  my  delegate  this  responsibility  to  a  Senior 
Officer to oversee the operations of the PMU. A Finance Manager, assisted by an Accountant will be 
recruited and will be supervised by the Coordinator and supported by the Head of Finance at BNI.  
The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  project  coordination  and  management  of  fiduciary  issues  in 
conformity with the standards and requirements agreed upon between GoM and IFAD; and manage 
the  project  in  accordance  with  the  Financing  Agreement  and  other  project  documents  such  as  the 
Letter to the Borrower, the Project Design Report and the PIM.  It will also be responsible for the day-
to-day management of the project. 
Division of Advisory and Structured Finance has been identified as the lead for the Umbrella Fund that 
will be implemented by BNI. Under the Division, there is a Capital Markets and Research Department 
that  is  responsible  for  among  others  fund  management.  BNI  has  confirmed  that  the  current  staff 
structure is adequate to manage the proposed funds. It is however noted that should staff be required 
in the course of implementation,  BNI  will competitively  recruit the required staff and cover their cost 
within the fund management fees. 
FARE will manage the activities related to ASCAs and this will be handled within its current structure 
in coordination with the NPMU. 
The following will be the roles and responsibilities of the other implementing organisations. 
a)  A lean structure has been proposed for the PPMUs where provincial and district level activities will 
be  coordinated.  However,  given  its  lean  structure,  there  will  be  technical  backstopping  from  the 
NPMU, BNI and FARE, and engagement of technical service providers to support activities at the 
lower levels. . Except for BNI and FARE, no other strategic partners have been pre-identified and 
as such, identification of service providers will be through competitive procurement; 
b) 
.  REFP  PMU  will  be  the  central  financial  management  hub  of  the  project  responsible  for  data 
processing  and  reporting.  Payments  to  service  providers  and  contractors  will  be  centralised 
except  for  low  level  operational  costs  and  payments  that  may  be  transferred  to  provincial 
accounts whenever appropriate; 
c)  Payment  of  advances  to  service  providers/contractors  will  be  in  line  with  public  procurement 
provisions and stipulated in the contracts for service provision.  
III. 
Financial Management Risk Assessment 
A.  Inherent risks, Country issues, Entity risks and Project design 
Major Country accountability issues affecting fiduciary environment.  
a)  The last PEFA assessment of Mozambique  was in 2015. Compared to the  previous one carried 
out  in  2010,  71%  Mozambique’s  indicators  either  improved  or  remained  the  same.  Aggregate 
PEFA scores are high for legal and policy frameworks but implementation of these frameworks is 
weaker. Upstream elements of the Public Financial Management cycle (e.g. budget preparation, 
tax  policy)  perform  better  than  downstream  functions,  including  budget  execution,  procurement, 
internal controls, accounting, and audit follow-up. Key among areas of deficiency is procurement 
practices which continue to lag behind international best practices. 
b)  Government  accountability,  transparency  and  corruption  factors.  TI  perception  index  for  2016 
shows Mozambique scored 27 (down from 31 in 2015) on the 1 – 100 scale with a rank of 142 out 
of 176 Countries assessed. This ranking puts Mozambique in the high risk category. 
122 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
The implementation arrangements that pose a risk of low disbursements arise from delays in start-up 
due  to  delays  in  setting  up  the  PMU  and  delays  in  submission  of  withdrawal  applications;  delays  in 
financial reporting, among others. 
Overall assessment indicates that Mozambique mitigated is a high risk country, characterized by weak 
procurement systems and weak internal controls.  Design arrangements have taken into account this 
high inherent risk, and proposed hybrid implementation and financial management arrangements that 
are based on IFAD requirements and GoM systems.  
123 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
B.  Project Control Risks 
Table 7: Summary of FM Risks and mitigating actions 
Initial Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed 
mitigation 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
Inherent Risk 
1.  TI Index 
Control Risks 
1.  Organisation and Staffing 
2.  Budgeting 
3.  Funds 
Flow 
and 
Disbursement 
arrangements 
Internal Controls 
4. 
5.  Accounting 
Procedures 
systems, 
Policies 
and 
6.  Reporting and Monitoring 
7. 
Internal Audit 
8.  External Audit 
Fiduciary Risk @ Design 
- 
H 
H 
M 
H 
H 
M 
H 
M 
H 
H 
H 
M 
M 
H 
H 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
IV. 
Financial Management and Disbursement arrangements 
Organisation  and  staffing/Main-streamed  PMU.  The  Project  will  be  implemented  within  the 
Government of Mozambique’s institutional framework. The Ministry of Economy and Finance will have 
the  overall  responsibility  of  managing  the  Project  whose  implementation  responsibility  has  been 
delegated to BNI and FARE. These will be supplemented by service providers selected from both the 
private  and  public  sector.  The  National  Project  Management  Unit  (NPMU)  will  be  established  within 
FARE, based in Maputo for the day-to-day management of the Project. Being a national project, into 
two  sub-units  covering  the  planned  target  geographical  regions  based  in  Beira  and  the  other  in 
Nampula  or  Cabo  Delgado  shall  be  established.  The  choice  of  Nampula  or  Cabo  Delgado  will  be 
further evaluated prior to start up. 
The NPMU will be responsible for overall coordination of implementation, including preparation of the 
Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget,  procurement,  progress  reporting,  monitoring  and  evaluation  and 
financial  management.  It  will  also  ensure  liaison  with  other  related  government  or  donor-supported 
projects/programmes  to  explore  and  exploit  any  existent  synergies  and  avoid  duplication.  The  Sub-
Units  at  the  provinces,  as  seen  in  the  experience  of  PROSUL  and  PROAQUA  located  in  provincial 
capitals should enhance the level of ownership and engagement by local Governments to guarantee a 
high level of delivery of project results. The Project will also rely on other Government entities which 
will  act  as  implementing  agencies  for  specific  subcomponents.  This  will  be  supplemented  by 
contracted service providers where internal capacity will have been deemed inadequate. 
The key implementation risk is availability of qualified and experienced financial management staff for 
the Project. REFP will thus identify the staff competitively, under the oversight BNI... REFP will expose 
recruited  staff  to  IFAD  specific  procedures  and  provide  capacity  building  opportunities  for  financial 
management staff during implementation. 
Budgeting.  
Implementation  risk  in  respect  of  budgeting  relate  to  failure  to  meet  budget  deadlines  for  the 
submission of the AWPB’s due to the non- availability of clear planning schedules and lack of clarity of 
REFP requirements at low levels and inadequate budget control.  
The project will be implemented on the basis of approved Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs). 
The budgeting process will be done jointly between PMU and implementing agencies using a bottom 
–  up  approach.  The  PMU  will  consolidate  the  AWPB,  present  it  for  approval  by  the  Board  in 
accordance  with the PIM. To facilitate proper budget  monitoring and control,  PMU will ensure timely 
124 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
completion  of  the  budgeting  process  to  facilitate  early  posting  of  the  same  into  the  TOMPRO 
accounting software.  
Budgeting should involve the Project finance team, technical staff, procurement officer and the M & E 
Officer.  This  should  ensure  that  the  expenditures  categories  are  well  aligned  and  the  logframe  is 
considered at budgeting time. It should also realistically inform the procurement plan as procurement 
action timelines will be clearly attended. 
Prior  to  incurring  any  expenditure,  a  No  Objection  on  the AWPB  and  the  related  Procurement  Plan 
should have been obtained from IFAD. The requirement is submission of the AWPB together with the 
Procurement Plan no later than 60 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal/budget year.  
Disbursement  arrangements  and  Flow  of  Funds  –  Project  design  has  put  into  consideration 
the  country  fiduciary  risk  profile  and  proposed  financial  management  arrangements  that  will 
ensure that the  loan proceeds and  other financing sources will  be used for their intended purposes. 
This has been on the basis of lessons learned under existing IFAD financed projects in Mozambique. 
Under  REFP,  BNI  with  the  authority  of  MEF  will  open  a  designated  account  in  USD  in  the  Central 
Bank  (Bank  of  Mozambique)  designated  in  USD  to  the  benefit  of  BNI. An  operating  account  will  be 
opened  in  a  commercial  bank  acceptable  to  both  GoM  and  IFAD  and  Sub-Project  accounts  will  be 
opened  for  the  Umbrella  Fund  and  RPMUs.  .  All  sub  accounts  will  receive  funds  from  the  project 
operating account. MEF will communicate the authorised signatories to IFAD. 
Withdrawal  applications  will  be  under  the  advance/replenishment  procedure  by  use  of  SMART 
Statement of Expenditure (SoE). Specific thresholds on the SoEs will be applied for goods, works and 
services  to  determine  the  transactions  whose  support  documents  will  be  required  at  submission  of 
withdrawal applications and those that will not support documents. SoEs will also be reviewed during 
missions and will be audited by independent auditors appointed by FARE.  
An initial advance, the authorised allocation has been estimated at  USD 2,000,000 will be accessed 
upon meeting the disbursement conditions (if any). The key supporting documents include evidence 
of  meeting  of  disbursement  conditions;  bank  account  numbers,  names  and  related  signatories;  and 
signatories  of  the  withdrawal  applications.  Subsequent  withdrawals  will  be  on  the  basis  of  SoEs, 
where withdrawal applications will be submitted upon spending up to 30% of the authorised allocation 
or 90 days since the last withdrawal application was submitted.  
To  the  extent  possible,  financial  management  will  be  centralised  at  PMU  with  most  transactions 
centralised  as  procurements  will  be  aggregated.  Where  it  will  be  determined  that  the  implementing 
agencies/partners  will  require  financing  from  the  project,  funds  to  transfers  will  be  on  the  basis  of 
planned activities with specific activity based advances. Subsequent transfers will be upon justification 
of  previous  advances.  Contracted  service  providers  identified  through  a  competitive  procurement 
process will be paid in accordance with provisions of individual contracts.  
Funds  may  also  be  withdrawn  by  use  of  direct  payment  procedure  where  payments  with  a  value  of 
equivalents  of USD 100,000 for a single transaction or single service provider or contractor may be 
made.  This  withdrawal  procedure  will  require  all  relevant  support  documents  including  a  contract, 
evidence of receipt of goods/provision of service and invoice. 
The  funds  flow  chart  attached  depicts  the  use  of  the  standard  disbursement  methods  including:  i) 
direct  payment  method 
ii)  use  of  advance 
withdrawal/designated account; and iii) reimbursement if the GoM has pre-financed any transactions. 
Detailed instructions for disbursements will be included in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB) issued for 
REFP and the Project Financial Manual.  
for  bigger  payments  over  USD  100,000; 
Withdrawal  applications  will  be  under  the  advance/replenishment  procedure  by  use  of  SMART 
Statement  of  Expenditure  (SoE).  Specific  thresholds  will  be  applied  for  goods,  works  and  services. 
REFP  will  use  electronic  archiving  of  the  supporting  documentation  to  allow  IFAD  to  review 
electronically the statements of expenditure before processing withdrawal requests. Depending on the 
how well and how first REFP will adopt the electronic filing; the thresholds will be reviewed from time 
to  time.  SoEs  will  also  be  reviewed  during  missions  and  will  be  audited  by  independent  auditors 
appointed by GoM.  
125 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
REFP  Funds  flow  Chart  -  The  Project  will  have  one  external  funding  source,  the  IFAD  loan. 
Domestic funding sources will include GoM, participating financial institutions and Beneficiaries. The 
funds flow chart is attached at annex 1. 
The  financial  management  risks  under  the  area  of  funds  flow  and  disbursement  include  the 
following: 
a)  Experience has shown that the biggest project risk has concerned slow implementation, thus slow 
disbursement. This comes with challenges of low funds uptake with a possibility of a project failing 
to absorb funds allocated as has been the case with PRONEA Support Project; 
b)  Late submission of withdrawal applications in excess of  90 days; and 
c)  Poorly  coded  chart  of  accounts  that  will  make  it  difficult  to  generate  SoEs  from  the  system 
and make reporting cumbersome. 
2. 
The proposed mitigations for the financial management risks under the area are:  
a)  Submission  of  withdrawal  application  upon  realising  30%  expenditure  of  the  authorised 
allocation  or  90  days  from  the  last  submission  of  a  withdrawal  application,  whichever  is 
earlier;  
b)  Setting up the chart of accounts will be a loan covenant. As part of Start -up activities, coding 
of the chart of accounts and related configuration will be key ta sks for project management. 
Internal  Controls.  In  a  main-streamed  PMU,  working  within  GoM  systems  internal  controls 
should be strong. These controls will be enhanced by addressing the following challenges that 
have been experienced under PAFIR, PROSUL and PROAQUA. 
a) 
b) 
Inadequate filing of SoE support documents has been a challenge in the portfolio. IFAD ICO has 
initiated  an  electronic  archiving  system  project  which  should  help  improve  filling.  REFP  will 
implement  the  same  to  ease  access  and  review  of  SoE  support  documents  as  part  of 
improvement of internal controls; 
Improvement  of  contract  management  will  be  required.  Under  PROSUL  for  example  the  Land 
Tenure Service  Provider (LTSP) was contracted  in  a  manner that payments  would  be based on 
submission of financial reports and supporting documentation rather than deliverables. Whereas 
reports  would  be  required  contracts  should  provide  for  mechanisms  to  reward/pay  for 
measurable. Individual service providers public or private will be engaged on performance based 
MOUs/contracts  linked  to  agreed  milestones.  Payments  to  these  service  providers  will  be  made 
by  PMU  upon  verifying  deliverables  from  the  NPMU  operating  account  or  directly  from  IFAD  by 
direct payments on the basis of withdraw applications generated by NPMU; 
d) 
c)  Development  and  update  of  a  PIM  will  be  part  of  the  Project  Coordinator’s  role  whose 
performance  shall  be  assessed  against  existence  of  an  acceptable  PIM,  among  other 
deliverables; 
 At project level, internal controls will be set to ensure that project resources are properly utilised 
for purposes they are meant and funds reach intended beneficiaries.  GoM financial management 
procedures  relevant  to  REFP  will  be  included  in  the  PIM.  The  key  controls  should  include 
evidence  of  funds  reaching  intended  beneficiaries  and  the  use  of  financial  management 
procedural manuals, adequate segregation  of duties  with the following functional responsibilities 
performed by different units or persons, budget control, proper use of accounting software,  data 
backup, and storage of accounting records, among others; 
Internal controls related to the Umbrella Fund – The Umbrella Fund will be managed by BNI 
that  has  been  selected  on  the  basis  of  its  capability  to  manage  similar  funds,  and  will  operate 
under the direct supervision of the NPMU. The bulk of payments under the Umbrella Fund will 
be in the form of matching grants either directly to the grantees or by way of asset financing. 
Management of the fund will follow specific guidelines under each window. Funds flow will be 
from the Umbrella fund account to the individual grantees or directly to their suppliers as shall 
be provided for in the manual;  
e) 
f)  Grantees  will  be  required  to  maintain  specific  grant  accounts,  a  set  of  financial  statements 
with reports generated using templates developed jointly by the Umbrella Fund Manager and 
NPMU.SOEs and the related support documents will mirror the thresholds provided for under 
The  Letter  To  Borrower.  Grantees  should  keep  specific  support  documents  under  a  master 
file arrangement to ensure a state of audit readiness at all times; 
126 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
g)  The matching  grants  will  be  replenished  at  point  of  disbursement  to  grantees  and  not  when  the 
grantees  have  fully  utilised  the  grants,  but  separate  ledgers  will  be  maintained  to  facilitate 
monitoring of grants that will have not been fully justified. A performance-based (not input-based) 
payment  schedule  against  which  grants  will  have  to  be  monitored  will  be  included  in  grant 
contracts.  Grantees  shall  have  a  clear  business  objective  and  operate  in  the  formal  sector (e.g. 
have a Bank account, keep financial records). They will be provided with trainings and reporting 
guidelines (including templates) to build their capacity to accurately account for the funds received 
before disbursements; 
h)  A grants manual, with a set of specific measures will be developed to guarantee transparency of 
the  entire  process  and  minimize  the  risk  of  fraud.  These  should  include:  i)  detailed  selection 
criteria  (through  a  transparent  process);  ii)  grant  approval  process;  iii)  grant  management  and 
monitoring system; iv) arrangements for linking disbursements with  payment of the beneficiary’s 
contribution (if required), including meeting any down payment requirement for contribution before 
disbursement of grant funds; v) involvement of commercial banking institutions; and vi) provision 
of technical assistance for beneficiaries. More details can be found in other sections of the PDR 
(including component 2 description); 
i)  Further,  after  the  allocation  of  the  grants  under  their  respective  windows,  the  borrower  shall 
ensure that audits of the grant allocation process, approval and use of grant funds are carried out 
by the project Auditor for small grants but recipients of large grants will be required to submit audit 
reports audited by independent service provider acceptable to IFAD. Provision of audit reports by 
large  grantees  will  not  exempt  them  from  being  visited  or  inspected  by  the  REFP  auditors  and 
staff.  Withdrawals  from  the  grants  category  may  only  be  made  on  condition  that  IFAD  has 
determined that such audits are satisfactory; 
j)  Beneficiary  contribution:  Grantees  will  open  specific  bank  accounts  for  receipt  of  grant  funds 
and  for  banking  their  own  contribution.  They  will  however  not  be  required  to  deposit  their 
respective  contribution  into  their  own  bank  account  in  the  same  tranches  as  they  expect  to 
receive  from  the  project.  Instead,  they  will  keep  analytical  records  as  regards  their  own 
contributions and justify these where needed. Specific templates on the format and content of the 
reports will be provided by NPMU. Transfers of grants will be in tranches based on achievements 
of certain milestones by the grantees as defined in the grant agreements. For bigger grants, it will 
also be allowed for REFP to pay the suppliers directly after the grantee has confirmed that they 
have paid the supplier their contribution on the matching grant;  
k)  Taxes  and  Grants:  The  tax  element  in  grants  does  not  cause  ineligibility  for  IFAD  financing 
purposes  as  in  other  transactions.  It  will  be  taken  that  the  tax  element  is  paid  from  the  portion 
contributed by the beneficiary. 
Adherence  to  the  internal  control  framework  will  be  verified  during  the  internal  and  external  audit 
exercises and reported to the IFAD in the form of an internal audit report and Management letter, in 
line with IFAD’s audit guidelines. Compliance to the internal controls will also be part of the fiduciary 
checks performed during supervision and implementation support missions. 
Accounting Systems, policies and procedures. REFP will use a hybrid systems with a standalone 
accounting  software  and  a  mix  of  GoM  policies  and  procedures  justified  on  the  basis  of  challenges 
that have been experienced with the government e-SISTAFE accounting software and the complexity 
of the project; the products and multiple sites  
a) 
IFAD  portfolio  in  Mozambique  is  currently  using  parallel  systems,  the  e-SISTAFE  system  and 
TOMPRO  accounting  system.  FARE  accounting  is  done  under  PREMAVERA  for  entire 
operations. TOMPRO has been used for accounting needs of PAFIR with provision to post data 
into  the  GoM  e-SISTAFE  a  Government  integrated  financial  management  information  system, 
which  is  also  the  system  under  use  by  PROSUL  (TOMPRO  being  used  as  parallel  accounting 
software). e-SISTAFE does not facilitate reporting by category and by component, but reports by 
financier.  The  MS  Excel  used  for  data  manipulation  to  report  by  category  and  component  by 
financier is time consuming and prone to errors. The financial  management manual is based on 
the e-SISTAFE and for PAFIR a specific manual was developed. 
b)  The system (e-SISTAFE) is also characterised by operational closure from 15 December to about 
15 February to facilitate closure of the financial year. This renders this period inactive for project 
operations  yet  the  period  coincides  with  a  crop  production  cycle  where  agricultural  campaign 
activities  are  at  their  highest,  requiring  more  resources.  In  2016,  PRONEA  (National  Agriculture 
Extension  Programme)  Support  Project  was  authorized  to  disburse  25  per  cent  of  its  financial 
127 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
c) 
d) 
resources  outside  e-SISTAFE,  in  consideration  of  the  end-of-the  year  system  closure. Whereas 
this  was  an  appropriate  action  in  the  circumstances,  it  took  the  project  to  the  operation  of  a 
parallel system during that period. 
In  order  to  meet  IFAD  reporting  requirements,  projects  have  been  using  e-SISTAFE  in  parallel 
with  other  accounting  software.  MEF  has  expressed  commitment  to  re-configure  e-SISTAFE  to 
meet  IFAD  reporting  requirements.  This  should  facilitate  migration  of  all  programmes  in  the 
portfolio  onto  the  system.  Coupled  with  its  in-built  controls  and  the  fact  that  REFP  will  have  a 
designated account, the project will use e-SISTAFE.  
It  should  be  noted  that  there  has  been  significant  delays  in  addressing  these  challenges.  In 
consideration  of  the  same,  it  is  recommended  that  REFP  will  implement  the  use  TOMPRO 
accounting software which it has already acquired and installed. Correct set up of the accounting 
software will be a key requirement at start-up of the project. 
e)  The key risks in this area relate to improper coding of the chart of accounts that may not facilitate 
production  of  required  reports  (including  SMART  SOEs);  unavailability  of  personnel  to  manage 
the complex project accounting work; delays in manual returns and inaccuracy of data provided. 
TOMPRO  accounting  software  will  be  installed  at  NPMU,  BNI  Umbrella  Fund  and  FARE.  At  the 
Province  (PPMU)  and  service  provider  level  financial  returns  will  be  manual.  PPMU  will  develop 
reporting  templates  to  be  used  to  ease  reporting  and  data  consolidation.  The  accounting  systems, 
policies, and procedures to be used by the NPMU will follow IFAD requirements and GoM systems. To 
ease  application,  the  relevant  aspects  of  the  GoM  systems  will  be  documented  in  the  Financial 
Procedures Manual that will also capture IFAD requirements. The manual will describe the accounting 
system,  internal  control  procedures,  basis  of  accounting,  standards  to  be  followed,  authorization 
procedures, financial reporting process, budgeting procedures, financial forecasting procedures,  and 
contract management. In addition, the manual should document withdrawal procedures and auditing 
arrangements.  The  manual  will  also  pick  key  financial  management  related  aspects  from  the 
individual operation guidelines of the funds. 
Payments  to  service  providers  will  be  performance  based  where  invoices  will  be  settled  after 
verification  of  delivery  against  agreed  milestones.  For  reimbursable  expenses,  the  service  providers 
will avail all support documents to their claims to facilitate verification 
Financial reporting.  
REFP  will  be  required  to  ensure  that  complete,  accurate  and  timely  reports  are  produced  in 
accordance  with  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS).  The  PMU  will  be  the 
financial management and reporting hub, responsible for posting, reconciling and reporting on project 
finances. BNI Umbrella Fund and FARE will be required to maintain computerised accounting systems 
that mirrors the chart of accounts of PMU to facilitate consolidation of data. Further, service providers 
and Regional PMUs will be required to submit reports to NPMU on a quarterly basis. Reporting should 
be done no later than 10 days following end of quarter to facilitate timely consolidation of reports and 
onward reporting by PMU.  
 In  line  with  the  IFAD  reporting  requirements,  NPMU  will  prepare  and  present  Interim  Financial 
Reports  on  a  semi-annual  basis.  The  contents  of  the  reports  will  consist  of  at  least  the  following:  a 
statement  of  source  and  uses  of  funds,  a  statement  of  uses  of  funds  by  project  component  by 
financier and expenditure category, and a summary variance report explaining financial performance 
for  the  period.  The  PMU  will  also  produce  annual  project  financial  statements  in  line  with  IFAD 
reporting requirements.  
The key risks include inadequate failure by implementing partners, service providers and grantees to 
report accurately and on a timely basis; and inadequate/incompatible disclosures. Inadequate chart of 
accounts/  failure  by  TOMPRO  to  produce  reports  by  category  and  by  component  by  financier.  This 
necessitates  the  cumbersome  data  manipulation  in  MS  excel  which  is  prone  to  errors  and  time 
consuming.  
TOMPRO  will  be  configured  to  meet  REFP’s  reporting  needs  with  BNI  Umbrella  Fund  and  FARE 
using  the  same  accounting  software  and  chart  of  accounts  to  ease  consolidation.  The  explanatory 
notes should be presented in a systematic manner with items on the statement of cash receipts and 
128 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
payments  cross-referenced  to  any  related  information  in  the  notes.  The  grantees  and  other  service 
providers will be given standard reporting templates to ease data consolidation. The PMU will conduct 
periodic  field  visits  to  verify  on  a  sample  basis  the  accuracy  and  reliability  of  submitted  reports  and 
documents.  This  effort  will  be  supplemented  by  internal  auditors,  IFAD/GoM  missions  and  external 
auditors. 
The  Mozambique  portfolio  has  developed  an  e-archiving  system  that  has  been  implemented  by  the 
existing  projects.  This  should  ease  filing  and  document  verification  both  internally  by  NPMU  and 
internal auditors and IFAD. It is recommended that the project takes on this initiative upon start-up of 
implementation. 
Internal  Audit.  Internal  Audit  Department  of  BNI  will  be  responsible  for  provision  of  internal  audit 
services  to  the  project.  This  will  provide  assurance  that  the  project  is  being  implemented  in 
accordance  with  the  PIM,  complies  with  GoM  regulations  and  is  complying  with  the  financing 
covenants.  The  key  risk  is  that  internal  audits  will  not  be  monitored  to  ensure  adequate  scope, 
reasonableness of recommendations and implementation of recommendations.  
Considering this risk, internal audit of the project will be included in the audit plan of the internal audit 
department of BNI to cover project audits twice every year. Internal audit reports and action plans to 
implement audit recommendations will be shared with IFAD as a reporting requirement. The PMU will 
need to agree with Internal Audit department of BNI before the beginning of each year on the time and 
number of the missions planned to be undertaken so that they are included in the AWPB.  
External Audit. The statutory audits of both BNI and FARE are conducted by private audit firms with 
the current ones being Deloitte and KPMG, respectively. The audits of BNI have been conducted on a 
timely basis with reports issued within three to four months following end of a fiscal year in line with 
the  practice  in  other  financial  institutions.  FARE  on  the  other  hand  has  been  experiencing  delays  in 
concluding  its  audits  with  an  example  of  the  report  for  the  FYE  31  December,  2015  issued  on  31 
December, 2016, one year following the end of the fiscal year.  In the case of REFP this will constitute 
a significant delay in audit of the financial statements that is not acceptable to IFAD. The option of use 
of the government external auditor, the Tribunal Administrativo (TA) is challenging as there would be 
delays  arising  out  of  their  audit  calendar.  GoM  requires  that  entities  submit  their  draft  financial 
statements to TA on 31st May each fiscal year. For REFP this would leave available one month within 
which to submit audited financial statements which would be impractical. The use of TA will however 
be reviewed in the course of implementation to determine their consideration for the audit of REFP. It 
is  proposed  that  the  external  audits  of  REFP  will  be  conducted  by  private  audit  firms  competitively 
selected and acceptable to both GoM and IFAD. 
To mitigate the above challenges, the project statutory audits will be conducted on an annual basis by 
a  private  audit  firm  in  accordance  to  IFAD  audit  guidelines.  Statutory  audits  will  provide  mandatory 
opinions  on  the  general  purpose  financial  statements,  operation  of  the  designated  account  and  the 
use  of  the  SoE  procedure.    The  auditor’s  scope  of  work  shall  cover  the  operations  of  PMU,  the 
Umbrella  Fund,  operations  of  FARE  and  selected  grantees.  All  grantees  will  maintain  a  state  of 
readiness for audit as shall be detailed in the PIM and specific fund manuals  Statutory audit terms of 
reference will require the Fund’s ‘No Objection’ on an annual basis.   
V. 
The actions needed to mitigate financial management risks are summarised below: 
Implementation Readiness 
Table 8: FM Actions Summary 
Action 
Target Date / Covenants 
1.  1 Constituting  PMU  headed  by  a  Project  Coordinator  with 
fully  dedicated  staff  recruited  on  fixed  term  performance 
based contracts 
 Compile  the  first  AWPB  and  its  related  18  months 
Procurement Plan 
 Develop a draft PIM that should include a comprehensive  Within first six months of entry into 
Within  first  six  months  or  as  shall 
be agreed during negotiations 
Withdrawal condition 
3. 
2. 
129 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
financial  management  manual  with  a  comprehensive 
project chart of accounts 
 Appoint a National Project Steering Committee 
 Implement  TOMPRO  accounting  software  to  meet  the 
accounting and reporting requirements of project.  
4. 
5. 
force 
Within  six  months  of  entry  into 
force 
Part of start-up activities 
Supervision  and  Implementation  Support  Plan  for  Financial  Management.  The  risk  profile 
described  above  requires  IFAD  implementation  support  especially  in  the  first  two  years  of 
implementation. Initial implementation support resources should include facilitation of the PMU to put 
in  place  the  systems  and  controls  to  manage  fiduciary  aspects  of  REFP.  In  the  first  two  years,  it  is 
proposed  that  there  should  be  at  least  two  IFAD  missions  supplemented  to  ensure  financial 
management systems and tools are in place and implemented.   
 Annex 1. Funds flow chart 
Designated 
Account/Bank of 
Mozambique 
Line 2 
Operating 
Account/NPMU 
Line 1 
Line 6 
Line 3 
Line 4 
IFAD 
Line 5 
  Suppliers 
  Contractors 
  Service 
 
Providers and 
Implementing 
partners 
RPMUs 
Line 2 
Line 3 
Funds flow 
                    Document flow/Reports/Justifications/WAs 
a)  Line 1: Advance withdrawal/replenishment to the designated account by IFAD in USD on the basis 
of withdrawal applications; 
b)  Line  2:  Transfer  of  funds  from  the  USD  designated  account  at  Bank  of  Mozambique  to  the 
Operating Account and operating account to RPMUs accounts in MZN.  
c)  Line  3:Payments  for  goods  supplied,  works  executed,  services  rendered,  salaries  and  other 
expenses for Project implementation and management; 
130 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
d)  Line  4:  Necessary 
from 
suppliers/contractors/service  providers  including  evidence  of  completion  of  service/delivery  of 
goods and justification from implementing partners; 
reports  are  compiled/obtained 
transactional  documents  and 
e)  Line 5: Direct payments for payments with high value equivalents of USD 100,000 and above; and 
f)  Line  6:  Justification  and  information  flow  from  MEF/PMU  to  IFAD  including  availability  of  support 
documents for review. Documents are also filed and accessed electronically. 
131 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 8: 
Procurement 
Procurement of Goods, Works and Services financed by the IFAD loan and grant will be undertaken 
by  Banco  Nacional  de  Investimento  (BNI),  as  delegated  by  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance 
(MEF) in accordance with GoM’s Procurement guidelines and procedures to the extent they are not in 
conflict  with  IFAD  Project  Procurement  guidelines.    The  use  of  the  Borrower’s  procurement 
regulations  is  provided  for  under  IFAD’s  General  Conditions,  provided  they  are  deemed  to  be 
consistent  with  IFAD’s  guidelines.  Further,  this  is  in  line  with  the  various  commitments  of  the 
international donor community to work towards increasing the use of national systems where they are 
compatible with the requirement of the donors.  
The  IFAD  procurement  guidelines  and  handbook  require  an  assessment  of  national  procurement 
systems  as  part  of  project  design.  The  assessment  has  been  done  in  two  stages:  (i)  overarching 
country assessment and (ii) project specific assessment at BNI. 
Overarching  Country  assessment.  The  government  body  responsible  for  oversight  of  the 
Procurement  Regulation  is  the  Unit  for  the  Supervision  of  Acquisitions  (Unidade  Funcional  de 
Supervisão  das  Aquisições  –  UFSA).  Ministerial  Diplomas  141  and  142/2006  of  05  September 
established UFSA and approved the structure of Unidade Gestora Executora de Aquisições (UGEA) – 
Unit  responsible  for  acqusition.      The  Procurement  Regulation  requires  that  all  procurement 
procedures abide by a number of principles including legality, public interest, transparency, openness, 
equality,  competitiveness,  impartiality  and  sound  financial  management.  In  addition  procurement 
processes  must  be  decentralised  wherever  possible  as  indicated  by  UFSA,  and  must  strive  to 
optimise  the  benefits  of  procurement  (for  example  through  collective  purchasing/aggregation  of 
purchases). 
The  latest  version  of  public  procurement  regulations  is  Decree  number  5/2016  of  8  March.  This 
regulation guides the tendering of public works, supply of goods and provision of services to the state. 
They  apply  to  all  bodies  and  institutions  of  the  state,  including  state  owned  companies.  There  is  a 
requirement  that  public  procurement  fulfil  a  number  of  criteria  including  legality,  public  interest, 
transparency, openness, equality, competitiveness, impartiality and good financial management.  
According  to  the  regulations,  procurement  at  all  levels  of  government,  including  procurement  using 
funds  from  donor  agencies  must  be  undertaken  under  the  regulations.    The  entity  planning  to 
undertake a procurement process must first send a request  to the unit responsible for management 
and  execution  of  acquisitions  (UGEA).  This  request  must  include:  the  need  and  purpose  of  the 
proposed  procurement;  Specifications;  Detailed  contract  estimate  and  budget  provision  and  any 
specific requirements that must be made of bidders. 
In the Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) carried out jointly by the World Bank, African 
Development  Bank  and  the  donor  community  in  June,  2008  it  was  noted  that  there  has  been 
improvement in the legal and regulatory framework for procurement in Mozambique. It was noted that 
whereas  there  are  a  number  of  aspects  that  provide  opportunities  for  improvement,  the  system  has 
been  embraced  with  International  financiers  increasingly  relying  on  Mozambique’s  systems  for 
National  Competitive  Bidding,  with  fewer  exceptions  to  the  national  regulations,  and  move  to 
organically integrated project implementation units.  
Overall the Country’s legal framework provides an adequate operational environment for procurement 
under REFP. It should however be noted that whenever there are inconsistencies between the GoM 
procurement procedures and IFAD project procurement guidelines, the IFAD guidelines will prevail. 
Project Specific Assessment. REFP will be implemented by the MEF which under the procurement 
law  is  a  UGEA;  a  Ministry  duly  authorised  to  engage  in  Public  Procurement.  The  ministry  has 
delegated  BNI  as  a  Lead  Project  Agency.  A  PMU  established  under  the  supervision  of  the  Chief 
Executive Officer of BNI will run the day to day implementation of the project.  
During  the  design  mission,  a  procurement  assessment  was  carried  out  on  BNI  -  the  lead  project 
agency  (LPA)  and  the  host  of  the  NPMU  in  accordance  with  the  IFAD  procurement  guidelines  and 
handbook.  The  assessment  also  drew  lessons  from  the  procurement  processes  of  BNI  and 
experiences with  other projects in the portfolio. Below is a summary of the assessment, highlighting 
key issues that will require to be addressed. 
133 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Table 9: Summary of Procurement Risks /Findings and Actions (Risk Mitigation Matrix) 
No 
Area 
Major findings/Actions proposed 
1. 
  Personnel 
capacity  and 
Procurement 
planning  
a)  Poor  planning  and  monitoring  leading  to  significant  delays  in  executing 
procurement  actions.  Examples  under  PROSUL  procurement  delays  have 
been noted. In the Project Completion Report of PAFIR, procurement delays 
were registered as a key challenge; 
b)  To address the above, procurement planning will be a requirement as part of 
the annual work plan and budget and will involve all PMU personnel including 
a  Procurement  Officer,a  Project  Finance  Manager  and  BNI  staff  involved  in 
procurement  under  the  Umbrella  Fund.  This  should  facilitate  matching  of 
desired  implementation  timelines  with  processes  and  planned  targets  with 
available funds from the different allocations including financiers;  
c)  Availability  of  qualified  and  experienced  Procurement  personnel  has  been 
noted  as  a  challenge.    RFEP  will  train  procurement  staff  in  the  preparation 
and updating and monitoring of procurement plans in the IFAD recommended 
format but also including GoM mandatory requirement; and 
d)  Records  management  is  among  the  key  risks.  Under  RFEP,  a  checklist  of 
procurement  records  that  must  be  on  each  procurement  file  will  be 
developed.  This  will  be  made  a  filing  requirement  and  the  electronic  filing 
system (e-Archive) currently being developed by IFAD ICO together with the 
existing projects will be a requirement. 
Time  and  cost  overruns  arising  out  of  weaknesses  in  contract  management  has 
been  identified  as  one  of  the  challenges.  Delays  in  implementation  start-up 
have  been  common  in  the  portfolio  and  have  been  linked  to  challenges  with 
contract  management.  Subsequent  delays  in  management  of  contracts  with 
Service  Providers  brought  additional  pressure  to  achieve  physical  outputs. 
This  has  also  been  identified  under  PROSUL  at  MTR  and  PROAQUA.  This 
may  affect  quality  of  implementation  with  negative  implications  for  long-term 
sustainability; Contract management will require to be improved. 
Contract  management  should  be  well  planned  and  coordinated  between  the 
appointed  contract  manager;  technical  staff;  Finance  and  Procurement 
departments; 
and 
Provide training in contract management 
Proactive  follow  up  by  NPMU  and  BNI  to  ensure  quick  action  by  Tribunal 
Administrativo. Submissions should also be comprehensive to reduce on the 
back and forth communication. 
2. 
 Contract 
management 
3. 
 Delays  by  the 
Tribunal 
Administrativo 
to 
clear 
contracts 
Procurement organisation structure. RFEP NPMU will be established under the supervision of BNI. 
Given the small structure of the NPMU, RFEP procurement will be implemented using the structure of 
the procuring entity, where a’ Tender Committee as provided for in the procurement guidelines will be 
appointed and approved by MES.  This should draw membership from the PMU to facilitate sharing of 
implementation  experiences and  guidance on project  specific subject matter requirements. A project 
specific Procurement Officer responsible for procurement planning, procurement executions, reporting 
134 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
and ensuring existence of and compliance with procedures will be competitively recruited and will be 
supervised by the Project Coordinator.  
In  procuring  common  use  items  for  both  the  NPMU  headquarters  and  at  the  RPMU,  requirements 
shall  be  aggregated  and  procured  at  NPMU.  This  should  facilitate  selection  of  appropriate 
procurement  methods,  time  saving  and  other  benefits  of  bulk  procurement.  This  will  be  in  line  with 
GoM Public Procurement regulations that require aggregation of procurement needs.  
To  ensure  quick  turn  over  of  procurement  actions  and  central  management  of  processes,  all 
invitations to tender  and expression of interests shall be  published  through  PMU. It  is PMU that  will 
ensure  that  the  necessary  approvals  and  the  required  No  Objections  are  obtained  prior  to 
implementing any procurement actions both at the NPMU and the Umbrella Fund. 
Procurement planning. All procurement will be executed only against approved procurement plans 
and AWPBs, specifying items to be procured, responsibility for the procurement and the  appropriate 
procurement methods. A detailed procurement cycle will be included in the PIM. 
The  procurement  plan  for  each  year  will  be  consistent  with  the  project’s  AWPB.  Items  procured 
outside the procurement plan and the related AWPB will be declared mis-procurement and the related 
expenditure will be ineligible for financing from the loan proceeds.  
The consolidated Procurement Plan will be submitted together with the AWPB to  the Project Steering 
Committee for approval, and to IFAD for a no objection as part of the RFEP project AWPB and later to 
the  department  of  procurement  for  information  and  subsequently  into  MEF  plans  –  for  monitoring 
purposes. 
Summary of key areas to consider during procurement planning: 
a)  A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during planning period;  
b)  The estimated value of each activity in USD equivalent to MZN;  
c)  The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity;  
d)  Works Procurement Packages with Methods and Time Schedule; 
e)  Goods Procurement Packages with Methods and Time Schedule;  
f)  Service Procurement Packages (both Consultancy and Non-Consultancy Assignments) with 
Selection Methods and Time Schedule; 
g)  Requirements  as  contained  in  the  specific  funding  windows  that  will  require  requests  for 
Expression of Interest will also be included in the plan under the services category; 
h)  The method of review IFAD will undertake for each activity (Post or Prior Review); and 
i)  Timelines  showing  milestones  when  the  key  stages  of  the  procurement  cycle  will  be 
achieved. 
Bidding Documents.  The conduct of a transparent and successful procurement is dependent on the 
quality  of  bidding  documents.  Thus,  to  guard  against  omissions;  costly  amendments  arising  out  of 
bidders seeking clarifications and related delays; and unnecessary cost overruns. It will be essential 
that  bid  documents  get  very  well  prepared  and  obtain  necessary  approvals.  Under  RFEP,  the  GoM 
standard  bid  documents  will  be  used  and  adapted  to  suit  each  specific  procurement  items.  IFAD 
clearance  of  the  Standard  Bidding  Documents/TOR  and  specifications  in  respect  of  RFEP  will  be  a 
requirement.  
Contract  Management  and  procurement  records.  The  NPMU  will  be  held  responsible  for  overall 
contract  management  including  monitoring  of  performance  of  the  implementing  agencies  as 
appropriate  and  establishing  Contract  Management  systems.  The  NPMU  contract  management 
system will include: (i) management of contract start-up issues, (ii) opening and updating a contracts 
register  (iii)  monitoring  of  contract  implementation,  (iv)claims  management,  (v)  implementation  of 
penalty  clauses  (vi)  contract  amendments,  (vii)  contract  completion  and  closure  and  (viii)  record 
keeping including e-filling.  
Procurement  records  shall  include  request  to  initiate  a  procurement,  the  rationale  for  the  method  of 
procurement,  solicitation  document  including  TOR/specifications/bid  documents,  selection  of  the 
contract  type,  advertisement,  record  of  sale  of  bids,  record  of  receipt  of  bids  (both  successful  and 
successful  bids),  record  of  opening  of  bids,  evaluation  minutes  and  report,  the  justification  for  the 
award, award letter, acceptance letter, contracts incl. amendments if any, and other correspondences 
related  to  the  procurement,  including  approvals  and  No  Objections.  Under  the  IFAD  general 
135 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
conditions,  records  are  kept  for  ten  years  after  project  closure.  A  checklist  for  some  of  the  key 
information that should be included in a procurement file will be included with more details in the PIM. 
Particular Methods of Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services and related 
thresholds are proposed. 
In  accordance  with  the  IFAD  procurement  Handbook,  international  competitive  bidding  (ICB)  will  be 
carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  World  Bank  guidelines.  This  will  be  mandatory  for  procurement 
contracts with the following values: 
a)  Goods, above USD 200,000 
b)  Works, above USD 1,000,000 and 
c)  Services above USD 100,000. 
A summary of other methods are indicated in the table below. 
Table 10: Thresholds for Procurement and Review Methods 
Expenditure Category  Contract Value Threshold (USD) 
>1,000,000 
Procurement/Selection Method 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) 
Works 
Goods 
≥ 50,000 ≤ 1,000,000 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) 
< 50,000 
All values 
≤ 200,000 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
ICB 
≥ 10,000 < 200,000  
NCB 
< 10,000 
All values 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
None Consulting Services. Non consulting services will be procured using the following methods. 
a)  Request for Quotations: 
- 
- 
Internationally: for contracts valued over USD 200,000 equivalent, and  
 Nationally: for contracts valued over USD 50,000 equivalent up to and including 
(e.g. USD 200,000 equivalent;  
b)  National Shopping applies to contracts valued up to and including USD 50,000 equivalent. 
Consulting  Services.  The  Quality  and  Cost  Based  Selection  will  be  the  standard  method  applied 
unless otherwise approved. The following processes will apply:  
a)  Request  for  Proposal  (Internationally)–  for  contracts  with  a  value  over  USD  200,000 
equivalent; and  
b)  Request  for  Proposal  (Nationally)  -  for  contracts  with  a  value  up  to  and  including  USD 
200,000. 
Prior-Review  by  IFAD:  In  accordance  with  paragraph 80  of  the  IFAD  Project  Procurement 
Guidelines, the following will be subject to prior review by IFAD: 
a)  Award  of  any  contract  for  goods  and  equipment  to  cost  USD  100,000  or  equivalent  or 
more; 
b)  Award of any contract for works estimated to cost USD 100,000 or equivalent or more; 
c)  Award of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost of USD 50,000 or 
equivalent or more; 
d)  All contracts done under direct procurement method;  
e)  Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) or any equivalent contractual vehicle entered into 
between RFEP/FARE with any entity including GoM agencies. 
136 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
For NCB, GoM regulations will apply. All bidding documents will need to be satisfactory to IFAD and 
subject  to  the  additional  procedures  and  modifications  stipulated  below  and  to  be  reflected  in  the 
Financing Agreement. 
Qualification.  Qualification  criteria  shall  entirely  concern  the  bidder’s  capability  and  resources  to 
perform the contract considering objective and measurable factors. The qualification criteria shall  be 
clearly  specified  in  the  bidding  documents,  and  all  criteria  so  specified  and  only  such  criteria  so 
specified  shall  be  used  to  determine  whether  a  bidder  is  qualified.  Qualification  criteria  shall  be 
assessed on a ‘pass or fail’ basis, and merit points  shall not be used. Bidders’ qualifications may be 
assessed  by  post-qualification  and  such  an  assessment  shall  be  conducted  separately  from  the 
technical and commercial evaluation of the bids. 
Advertisement.  A  shorter  version  of  the  advertisement  text,  including  the  minimum  relevant 
information, shall be published in a national newspaper of wide circulation provided that the full text is 
simultaneously  published in the official gazette or on a  widely used  website or  electronic portal  with 
free national and international access. 
Bid preparation time, submission and opening. Bidders shall be given at least forty five days for 
ICB, thirty days for NCB and fourteen days for selective tendering, from the date of the invitation to bid 
or the date of availability of bidding documents, whichever is later, to prepare and submit bids in line 
with  Public  Procurement  Regulations.It  is  good  practice  to  publish  bids  when  the  tender  documents 
are  ready  for  issuance.  This  should  shorten  the  time  for  the  specific  procurement  cycle  and  allow 
adequate time to address clarifications whenever they arise. 
Bids shall be opened in public, immediately after the deadline for their submission in accordance with 
the procedures stated in the bidding documents. The public bid opening shall  take place in only one 
session. At the public bid opening, the names of the bidders and the total amount of each bid and of 
any alternative bids if they have been requested or permitted, shall be read aloud and recorded when 
opened. Bids shall not be evaluated as part of the bid opening process, and no bid shall be rejected 
during the public bid opening session, except for late bids. Bidders shall not be allowed to submit their 
bids or additional information after the deadline for submission of bids has expired. 
Bid  validity.  No  automatic  extension  of  the  bid  validity  shall  apply.  If  justified  by  exceptional 
circumstances,  an  extension  of  the  bid  validity  may  be  requested  in  writing  by  the  Project  to  all 
bidders  before  the  original  bid  validity  expiration  date  and  it  shall  cover  only  the  minimum  period 
required to complete the evaluation and award of the contract. It is important to note that where bid 
security is a requirement, extension of the validity period should correspond to the bid validity. 
Bid  evaluation.  Evaluation  of  bids  shall  be  made  in  strict  adherence  to  the  evaluation  criteria 
declared  in  the  bidding  documents.  Evaluation  criteria  other  than  price  shall  be  quantified  in  the 
manner in which they will be applied for the purpose of determining the lowest evaluated bid shall be 
established in the bidding documents. A weighting/scoring system shall be used. 
a)  A  contract  shall  be  awarded  to  the  qualified  bidder  offering  the  lowest-evaluated  and 
substantially responsive bid; 
b)  Bidders shall not be eliminated on the basis of minor, non-substantial deviations;  
c)  Requests  for  clarification  and  the  bidder’s  responses  shall  be  made  in  writing  and  all  the 
clarifications made shall be notified to all the bidders; and 
d)  After  the  public  opening  of  bids,  information  relating  to  the  examination,  clarification,  and 
evaluation of bids and recommendations concerning the awards shall not be disclosed to bidders 
or  other  persons  not  officially  concerned  with  this  process  until  publication  of  the  award  of  the 
contract. 
Rejection  of  all  bids  and  re-bidding.  Without  the  Fund’s  prior  concurrence,  there  will  be  no 
procurement  process  where  all  the  bids  will  be  rejected,  or  which  will  be  cancelled,  and  new  bids 
solicited.  This  also  applies  to  corrections  on  bid  documents  that  had  been  previously  given  a  No 
Objection by IFAD. 
Securities.  Bid  securities  shall  not  exceed  3  percent  of  the  estimated  cost  of  the  contract;  and 
performance securities shall not exceed 10 percent of the contract price. The successful bidder shall 
be given at least 15 days from the receipt of notification of contract award to submit a performance 
137 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
security.  No  advance  payment  shall  be  made  without  a  suitable  advance  payment  security  in 
accordance with Public Procurement Regulations. 
Complaints by bidders and handling of complaints. The borrower shall establish an effective and 
independent  protest  mechanism  allowing  bidders  to  protest  and  to  have  their  protest  handled  in  a 
timely manner. The GoM complaint management procedure shall be used. 
Contract  and  contract  modifications.  Contracts  shall  be  in  writing  and  the  bid  of  the  successful 
bidder shall become part of the contract documents. In the case of contracts signed after prior review 
by IFAD, the IFAD’s No Objection shall be obtained before agreeing to any type of amendment, such 
as  (a)  a  material  extension  of  the  stipulated  time  for  performance  of  a  contract;  (b)  any  substantial 
modification of the scope of services or other significant changes to the terms and conditions of the 
contract; or (c) the proposed termination of the contract. A copy of all contracts and amendments shall 
be furnished to the IFAD for its record. 
Right to inspect/audit. In accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, each bidding document and 
contract  financed  from  the  proceeds  of  the  financing  shall  stipulate  that  bidders,  suppliers,  and 
contractors, and their subcontractors, agents,  personnel, consultants, service  providers or suppliers, 
shall permit the IFAD, at its request, to inspect their accounts, records, and other documents relating 
to the submission of bids and contract performance and to have them audited by auditors appointed 
by  IFAD.  Acts  intended  to  materially  impede  the  exercise  of  the  IFAD’s  inspection  and  audit  rights 
constitute an obstructive practice as defined in the Procurement Guidelines. 
Fraud and corruption. In accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, each bidding document and 
contract financed from the proceeds of the financing shall include provisions on matters pertaining to 
fraud  and  corruption.  The  IFAD  will  sanction  a  firm  or  individual,  at  any  time,  in  accordance  with 
prevailing IFAD sanctions procedures, including by publicly declaring such firm or individual ineligible, 
either indefinitely or for a stated period of time. 
 All contracts must be listed in the Register of Contracts, which should be updated and submitted to 
the  IFAD  on  a  quarterly  basis.  In  accordance  with  the  GoM  Public  Procurement  Regulations,  all 
contracts  are  subject  to  review  by  Tribunal  Administrativo  (TA).  NPMU  should  ensure  that  the 
requirement is met. 
138 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Appendix 9: 
Project cost and financing 
1.  Main  Assumptions.  The  Rural  Enterprise  Finance  Project  will  be  implemented  over  a  6-year 
period. Project costs and financing were calculated based on consultations with relevant project sub-
component leaders of the design team. All costs were produced using COSTAB.  
Inflation. Information on the current as well as projections on inflation were collected from the 
2. 
regular reports prepared by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU134). Local inflation (CPI) reached an 
average all-time high in 2016 of 19.9% and has steadily decreased. In 2017, the EIU estimates that 
the  average  inflation  will  be  15%.  The  forecast shows  inflation  to  decrease  sharply  to  6.5%  in  2018 
(PY1), before rising slowly  in 2019 (PY2) to 6.7%. The decrease in inflation will be driven mainly by 
lower  oil  prices,  and  the  stabilization  of  food  prices  following  the  recovery  from  shocks  to  internal 
production  due  to  weather  related  events.  As  the  forecast  does  not  go  beyond  2021  (at  5.9%),  we 
have set the inflation for project years 5 and 6 equal to the forecasted inflation for 2021. The inflation 
on  foreign  exchange  is  based  on  the  EIU  forecasts  for  the  Unit  Value  Index  (in  USD)  of 
manufacturers. 
3. 
Exchange rate. After a of continuous depreciation of the Mozambican Metical against the US 
dollar  in  2016,  Bank  of  Mozambique  has  tightened  fiscal  policy  in  2017,  establishing  a  single 
exchange rate applicable by all banks. As at September 2017 the official exchange rate for the USD 
was     1 USD = 60  MZN.  Considering  the  volatile  situation,  the  exchange  rate  forecast  presented  by 
the EIU was adjusted for the purposes of the project to 1 USD = 64.4 MZN in PY1 to 1 USD = 78.3 
MZN in PY5 and 6. 
Table 11: Inflation and Exchange rates for COSTAB 
4. 
Physical  contingencies.  A  physical  contingency  of  5%  has  been  applied  to  all  goods 
(equipment, vehicles, etc.) and services. This measure will allow for fluctuations in the costs of these 
expenditure  categories  due  to  uncertainties  not  fully  accounted  for  during  design.  No  contingencies 
134 http://www.eiu.com/ 
139 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectInflation and Exchange RatesUp toUp toProjectNegotiationStart201820192020202120222023Inflation (in %'s) /a MOST Annual rates Local 15.015.06.56.75.15.95.95.9Foreign 1.41.42.05.94.14.54.54.5Compounded rates Local 15.015.018.726.634.041.449.758.6Foreign 1.41.42.46.511.816.621.827.3NONE Annual rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Compounded rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Exchange rates (Local/Foreign) /b MOST Rates actually used 60.060.064.468.973.576.078.378.3Constant purchasing parity rates 60.068.078.980.981.682.583.684.8% deviation 0.0-11.8-18.4-14.8-9.9-7.9-6.4-7.6NONE Rates actually used 60.060.064.468.973.576.078.378.3Constant purchasing parity rates 60.060.060.060.060.060.060.060.0% deviation 0.00.07.314.822.526.730.530.5 _________________________________\a Yearly values are within Each Project Year\b Yearly values are at Project Year Midpoints 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
have been applied to the expenditure category for funds disbursed as part of grants or loans (for on 
lending) to project beneficiaries.   
Project Costs. Total project costs including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes 
5. 
are estimated at USD 72.5 million. Of this amount, USD 55.9 million is foreign exchange content, and 
around USD 13.1 million corresponds to duties and taxes.  
6. 
Project  components  are  (i)  Component  1:  Improved  access  to  adaptive  financial  services  to 
rural  entrepreneurs,  totalling  USD  51.4  million);  (ii)  Component  2:  Capacity  building  and  support  for 
local  institutions  and  rural  entrepreneurs,  totalling  USD 10.6 million  and  (iii)  Institutional  support  and 
Programme Management, totalling USD 10.5 million. 
A summary breakdown of the Project costs by component and financier is presented in the 
7. 
table below. 
Table 12: REFP breakdown components and financiers 
8. 
Project Financing. REFP  will be financed by:  an IFAD loan (USD 62.1 million,  85.7% of total 
project costs), Government of Mozambique (USD 4.3 million, 5.9% of total project costs), the Private 
Sector  (which  includes  Banks,  Micro-banks  and  MFIs)  for  a  total  of  USD 5 million  and  the  project 
beneficiaries  (USD  1.1  million,  1.7%  of  total  project  costs).  The  IFAD  financing  will  be  provided  as 
loan  in  USD  on  highly  concessionary  terms  and  will  absorb  the  entire  PBAS  allocation  for 
Mozambique for the period 2016-2018 (USD 62,148, 581). Finally, the IFAD loan will finance taxes. 
 The Government of Mozambique will finance the salaries of its own staff who will support the 
9. 
implementation of the project on a pro-rata basis, as well as the costs of the PMU office in Maputo.  
Table 13: REFP financing plan 
140 
Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Improved access to adaptive financal services for rural entrepreneurs1. The Graduation and Outreach Programme10,188.783.5997.58.2100.00.8915.27.512,201.416.82. The Crowding in Fund6,000.251.04,002.534.01,000.08.5758.46.411,761.116.23. Line of Credit27,087.398.6----382.91.427,470.237.9Subtotal43,276.284.15,000.09.71,100.02.12,056.54.051,432.770.9B. Capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs1. Support to essential local institutions6,469.194.5----378.55.56,847.59.42. Business Development Support2,882.676.9----868.123.13,750.75.2Subtotal9,351.788.2----1,246.511.810,598.214.6C. Programme Management9,520.790.6----985.29.410,505.914.5Total PROJECT COSTS62,148.685.75,000.06.91,100.01.54,288.35.972,536.8100.0IFADPrivate SectorBeneficiariesGoMTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Equipment & Materials426.8100.0----0.0-426.80.6Vehicles775.4100.0-----0.0-775.41.1Consultancies14,507.975.2997.55.2100.00.53,686.019.119,291.426.6Credit, Guarantee Funds32,537.386.74,002.510.71,000.02.7--37,539.851.8Training5,380.6100.0----0.0-5,380.67.4Workshop1,282.8100.0----0.0-1,282.81.8Salaries & Allowances6,018.398.4----98.71.66,117.08.4Operating Costs1,219.670.8----503.629.21,723.22.4Total PROJECT COSTS62,148.685.75,000.06.91,100.01.54,288.35.972,536.8100.0IFADPrivate SectorBeneficiariesGoMTotal 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 14: Expenditure accounts by financier 
141 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectExpenditure Accounts by Financiers(USD)LocalIFADPrivate SectorBeneficiariesGoMTotal(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%For. Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment Costs A. Funds 32,537.386.74,002.510.71,000.02.7--37,539.851.837,539.8--B. Consulting Services 5,082.887.1750.012.9--0.0-5,832.88.03,799.11,679.7354.1C. Studies 459.5100.0----0.0-459.50.6126.3255.078.1D. Training 5,380.6100.0----0.0-5,380.67.4929.03,877.0574.6E. Equipment and materials 426.8100.0----0.0-426.80.6113.8240.472.5F. Workshops 1,001.2100.0----0.0-1,001.21.487.1743.9170.2G. Meetings 281.6100.0----0.0-281.60.4-233.847.9H. Vehicles 775.4100.0-----0.0-775.41.1358.7290.1126.6I. Technical Assistance 8,965.669.0247.51.9100.00.83,686.028.412,999.117.97,749.73,547.01,702.4Total Investment Costs 54,910.784.95,000.07.71,100.01.73,686.05.764,696.789.250,703.510,866.83,126.4II. Recurrent Costs A. Travel costs 384.6100.0----0.0-384.60.5103.5215.765.4B. Operation & Maintenance 319.9100.0----0.0-319.90.488.6176.954.4C. Salaries 5,011.2100.0------5,011.26.95,011.2--D. Allowances and Benefits 622.586.3----98.713.7721.31.04.7716.5-E. Office and general expenses 899.764.1----503.635.91,403.31.9-1,164.7238.6Total Recurrent Costs 7,237.992.3----602.37.77,840.210.85,208.02,273.9358.3Total PROJECT COSTS 62,148.685.75,000.06.91,100.01.54,288.35.972,536.8100.055,911.513,140.73,484.7 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 15: Project components and sub-components summary 
142 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectComponents Project Cost Summary(MZN)(USD)%% Total%% TotalForeignBaseForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Improved access to adaptive financal services for rural entrepreneurs 1. The Graduation and Outreach Programme 215,783.3467,373.0683,156.468163,596.47,789.611,385.968162. The Crowding in Fund 73,294.1618,402.0691,696.189171,221.610,306.711,528.389173. Line of Credit 10,099.31,634,362.01,644,461.39939168.327,239.427,407.79939Subtotal 299,176.72,720,137.03,019,313.790734,986.345,335.650,321.99073B. Capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 1. Support to essential local institutions 197,571.0156,638.5354,209.54493,292.92,610.65,903.54492. Business Development Support 128,123.665,646.4193,770.03452,135.41,094.13,229.5345Subtotal 325,694.7222,284.8547,979.541135,428.23,704.79,133.04113C. Programme Management 241,446.5355,025.1596,471.660144,024.15,917.19,941.26014Total BASELINE COSTS 866,317.93,297,446.94,163,764.87910014,438.654,957.469,396.179100Physical Contingencies 38,810.616,976.455,787.0301646.8282.9929.8301Price Contingencies 288,763.3737,800.21,026,563.572251,539.9671.12,211.0303Total PROJECT COSTS 1,193,891.84,052,223.55,246,115.37712616,625.455,911.572,536.877105 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 16: Expenditure accounts by components – Totals including contingencies 
143 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies(USD)Improved access to adaptivefinancal services for ruralCapacity building andentrepreneurssupport for institutionsTheand rural entrepreneursGraduationSupport toandTheessentialBusinessOutreachCrowding inLine oflocalDevelopmentProgrammeProgrammeFundCreditinstitutionsSupportManagementTotal I. Investment Costs A. Funds 450.010,002.527,087.3---37,539.8B. Consulting Services 3,750.01,000.2-577.2-505.45,832.8C. Studies ---118.574.8266.2459.5D. Training 2,000.7--686.62,486.2207.15,380.6E. Equipment and materials 9.0--18.7-399.1426.8F. Workshops 629.6--70.5-301.01,001.2G. Meetings 281.6-----281.6H. Vehicles ---33.0-742.4775.4I. Technical Assistance 5,080.5758.4382.94,850.41,189.7737.112,999.1Total Investment Costs 12,201.411,761.127,470.26,355.03,750.73,158.264,696.7II. Recurrent Costs A. Travel costs ---384.6--384.6B. Operation & Maintenance ---68.0-251.8319.9C. Salaries -----5,011.25,011.2D. Allowances and Benefits -----721.3721.3E. Office and general expenses ---39.9-1,363.41,403.3Total Recurrent Costs ---492.5-7,347.77,840.2Total PROJECT COSTS 12,201.411,761.127,470.26,847.53,750.710,505.972,536.8  Taxes 597.7299.065.11,078.8637.6806.53,484.7Foreign Exchange 7,974.010,363.827,270.02,990.91,267.76,045.155,911.5 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 17: Expenditure accounts by years – Totals including contingencies 
144 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectExpenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies(USD)Totals Including Contingencies201820192020202120222023Total I. Investment Costs A. Funds 6,831.76,831.76,831.76,681.76,181.74,181.237,539.8B. Consulting Services 1,370.61,788.81,786.6292.4307.2287.35,832.8C. Studies 199.5--124.4-135.6459.5D. Training 1,137.61,138.31,102.91,072.4528.0401.35,380.6E. Equipment and materials 328.419.719.921.318.319.3426.8F. Workshops 416.7281.1205.631.432.334.21,001.2G. Meetings 80.179.939.640.441.6-281.6H. Vehicles 775.4-----775.4I. Technical Assistance 1,965.82,968.92,927.02,344.51,761.61,031.312,999.1Total Investment Costs 13,105.813,108.212,913.210,608.68,870.76,090.164,696.7II. Recurrent Costs A. Travel costs 64.8221.698.1---384.6B. Operation & Maintenance 62.463.063.741.943.345.7319.9C. Salaries 835.2835.2835.2835.2835.2835.25,011.2D. Allowances and Benefits 135.9127.1119.2115.3111.9111.9721.3E. Office and general expenses 235.8234.9233.2224.4230.7244.31,403.3Total Recurrent Costs 1,334.11,481.81,349.31,216.81,221.11,237.17,840.2Total PROJECT COSTS 14,439.914,590.014,262.511,825.410,091.87,327.172,536.8 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 18: Project Components by Year - Base costs 
145 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectProject Components by Year -- Base Costs(USD)Base Cost201820192020202120222023TotalA. Improved access to adaptive financal services for rural entrepreneurs 1. The Graduation and Outreach Programme 1,946.63,640.03,500.91,078.5731.1488.811,385.92. The Crowding in Fund 2,265.52,265.52,265.52,265.52,265.5200.911,528.33. Line of Credit 4,734.64,734.64,734.64,734.64,234.64,234.627,407.7Subtotal 8,946.710,640.110,501.08,078.67,231.24,924.350,321.9B. Capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 1. Support to essential local institutions 1,528.21,203.61,073.6908.0783.0407.05,903.52. Business Development Support 801.9735.9735.9735.9175.044.93,229.5Subtotal 2,330.21,939.51,809.51,643.9958.0451.89,133.0C. Programme Management 2,530.01,491.91,450.21,533.51,423.51,512.19,941.2Total BASELINE COSTS 13,806.814,071.513,760.811,256.09,612.76,888.369,396.1Physical Contingencies 243.2183.7164.5153.3107.377.7929.8Price Contingencies Inflation Local 630.9693.7799.7897.0791.7730.54,543.5Foreign 38.376.9124.4169.7149.5112.2671.1Subtotal Inflation 669.2770.6924.21,066.7941.2842.75,214.6Devaluation -279.4-435.8-586.9-650.6-569.3-481.6-3,003.6Subtotal Price Contingencies 389.8334.8337.2416.2371.9361.12,211.0Total PROJECT COSTS 14,439.914,590.014,262.511,825.410,091.87,327.172,536.8  Taxes 901.7681.5610.4583.6411.8295.73,484.7Foreign Exchange 10,269.411,393.411,412.09,141.58,054.25,641.155,911.5 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 19: Project Components by Years - Investment/Recurrent Costs 
146 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectProject Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs(USD)Totals Including Contingencies201820192020202120222023TotalA. Improved access to adaptive financal services for rural entrepreneurs 1. The Graduation and Outreach Programme Investment Costs 2,077.93,807.03,643.41,225.0848.5599.512,201.4Recurrent Costs -------Subtotal 2,077.93,807.03,643.41,225.0848.5599.512,201.42. The Crowding in Fund Investment Costs 2,294.32,296.42,298.52,306.32,316.3249.211,761.1Recurrent Costs -------Subtotal 2,294.32,296.42,298.52,306.32,316.3249.211,761.13. Line of Credit Investment Costs 4,740.64,741.84,743.34,745.44,247.84,251.227,470.2Recurrent Costs -------Subtotal 4,740.64,741.84,743.34,745.44,247.84,251.227,470.2Subtotal 9,112.910,845.210,685.28,276.87,412.75,099.951,432.7B. Capacity building and support for institutions and rural entrepreneurs 1. Support to essential local institutions Investment Costs 1,602.91,093.41,090.81,062.9972.6532.56,355.0Recurrent Costs 100.7257.6134.2---492.5Subtotal 1,703.51,351.01,225.01,062.9972.6532.56,847.52. Business Development Support Investment Costs 904.1840.0852.7878.0217.158.83,750.7Recurrent Costs -------Subtotal 904.1840.0852.7878.0217.158.83,750.7Subtotal 2,607.62,191.12,077.71,940.81,189.7591.310,598.2C. Programme Management Investment Costs 1,486.0329.5284.5391.0268.4398.83,158.2Recurrent Costs 1,233.41,224.21,215.11,216.81,221.11,237.17,347.7Subtotal 2,719.51,553.71,499.51,607.81,489.51,635.910,505.9Total PROJECT COSTS 14,439.914,590.014,262.511,825.410,091.87,327.172,536.8Total Investment Costs 13,105.813,108.212,913.210,608.68,870.76,090.164,696.7Total Recurrent Costs 1,334.11,481.81,349.31,216.81,221.11,237.17,840.2 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 20: Detailed cost table - sub-component 1.1 
147 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectTable 1.1. The Graduation and Outreach ProgrammeDetailed CostsUnit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationBase Cost - Negotiation (USD)Totals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit201820192020202120222023Total(USD)201820192020202120222023Total201820192020202120222023Total I. Investment Costs A. Graduation Promotion Sub-Programme 1. Sensitization of beneficiaries Lumpsum113.4113.4113.4---340.1130.6130.7130.5---391.92. Selection of Financial Service Providers Lumpsum-106.853.453.4--213.6-121.262.164.2--247.53. Government monitoring of performance of loans /a Lumpsum106.8106.8106.8106.8106.8106.8640.8118.8121.2124.2128.4133.2140.0765.84. Targeting selection Lumpsum106.8106.8----213.6118.8121.2----240.05. Monitoring and coaching Technical Support /b Lumpsum5050505050-2501.06853.453.453.453.453.4-267.059.460.662.164.266.6-312.9Linkages to Formal Financial Institutions Lumpsum-100100100--3001.068-106.8106.8106.8--320.4-121.2124.2128.4--373.8Monitoring and Evaluation Number11111-553.40453.453.453.453.453.4-267.059.460.662.164.266.6-312.9Establishment of VSLAs/ASCAs Lumpsum50505050--2000.53426.726.726.726.7--106.829.730.331.132.1--123.1Subtotal 133.5240.3240.3240.3106.8-961.3148.5272.7279.5288.8133.2-1,122.86. Savings mobilization Community sensitization meeting Meeting3030303030-1501.1534.534.534.534.534.5-172.540.139.939.640.441.6-201.6Establishment of community savings groups Lumpsum-303040--1001.068-32.032.042.7--106.8-36.437.351.3--125.0Incentives for saving Beneficiary3,0003,0003,000---9,0000.05150.0150.0150.0---450.0150.0150.0150.0---450.0Provision of savings facilities Number-303040--1000.077-2.32.33.1--7.7-2.62.73.7--9.0Subtotal 184.5218.9218.980.334.5-737.0190.1228.9229.695.541.6-785.67. Selection of enterprises Meetings for selection of enterprises Workshop11----234.534.534.5----69.040.139.9----80.0Enterprise specific training workshops Workshop11----245.34545.345.3----90.752.252.3----104.5Support from Government experts /c Lumpsum-10.710.710.7--32.0-12.112.412.8--37.4Market survey Study1-----121.36121.4-----21.423.8-----23.8Subtotal 101.290.510.710.7--213.1116.1104.312.412.8--245.78. Training and Capacity Building Development of training curriculum and manual Number1-----124.56624.6-----24.627.3-----27.3Review of training curriculum /d Lumpsum5.3-----5.35.9-----5.9Training workshops Lumpsum38.538.538.5---115.644.444.444.4---133.2Training of beneficiaries Lumpsum281.0281.0281.0281.0281.0281.01,685.9326.4325.2322.8329.3338.5358.52,000.7Subtotal 349.4319.5319.5281.0281.0281.01,831.4404.1369.6367.1329.3338.5358.52,167.2Subtotal 1,095.61,303.01,062.9772.5529.1387.85,150.91,226.91,470.01,205.4919.0646.5498.55,966.4B. Outreach Expansion Sub-Programme 1. Private sector participation Number-55---1075-375.0375.0---750.0-375.0375.0---750.02. Participation of Government credit entities lumpsum-552--1252-260.0260.0104.0--624.0-260.0260.0104.0--624.03. Participation of Financial Institutions Number51010---25150750.01,500.01,500.0---3,750.0750.01,500.01,500.0---3,750.04. Beneficiary level participation Number10203020201011010.1101.0202.0303.0202.0202.0101.01,111.0101.0202.0303.0202.0202.0101.01,111.0Subtotal 851.02,337.02,438.0306.0202.0101.06,235.0851.02,337.02,438.0306.0202.0101.06,235.0Total 1,946.63,640.03,500.91,078.5731.1488.811,385.92,077.93,807.03,643.41,225.0848.5599.512,201.4 _________________________________\a Carried out by BM\b For monitoring and evaluation activities\c Participation and training of workshop participants\d By Government microfinance experts 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 21: Detailed cost table - sub-component 1.2 
148 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectTable 1.2. The Crowding In Fund /aDetailed CostsUnit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationBase Cost - Negotiation (USD)Totals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit201820192020202120222023Total(USD)201820192020202120222023Total201820192020202120222023Total I. Investment Costs A. Fund Management /b 1. Fund Management Costs Lumpsum147.5147.5147.5147.5147.5147.5884.9163.2162.6161.3164.6169.2179.21,000.22. Support from Government institutions /c Supervision of Fund Management by Bank of Mozambique Lumpsum53.453.453.453.453.453.4320.459.460.662.164.266.670.0382.9Support in appraisal of agriculture projects /d Lumpsum32.032.032.032.032.0-160.235.636.437.338.540.0-187.7Support in appraisal of fisheries and aquaculture projects /e Lumpsum32.032.032.032.032.0-160.235.636.437.338.540.0-187.7Subtotal 117.5117.5117.5117.5117.553.4640.8130.7133.3136.6141.2146.670.0758.4Subtotal 265.0265.0265.0265.0265.0200.91,525.8293.8295.9298.0305.8315.8249.21,758.6B. Contribution from participating Financial Institutions /f Lumpsum800.5800.5800.5800.5800.5-4,002.5800.5800.5800.5800.5800.5-4,002.5C. Matching contribution from beneficiaries /g Beneficiary200200200200200-1,0001200.0200.0200.0200.0200.0-1,000.0200.0200.0200.0200.0200.0-1,000.0D. Disbursement of funds Beneficiary200200200200200-1,00051,000.01,000.01,000.01,000.01,000.0-5,000.01,000.01,000.01,000.01,000.01,000.0-5,000.0Total 2,265.52,265.52,265.52,265.52,265.5200.911,528.32,294.32,296.42,298.52,306.32,316.3249.211,761.1 _________________________________\a For around 1,000 beneficiaries and maximum loans of USD 5,000\b For the management of the crowding in fund and Line of Credit\c Supervision activities to be financed by Government\d From Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA)\e From Ministry of Sea, Inland Waters, and Fisheries (MIMAIP)\f Including Banks and Microfinance Institutions. Calculated as a loan of 40% of maximum investment (USD 10,000)\g Estimated at around 10% of maximum investment (USD 10,000) 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 22: Detailed cost table - sub-component 1.3. 
149 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectTable 1.3. Line of CreditDetailed CostsUnit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationBase Cost - Negotiation (USD)Totals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit201820192020202120222023Total(USD)201820192020202120222023Total201820192020202120222023Total I. Investment Costs A. Financing existing and emerging micro agro-enterprises /a Lumpsum1,491.21,491.21,491.21,491.21,491.21,491.28,947.31,491.21,491.21,491.21,491.21,491.21,491.28,947.3B. Financing outgrower schemes on a pilot basis /b Lumpsum500.0500.0500.0500.0--2,000.0500.0500.0500.0500.0--2,000.0C. Financing production/working capital /c Lumpsum2,090.02,090.02,090.02,090.02,090.02,090.012,540.02,090.02,090.02,090.02,090.02,090.02,090.012,540.0D. Financing ASCAs for on-lending to members /d Lumpsum600.0600.0600.0600.0600.0600.03,600.0600.0600.0600.0600.0600.0600.03,600.0E. Support from Government Financial Institutions /e Lumpsum53.453.453.453.453.453.4320.459.460.662.164.266.670.0382.9Total 4,734.64,734.64,734.64,734.64,234.64,234.627,407.74,740.64,741.84,743.34,745.44,247.84,251.227,470.2 _________________________________\a To cover also allied sectors of agriculture. To cover around 3,500 enterprises. Loans ranging between 500-4000 US$\b To finance 1-3 outgrower schemes impacting approximately 300 smallholder farmers.\c For 'subsistence' and 'emerging' farmers, as well as individual local traders and aggregators through seggregated loans averaging 300-1000 US$\d To undertake agriculture activities or setting up micro-enterprises that offer anciliary services to farmers\e On reviewing LoC strategy and feasibility 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 23: Detailed cost table - sub-component 2.1 
150 
QuantitiesUnit Cost -Base Cost - Negotiation (USD)Totals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit201820192020202120222023TotalNegotiation (USD)201820192020202120222023Total201820192020202120222023Total I. Investment Costs A. Capacity building for financial services intermediaries Conduct training need assessment Study1-----155.04255.0-----55.062.4-----62.4Delivering trainings to financial service providers Number-5555-2011.008-55.055.055.055.0-220.2-63.063.765.567.7-259.8Developing training manuals/materials Number18-----185.3496.1-----96.1106.9-----106.9Financial product development /a Lumpsum138.0-----138.0160.3-----160.3Support of Government Financial Institutions /b Lumpsum-182.8182.8182.8182.8-731.2-207.5212.6219.7228.0-867.8Enhancing mobility of Formal Financial Service Providers /c Lumpsum25252525--1005125.0125.0125.0125.0--500.0125.0125.0125.0125.0--500.0Subtotal 414.2362.8362.8362.8237.8-1,740.5454.6395.4401.3410.2295.7-1,957.2B. Strengthening existing ASCAs Strengthening and linking matured ASCAS to the FFIs Lumpsum99.1-----99.1112.2-----112.2Developing financial products that meet the needs of ASCAs Lumpsum51.8-----51.857.2-----57.2Develop simplified IT supported MIS /d Lumpsum96.1-----96.1106.9-----106.9Subtotal 247.0-----247.0276.4-----276.4C. Establishing and training the apex of ASCAs Hiring core staff 2 Person-Month121212121212720.805/Person-Month19.319.319.319.319.319.3115.922.422.422.222.623.324.7137.6Developing operational manual and strategic plan Lumpsum23.5-----23.526.1-----26.1Training staff Lumpsum19.819.8----39.622.422.7----45.1Vehicle (4WD) for enhanced mobility 129.8-----29.833.0-----33.0Conducting workshops and conferences Number3-----320.40561.2-----61.270.5-----70.5Purchase of office equipment /e Lumpsum16.5-----16.518.7-----18.7Subtotal 170.139.119.319.319.319.3286.5193.345.022.222.623.324.7331.1D. Build a database and promote social performance management of MFIs /f Training in social performance management of MFIs Number111---349.53849.549.549.5---148.656.156.757.3---170.1Performance Monitoring Officer Person-Month1212121212-601.72520.720.720.720.720.7-103.522.922.822.623.123.8-115.2Integrate data in Government database Lumpsum10.710.710.710.710.7-53.411.912.112.412.813.3-62.6Subtotal 80.980.980.931.431.4-305.590.991.692.435.937.1-347.9E. Supporting the transformation of FARE Lumpsum157.5157.5157.5157.5157.5157.5945.2175.2178.8183.2189.3196.5206.51,129.6F. Strengthen the Development Finance Coordination Secretariat under MEF Lumpsum213.6213.6213.6213.6213.6213.61,281.7237.6242.4248.4256.7266.5280.01,531.6G. Capacity building of regulatory department of MFIs /g Training the staff of the regulation and supervision department for microfinance Lumpsum-11111516.513-16.516.516.516.516.582.6-18.919.119.620.321.499.3Undetake a study to identify the challenges of growth Study49.5-----49.556.1-----56.1Implement financial literacy promotion activities Lumpsum106.8106.8106.8106.8106.8-534.0118.8121.2124.2128.4133.2-625.8Subtotal 156.3123.3123.3123.3123.316.5666.1174.9140.1143.3148.0153.521.4781.3Total Investment Costs 1,439.7977.4957.6908.0783.0407.05,472.61,602.91,093.41,090.81,062.9972.6532.56,355.0II. Recurrent Costs A. Capacity building for financial service provider intermediaries International exposure visits for policymakers Lumpsum-26.7----26.7-28.9----28.9International exposure vists for CEOs of Finance Providers Lumpsum-61.4----61.4-70.6----70.6Subtotal -88.1----88.1-99.5----99.5B. Strengthening existing ASCAs Conducting exposure visits among the ASCAs Number1010----202.20222.022.0----44.024.925.2----50.1C. Establishing and strengthening the apex of ASCAs Providing the recurrent budget Month121212---361.65119.819.819.8---59.422.422.722.9---68.0Administrative costs /h Lumpsum11.511.511.5---34.513.413.313.2---39.9Follow up, monitoring and supervision of ASCAs Number888---244.40335.235.235.2---105.739.940.340.8---121.0Subtotal 66.566.566.5---199.675.776.376.9---228.9D. Capacity building of regulatory department of MFIs International exposure visits in Africa and Asia Number-11---249.538-49.549.5---99.1-56.757.3---114.0Total Recurrent Costs 88.6226.2116.1---430.9100.7257.6134.2---492.5Total 1,528.21,203.61,073.6908.0783.0407.05,903.51,703.51,351.01,225.01,062.9972.6532.56,847.5 _________________________________\a For banks, microbanks, credit only institutions and ASCAs through twining arrangement\b For training and review/preparation of training materials and financial products - co-shared with Government\c To reach remote districts and remote villages within the district\d Easy to use and cost-effective. System should improve performance and transparent reporting system\e Desktops and laptops, printers, fax and photocopy machine, etc\f Through Mozambican Association of MFIs\g In addition, promote financial literacy and consumer protection through Bank of Mozambique\h Office rent, utilities, etc 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 24: Detailed cost table – component 2.2 
151 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectTable 2.2. Support to Business Development Services and Market LinkagesDetailed CostsUnit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationBase Cost - Negotiation (USD)Totals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit201820192020202120222023Total(USD)201820192020202120222023Total201820192020202120222023Total I. Investment Costs A. Business Development training 1. Selection from aggregators /a Number125125125125--5000.66182.682.682.682.6--330.393.594.595.598.2--381.72. Selection from Service Providers /b Number250250250250--1,0000.495123.8123.8123.8123.8--495.4140.3141.7143.3147.3--572.63. Selection from incubated start-up entrepreneurs /c Beneficiary625625625625--2,5000.396247.7247.7247.7247.7--990.8280.6283.4286.6294.6--1,145.24. Support from Government experts in agripreneurs /d Lumpsum106.8106.8106.8106.8--427.2118.8121.2124.2128.4--492.65. Mapping study Study1-----166.05166.1-----66.174.8-----74.8Subtotal 627.0560.9560.9560.9--2,309.7708.1640.8649.6668.5--2,667.0B. Training and equipment for youth to engage in MSEs Vocational training for selected youth /e Beneficiary200200200200200-1,0000.16533.033.033.033.033.0-165.137.437.838.239.340.6-193.3Support provided by Government youth experts /f Lumpsum32.032.032.032.032.0-160.235.636.437.338.540.0-187.7Mentorship for youth /g Lumpsum333333187.47722.422.422.422.422.422.4134.624.925.526.127.028.029.4160.8Subtotal 87.587.587.587.587.522.4459.998.099.6101.6104.7108.629.4541.9C. Training for women and women-headed households in MSEs Training for women in business skills Beneficiary200200200200200-1,0000.16533.033.033.033.033.0-165.137.437.838.239.340.6-193.3Support provided by Government gender experts /h Lumpsum32.032.032.032.032.0-160.235.636.437.338.540.0-187.7Mentorship for women in MSEs /i Lumpsum333333187.47722.422.422.422.422.422.4134.624.925.526.127.028.029.4160.8Subtotal 87.587.587.587.587.522.4459.998.099.6101.6104.7108.629.4541.9Total 801.9735.9735.9735.9175.044.93,229.5904.1840.0852.7878.0217.158.83,750.7 _________________________________\a Agricultural and non-agricultural aggregators\b Total 1,000 agricultural and non-agricultural Service Providers trained\c A total of 2,500 agricultural and non-agricultural entrepreneurs trained\d Evaluated pro-rata\e In business skills and MSEs\f Evaluated pro-rata\g To be implemented in regions North, Centre and South\h Evaluated pro-rata\i TA to be implemented in regions North, Center and South 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 25: Detailed cost table - component 3 
152 
 Republic of MozambiqueREFP - Rural Enterprise Financing ProjectTable 3. Institutional Support and Programme ManagementDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit Cost -Base Cost - Negotiation (USD)Totals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit201820192020202120222023TotalNegotiation (USD)201820192020202120222023Total201820192020202120222023Total I. Investment Costs A. Nutrition sensitive activities Training and sensitization on diversification of food production Lumpsum11.011.011.0---33.012.512.612.7---37.8Training and sensitization on improved processing, storage and preservation of food Lumpsum-5.55.5---11.0-6.36.4---12.7Nutrition education and community behavior change /a Session6.86.86.86.86.86.840.87.87.87.88.08.28.748.5Facilitate Training for SETSAN personnel on Monitoring and Evaluation of nutrition indicators Contract1---1-25.755.8---5.8-11.56.4---6.6-13.0Support from SETSAN personnel to field activities /b Lumpsum53.453.453.453.453.453.4320.459.460.662.164.266.670.0382.9Conduct consumption survey /c Study1--1-135.5045.5--5.5-5.516.56.2--6.5-7.119.9Subtotal 82.576.776.765.766.065.7433.392.387.389.078.781.585.9514.7B. Strengthening Knowledge Management system Develop and implement KM and communication action plan Lumpsum-26.7----26.7-30.3----30.3Prepare, package and dessiminate knowledge products Lumpsum11.011.011.011.011.011.066.112.512.612.713.113.514.378.7Organise and conduct the M&E training workshops /d Lumpsum19.819.8----39.722.922.9----45.7Organise and conduct annual participatory planning workshop Lumpsum19.819.819.819.819.819.8119.022.922.922.823.424.125.4141.4Systematise procedures for baseline survey and impact studies /e Lumpsum5.3-5.3-5.3-16.05.9-6.2-6.7-18.8Monitor and supervise KM and communication activities Lumpsum5.35.35.35.35.35.332.05.96.16.26.46.77.038.3Subtotal 61.482.741.536.241.536.2299.570.194.748.042.950.946.7353.3C. Strenghtening of M&E /f Assess M&E capacity Lumpsum1-----132.04232.0-----32.035.6-----35.6Develop M&E database Lumpsum1-----132.04232.0-----32.035.6-----35.6Procure and Install Interactive data dashboard Number1-----155.04255.0-----55.062.4-----62.4Install and implement M&E database Number1-----116.51316.5-----16.518.7-----18.7Training on use of M&E database Lumpsum-1-1--216.513-16.5-16.5--33.0-18.9-19.6--38.5Monitor performance of M&E system Lumpsum--1---116.021--16.0---16.0--18.6---18.6Subtotal 135.616.516.016.5--184.7152.318.918.619.6--209.5D. Mainstreaming gender and youth Technical Assistance for development of Gender Strategy Contract1-----121.36121.4-----21.423.8-----23.8Training workshop on gender awareness in REFP Lumpsum111111616.51316.516.516.516.516.516.599.118.718.919.119.620.321.4118.1Subtotal 37.916.516.516.516.516.5120.442.518.919.119.620.321.4141.8E. National Programme Management Unit 1. Vehicles Double cabin pick-up /g Number6-----642.504255.0-----255.0282.7-----282.7Small car /h Number1-----131.97832.0-----32.035.5-----35.5Subtotal 287.0-----287.0318.3-----318.32. Office Equipment Desktop Computers /i Number12-----121.65119.8-----19.822.4-----22.4Laptop Number10-----101.65116.5-----16.518.7-----18.7File server /j Number1-----12.2022.2-----2.22.5-----2.5Heavy duty scanner /k Number1-----11.1011.1-----1.11.2-----1.2Electronic archiving installation /l Loan1-----111.00811.0-----11.012.5-----12.5Multifunctional Printer Number1-----11.6511.7-----1.71.9-----1.9Office furniture Set12-----121.10113.2-----13.215.0-----15.0File cabinets /m Set1-----12.2022.2-----2.22.5-----2.5Accounting software purchase Lumpsum1-----111.00811.0-----11.012.5-----12.5Meeting room furniture Set1-----13.3033.3-----3.33.7-----3.7Fridge Number1-----10.330.3-----0.30.4-----0.4Subtotal 82.3-----82.393.3-----93.33. Start-up workshop Workshop1-----156.68156.7-----56.765.3-----65.34. Baseline/preparatory studies Study1-----155.04255.0-----55.062.4-----62.45. Mid-term review and impact assessment Study---1--199.076---99.1--99.1---117.8--117.86. Project completion and impact evaluation Study-----1199.076-----99.199.1-----128.4128.47. Audit Contract111111621.36121.421.421.421.421.421.4128.223.824.224.825.726.628.0153.2 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 26: Detailed cost table - component 3 (continued) 
153 
7. Audit Contract111111621.36121.421.421.421.421.421.4128.223.824.224.825.726.628.0153.28. Technical Assistance Environmental and social specialist Person-Day6060606060603600.36221.721.721.721.721.721.7130.424.024.023.824.324.926.4147.4Gender and youth specialist Person-Day6060606060463460.34520.720.720.720.720.715.9119.422.922.822.623.123.819.3134.5Legal expert Person-Day3030303030301800.34510.410.410.410.410.410.462.111.411.411.311.611.912.670.2Other experts /n Person-Day6060606060603600.34520.720.720.720.720.720.7124.222.922.822.623.123.825.2140.4Subtotal 73.573.573.573.573.568.7436.181.381.080.482.084.383.4492.59. Knowledge Management Publication material on Environmental issues Lumpsum1.71.71.71.71.71.79.91.91.91.92.02.02.111.8Communication and visibility Lumpsum2.22.22.22.22.22.213.22.52.52.52.62.72.915.7Subtotal 3.93.93.93.93.93.923.14.44.44.54.64.75.027.5Subtotal 579.898.798.7197.898.7192.91,266.6648.6109.7109.7230.1115.7244.81,458.6F. Regional Management Unit - North 1. Vehicles Double cabin pickup Number3-----342.504127.5-----127.5141.4-----141.42. Office Equipment Desktop Computer /o Number4-----41.6516.6-----6.67.5-----7.5Laptop Number1-----11.6511.7-----1.71.9-----1.9Office furniture Set4-----41.1014.4-----4.45.0-----5.0Meeting room furniture Set1-----13.3033.3-----3.33.7-----3.7Fridge Number1-----10.550.6-----0.60.6-----0.6Subtotal 16.5-----16.518.7-----18.7Subtotal 144.0-----144.0160.1-----160.1G. Regional Management Unit - Center 1. Vehicles Double cabin pickup Number3-----342.504127.5-----127.5141.4-----141.42. Office Equipment Desktop Computer /p Number4-----41.6516.6-----6.67.5-----7.5Laptop Number1-----11.6511.7-----1.71.9-----1.9Office furniture Set4-----41.1014.4-----4.45.0-----5.0Meeting room furniture Set1-----13.3033.3-----3.33.7-----3.7Fridge Number1-----10.550.6-----0.60.6-----0.6Subtotal 16.5-----16.518.7-----18.7Subtotal 144.0-----144.0160.1-----160.1H. Regional Management Unit - South 1. Vehicles Double cabin pickup Number3-----342.504127.5-----127.5141.4-----141.42. Office Equipment Desktop Computer /q Number4-----41.6516.6-----6.67.5-----7.5Laptop Number1-----11.6511.7-----1.71.9-----1.9Office furniture Set4-----41.1014.4-----4.45.0-----5.0Meeting room furniture Set1-----13.3033.3-----3.33.7-----3.7Fridge Number1-----10.550.6-----0.60.6-----0.6Subtotal 16.5-----16.518.7-----18.7Subtotal 144.0-----144.0160.1-----160.1Total Investment Costs 1,329.2291.2249.5332.7222.7311.42,736.61,486.0329.5284.5391.0268.4398.83,158.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Programme Management Unit 1. National Team Project Manager Person-Month12121212121272672.072.072.072.072.072.0432.072.072.072.072.072.072.0432.0Financial Management Specialist Person-Month12121212121272560.060.060.060.060.060.0360.060.060.060.060.060.060.0360.0Procurement Specialist Person-Month121212121212724.554.054.054.054.054.054.0324.054.054.054.054.054.054.0324.0Monitoring & Evaluation Specialist Person-Month12121212121272560.060.060.060.060.060.0360.060.060.060.060.060.060.0360.0Rural Finance Specialist Person-Month121212121212724.554.054.054.054.054.054.0324.054.054.054.054.054.054.0324.0Innovation and Outreach Officer Person-Month12121212121272448.048.048.048.048.048.0288.048.048.048.048.048.048.0288.0Accountant 2 Person-Month121212121212723/Person-Month72.072.072.072.072.072.0432.072.072.072.072.072.072.0432.0Administrative Assistant Person-Month12121212121272224.024.024.024.024.024.0144.024.024.024.024.024.024.0144.0Driver 2 Person-Month121212121212721/Person-Month24.024.024.024.024.024.0144.024.024.024.024.024.024.0144.0Subtotal 468.0468.0468.0468.0468.0468.02,808.0468.0468.0468.0468.0468.0468.02,808.0 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 27: Detailed cost table - component 3 (continued 2) 
154 
Subtotal 468.0468.0468.0468.0468.0468.02,808.0468.0468.0468.0468.0468.0468.02,808.02. Operating costs PMU Office rental /r Month121212121212724.655.255.255.255.255.255.2331.264.163.963.464.766.570.4393.0Perdiem Day3003003003003003001,8000.260.060.060.060.060.060.0360.058.754.951.449.748.348.3311.3Vehicle O&M /s Lumpsum8.88.88.88.88.88.852.810.010.110.210.510.811.463.0General office expenses /t Month121212121212722.327.627.627.627.627.627.6165.632.131.931.732.433.335.2196.5Utilities /u Lumpsum121212121212721.1513.813.813.813.813.813.882.816.016.015.916.216.617.698.3Subtotal 165.4165.4165.4165.4165.4165.4992.4180.9176.7172.6173.4175.5182.91,062.1Subtotal 633.4633.4633.4633.4633.4633.43,800.4648.9644.7640.6641.4643.5650.93,870.1B. Government staff costs Support staff from Bank of Mozambique /v Persons555555300.31.51.51.51.51.51.59.01.51.41.31.21.21.27.8Support staff from Ministry of Economy and Finance Number555555300.3451.71.71.71.71.71.710.42.02.02.02.02.12.212.3Support staff from FARE offices and decentralized offices /w Lumpsum15.115.115.115.115.115.190.714.813.813.012.512.212.278.4Subtotal 18.318.318.318.318.318.3110.118.317.216.215.815.415.698.5C. Regional Management Team - North 1. Region North Team Area Coordinator Person-Month12121212121272448.048.048.048.048.048.0288.048.048.048.048.048.048.0288.0Monitoring and Evaluation Officer Person-Month12121212121272336.036.036.036.036.036.0216.036.036.036.036.036.036.0216.0Finance and Administrative Officer Person-Month121212121212722.530.030.030.030.030.030.0180.030.030.030.030.030.030.0180.0Driver Person-Month121212121212720.78.48.48.48.48.48.450.48.48.48.48.48.48.450.4Support staff from DPEFs /x Number555555300.150.80.80.80.80.80.84.50.70.70.60.60.60.63.9Subtotal 123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2738.9123.1123.1123.0123.0123.0123.0738.32. Operating Costs Perdiem Day1001001001001001006000.220.020.020.020.020.020.0120.019.618.317.116.616.116.1103.8Vehicle O&M Lumpsum8.88.88.88.88.88.852.810.010.110.210.510.811.463.0Office rent Month121212121212722.327.627.627.627.627.627.6165.632.131.931.732.433.335.2196.5General Office expenses Month121212121212720.2883.53.53.53.53.53.520.74.04.04.04.04.24.424.6Subtotal 59.959.959.959.959.959.9359.165.664.363.063.464.367.1387.8Subtotal 183.0183.0183.0183.0183.0183.01,098.0188.7187.4186.0186.5187.3190.11,126.1D. Regional Management Team - Centre 1. Region North Team Area Coordinator Person-Month12121212121272448.048.048.048.048.048.0288.048.048.048.048.048.048.0288.0Monitoring and Evaluation Officer Person-Month12121212121272336.036.036.036.036.036.0216.036.036.036.036.036.036.0216.0Finance and Administrative Officer Person-Month121212121212722.530.030.030.030.030.030.0180.030.030.030.030.030.030.0180.0Driver Person-Month121212121212720.78.48.48.48.48.48.450.48.48.48.48.48.48.450.4Support staff from DPEFs /y Number555555300.150.80.80.80.80.80.84.50.70.70.60.60.60.63.9Subtotal 123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2738.9123.1123.1123.0123.0123.0123.0738.32. Operating Costs Perdiem Day1001001001001001006000.220.020.020.020.020.020.0120.019.618.317.116.616.116.1103.8Vehicle O&M Lumpsum8.88.88.88.88.88.852.810.010.110.210.510.811.463.0Office rent Month121212121212722.327.627.627.627.627.627.6165.632.131.931.732.433.335.2196.5General Office expenses Month121212121212720.2883.53.53.53.53.53.520.74.04.04.04.04.24.424.6Subtotal 59.959.959.959.959.959.9359.165.664.363.063.464.367.1387.8Subtotal 183.0183.0183.0183.0183.0183.01,098.0188.7187.4186.0186.5187.3190.11,126.1E. Regional Management Team - South 1. Region North Team Area Coordinator Person-Month12121212121272448.048.048.048.048.048.0288.048.048.048.048.048.048.0288.0Monitoring and Evaluation Officer Person-Month12121212121272336.036.036.036.036.036.0216.036.036.036.036.036.036.0216.0Finance and Administrative Officer Person-Month121212121212722.530.030.030.030.030.030.0180.030.030.030.030.030.030.0180.0Driver Person-Month121212121212720.78.48.48.48.48.48.450.48.48.48.48.48.48.450.4Support staff from DPEFs /z Number555555300.150.80.80.80.80.80.84.50.80.80.80.80.80.84.7Subtotal 123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2738.9123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2739.1 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 28: Detailed cost table - component 3 (continued 3) 
155 
Subtotal 123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2738.9123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2123.2739.12. Operating Costs Perdiem Day1001001001001001006000.220.020.020.020.020.020.0120.019.618.317.116.616.116.1103.8Vehicle O&M Lumpsum8.88.88.88.88.88.852.810.010.110.210.510.811.463.0Office rent Month121212121212722.327.627.627.627.627.627.6165.632.131.931.732.433.335.2196.5General Office expenses Month121212121212720.2883.53.53.53.53.53.520.74.04.04.04.04.24.424.6Subtotal 59.959.959.959.959.959.9359.165.664.363.063.464.367.1387.8Subtotal 183.0183.0183.0183.0183.0183.01,098.0188.8187.5186.2186.6187.5190.31,126.9Total Recurrent Costs 1,200.81,200.81,200.81,200.81,200.81,200.87,204.61,233.41,224.21,215.11,216.81,221.11,237.17,347.7Total 2,530.01,491.91,450.21,533.51,423.51,512.19,941.22,719.51,553.71,499.51,607.81,489.51,635.910,505.9 _________________________________\a Maternal and child feeding, care, hygiene and sanitation\b On beneficiaries' diversification of food production and nutrition education\c Baseline, midterm and at completion\d Specifically on M&E systems and procedures\e Specifically on data collection and analysis\f Specifically on M&E and Management Information Systems (MIS). DPEF - Provincial Directorate of Economy and Finance\g 2 for PMU, 2 for FARE, 2 for the Development Finance Coordination Secretariat under MEF\h For office duties\i Including monitor, keyboard and mouse, and printer.\j To house accounting software and electronic archiving system\k For electronic archiving\l Includes purchase and installation costs\m For filing of project documentation\n Consultants\o Complete with monitor, keyboard, mouse and printer\p Complete with monitor, keyboard, mouse and printer\q Complete with monitor, keyboard, mouse and printer\r Estimated rental cost of office space conceded by Government to PMU\s 10% of purchase price\t Stationery, petty cash, etc.\u Water, electricity, internet access forfeited by GoM for use of office space\v Bank of Mozambique personnel supporting project activities (pro rata)\w Salaries for FARE staff who support the project on a pro-rata basis.\x DPEF - Provincial Directorate of Economy and Finance. Evaluated pro-rata.\y DPEF - Provincial Directorate of Economy and Finance. Evaluated pro-rata.\z DPEF - Provincial Directorate of Economy and Finance. Evaluated pro-rata. 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 10: 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
This Appendix presents the financial and economic analysis of the Rural Enterprise Financing Project 
(REFP). 
I. Project benefits and beneficiaries 
Project Benefits. Financial benefits will be in the form of increased financial returns of the HHs 
7. 
targeted by REFP. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates in the areas targeted by the 
Project,  with  special  measures  taken  to  ensure  inclusion  of  disadvantaged  groups.  This  will  be  the 
effect  of  the  increased  financial  returns  for  HHs  consequent  to  Project  interventions.  Environmental 
benefits  will consist of reduced land degradation and increased carbon sequestration of rangelands. 
Due to limited data availability, only the HH increased returns are taken into account here. 
8. 
Project  benefits  not  quantified  in  this  analysis  will  include  a  more  conducive  environment  for 
access  to  finance  for  small  rural  entrepreneurs.  In  addition,  linking  farmers  to  formal  financial 
institutions  will  generate a  higher number of registered enterprises and as a consequence,  a  higher 
volume  of  taxable  production,  which  will  benefit  the  overall  Mozambican  economy.  Considering  the 
multi-faceted Mozambican fiscal regime for taxpayers based on their overall yearly revenue, number 
of  dependents,  as  well  as  exceptional  regimes  for  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises,  we’ve 
excluded the actual calculation of taxes paid under the various production models. 
9. 
Direct  Project  Beneficiaries.  Direct  project  beneficiaries  will  be  approximately  287,700 
individuals  involved  in  the  major  value  chains:  agriculture,  fisheries,  horticulture  and  processing  of 
goods.  This  EFA  presents  a  few  production  models  used  as  proxy  to  the  actual  activities  that  the 
target  group  will  be  engaging  too.  As  such,  we  note  that  the  model  is  a  simplification  of  the  actual 
dynamic and complex economic situation in the target areas.  
10.  For the purposes of this EFA we have computed the main economic benefits of the production 
models accessing loans under the line of credit and grants under the crowding in fund  based on the 
number  of  enterprises  (for  the  case  of  the  interventions  under  the  Crowding-in  Fund  and  Line  of 
Credit), and actual number of people for the case of farmers not accessing funds under REFP. More 
specifically, and as noted in appendix 2 (Poverty, targeting and gender): a total of 63,370 MSMEs will 
be supported and this will benefit 209,400 poor rural entrepreneurs. In addition, 78,300 beneficiaries 
will  benefit  directly  from  access  to  non-financial  products  to  give  the  total  beneficiary  poor  rural 
entrepreneurs of 287,700. As such, the 287,700 project beneficiaries represent actual individuals, and 
not households.  
Table 29: Beneficiaries of project activities 
Crowding in Fund 
Graduation Promotion and Outreach Programme  0 
Line of Credit 
Component 2 non-financial products 
beneficiaries with no access to Financial 
products 
0 
Number of 
enterprises 
1,000 
62,370 
Direct Beneficiaries 
20,000 
20,000 
169,400 
78,300 
287,700 
11.  The total period used for the analysis of the profitability of the project is 20 years. Considering 
the projected rate of uptake of the project by the beneficiaries, as well as the slow accrual of benefits, 
a 20-year lifespan allows us to better evaluate the impact of the project on farmers’ livelihoods. 
12.  Costs  and  benefits  have  been  evaluated  at  constant  2017  prices.  The  effects  of  inflation  on 
prices and revenue have not been taking into account in the analysis. This is justified based on the 
overall difficulty in forecasting inflation for a period of time beyond 3 to 5 years.  
157 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
II. Financial Analysis 
13.  Objectives.  A  financial  analysis  was  carried  out  for  each  of  the  proposed  interventions  to 
assess their viability. Of particular importance, the analysis was needed to verify if the new activities 
would be profitable to the beneficiaries in the project areas. Of particular importance, the analysis is 
necessary  to  establish  if  farmers  are  able  to  make  a  higher  profit  even  in  face  of  additional  costs 
related  to  debt  servicing.  Based  on  the  analysis,  it  was  therefore  possible  to  assess  the  level  of 
increased cash-flow for beneficiaries participating in the project. 
14.  Methodology  and  financial  models.  The  analysis  was  carried  out  based  on  production 
models  which  are  typical  of  the  ongoing  IFAD  projects  in  Mozambique  that  currently  access  credit 
through the windows made available through the projects. The analysis was needed to verify if there 
are indeed  net increases in revenue  as a result  of REFP, based on production  model that take into 
account the various credit lines that will be available to project beneficiaries.  
15.  Market prices used to cost the activities were based on two sources of information: the prices 
recorded by project field staff throughout the country, made available by the project Coordinators, and 
the  information  on  prices  published  regularly  by  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  on  its 
platform  for  market  prices  of  agricultural  products135.  Labour  costs  (and  unemployment  rate)  were 
based on information published yearly by the National Institute of Statistics136. 
16.  Financial Discount rate (FDR). The financial discount rate used in the financial analysis  was 
based  on  information  published  by  Bank  of  Mozambique137  on  the  interest  rates  applicable  in  the 
country  by  Commercial  Banks,  and  on  long  term  Government  bonds.  Due  to  the  ongoing  economic 
and financial crisis in Mozambique, interest rates applicable by banks for lending have soared, having 
reached all-time highs of 25% to 30% in December 2016. Currently, the long-term Mozambican bond 
rate is 22.35%. For the purposes of the analysis of the financial suitability of each model, we have set 
the FDR to 22%. 
17.  Credit  analysis  for  production  models.  Based  on  the  assumptions  made  in  the  detailed 
description of the project, the interest rate will spread over the different intermediation levels need to 
cover  costs  and  risks.  This  will  be  ensured  through  linking  lending  rates  from  the  apex  financing 
institution  to  the  central  bank  reference  rate,  so  that  rates  remain  positive  in  real  terms  and  proper 
spreads  and  incomes  are  generated  for  all  intermediaries  in  the  financial  intermediation  chain.  The 
current reference rate for loans is the Maputo Inter-Bank Offered Rate (MAIBOR), which has been set 
to 21.5% by  Bank of Mozambique in  August 2017. For the purposes of our credit  analysis  we have 
used  a  proxy  annual  interest  rate  of  22.5%  for  the  loans  offered  to  the  project  beneficiaries.  In 
addition, we have assumed that loans to farmers will be seasonal, i.e. repayable in one instalment at 
the end of the production season. 
18.  Project beneficiaries will have access to two main financing windows: the crowding-in fund and 
the  Line  of  Credit.  The  crowding-in  fund  aims  at  improving  access  to  finance  for  otherwise  un-
bankable  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises.  The  facility  will  support  investments  in  productive 
assets  such  as  on  farm  production  equipment,  post-harvest  machinery  and  equipment,  and 
processing  equipment  thereby  allowing  beneficiaries  to  increase  production  and  productivity  and 
increase their incomes. This grant acts  as an  incentive to crowd-in the beneficiary to co-finance the 
productive equipment in an agreed ratio with participating financial service providers providing part of 
the  investment  cost  through  an  interest-bearing  loan.  The  grant  from  the  project  and  the  matching 
component from the beneficiary are intended to reduce financial service provider’s loan exposure and 
repayment  risks.  The  crowding  in  fund  has  been  simulated  as  a  cost-sharing  initiative  whereby 
farmers  will  contribute  with  20%  of  total  investment,  Participating  Financial  Institutions  (PFIs)  with 
40%,  and  REFP  will  provide  a  matching  grant  of  40%.  The  amount  of  the  grant  provided  under  the 
grant  will  not  exceed  USD 5,000  (MZN 300,000),  and  in  average  should  be  between  USD 2,000 
(MZN 120,000) and USD 5,000. 
135 http://www.masa.gov.mz/sima/ 
136 http://www.ine.gov.mz/estatisticas/estatisticas-sectoriais 
137 http://www.bancomoc.mz/fm_pgTab1.aspx?id=106 
158 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
19.  The  line  of  credit  will  be  provided  to  MFIs  and  Commercial  Banks  at  a  pre–determined  rate. 
Participating Financial Institutions will agree to stipulate loans with reasonable interest rate to clients 
under  the  project  not  exceeding  the  Central  Bank’s  reference  rate.  These  loans  may  be  used  for 
purchase of seeds, chemical inputs, fishing net, feeds and other low value inputs, hiring or purchasing 
of  agriculture  implements,  hiring  of  labour,  repairing  boats,  and  meeting  of  working  capital 
requirements. Loans of different sizes  with a cap of USD 1,000 dollars will be refinanced  under this 
component. For the purposes of our analysis, the line of credit has been simulated with micro-loans 
not  exceeding  USD  300  (MZN 18,000),  small  loans  not  exceeding  USD 750  (MZN 45,000),  and 
medium loans of up to USD 1,000 (MZN 60,000).  
20.  Assumptions  for  production  models.  As  REFP  will  target  several  different  kinds  of 
enterprises, this analysis seeks to evaluate the profitability of modelled production models. In addition, 
we considered the effects of access to credit in the production models, especially in view of the high 
annual interest rate charged by commercial banks and MFIs.  However, and as stated above, for the 
purposes of the implementation of REFP  the interest rate to be charged to the target beneficiary will 
take into account that the loan funds are developmental in nature and not one of profit maximisation.  
21.  We’ve analysed a total of 10 production models. Most of the models are related to agriculture 
and  fisheries  activities  already  implemented  in  the  various  IFAD-funded  projects  in  Mozambique. 
Value  addition  through  processing  has  also  been  included,  with  the  model  of  a  cassava  processing 
plant  being  part  of  the  overall  analysis.  To  remain  conservative  in  the  analysis,  we  have  set  the 
maximum  success  rate  of  some  of  the  financial  models  slightly  below  the  theoretical  rate  as 
calculated in the production model. This is the case for the horticulture, aquaculture, livestock models 
and the cassava processing plant. This slight underperformance would then capture better real world 
situations. 
22.  The  horticulture  model  is  based  on  tomatoes,  a  high-value  crop,  owing  to  the  high  initial 
investment costs. We consider a without project production area of 0.1 ha under tomato cultivation. In 
this initial phase, the farmer is able to produce tomatoes on an average of once per year. in addition, 
the plants are watered by hand, as the farmer has not installed any irrigation system. Under covered 
agriculture  practices,  the  farmer  accesses financing  through  REFP  to  install  a  shade  net  and  a  drip 
irrigation system which allows her to produce tomatoes on two cycles per year. The model assumes 
that  the  farmer  will  receive  a  grant  from  the  crowding-in  fund,  and  will  access  a  loan  from  PFIs.  In 
addition, the farmer is expected to contribute to the investment from her own savings. 
23.  The  cassava  processing  unit  represents  an  example  of  value  addition.  In  this  model,  a  rural 
entrepreneur accesses financing through REFP to set-up a small processing unit to produce cassava 
chips.  This  model  assumes  existing  technical  capacity  from  the  entrepreneur  in  managing  a 
reasonably  complex  processing  enterprise,  as  the  small  factory  will  employ  5  people  on  a  monthly 
basis. Financing is accessed through a grant from the crowding in fund, as well as a contribution from 
the beneficiary, and a loan from a PFI.  
24.  The  cassava  farm  model  represents  some  of  IFAD’s  current  target  groups  in  areas  of 
implementation of the IFAD project PROSUL: smallholder farmers producing at a subsistence level in 
1 ha plots that, with access to credit may increase productivity. The choice of cassava is based on its 
relatively  low  price  per  kilogram,  which  better  models  the  very  poor  subsistence  farmers.  our  target 
group.  The  farmer  will  have  access  to  a  micro-loan  from  a  PFI  to  purchase  inputs  (fertilizers, 
herbicides) to increase the productivity of the farm. It is assumed that the micro-loan is seasonal and 
repayable in one single instalment at the end of the production cycle. 
25.  Livestock  is  modelled  around  a  typical  farmer  who  wants  to  access  supplementary  feeds  and 
better  veterinary  care  to  increase  the  weight  of  the  animals  at  the  moment  of  selling.  As  noted  by 
PROSUL,  there’s potential there for a substantial  increase in  productivity  is farmers are trained and 
have access to the necessary credit to purchase feeds, veterinary drugs and the services of vets. The 
model also assumes that the access to greater veterinary care reduces the mortality rate of animals, 
allowing  the  farmers  to  sell  more  animals  at  the  end  of  a  typical  24-month  production  cycle.  In 
addition, the model assumes that the farmer will have access to a small season loan repayable at the 
end of the production cycle.  
26.  The  fisheries  model  is  well  aligned  with  ProPESCA’s  current  interventions  along  the 
Mozambican coast. In this model, fishermen access credit to purchase improved boats and outboard 
engines  to  allow  them  to  fish  further  away  from  the  coast,  and  increase  productivity  while  also 
159 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
decreasing the time spent in the sea. The fishermen would access financing through the crowding-in 
fund.  
27.  The naval carpenter model represents those rural people who will engage in REFP activities in 
activities  other  than  farming,  fishing  and  value  addition.  This  model  is  encountered  in  ProPESCA, 
whereby  boat  carpenters  are  supported  by  the  project  in  increasing  their  production  output  for 
fishermen engaged in the project. Here, a modelled  carpenter accesses a medium loan through the 
line of credit to purchase improved tools, which allow him to increase the output of boats per year. we 
assume this loan to be seasonal, and repayable in one instalment at the end of the production cycle.  
28.  The aquaculture model is based on PROAQUA’s activities implemented throughout the project 
areas. One of the most critical issues that limit productivity of fish ponds has identified by the project is 
access  to  fish  feeds  and  the  current  stocking  rate  of  the  ponds.  Farmers  are  unable  to  purchase 
improved feeds, and rely on household-produced feeds, and the stocking rate of the farms is typically 
low. In this model, we assume that a farmer will access a micro-loan under the line of credit to enlarge 
his  pond,  purchase  improved  feeds,  while  also  purchasing  additional  fish  fingerlings  to  increase  the 
population rate of the ponds to 2 fingerlings per square metre. Once again, the micro-loan is assumed 
to be seasonal.  
29.  The  barber  shop  model  represents  those  rural  people  who  will  engage  in  REFP  in  non-
agriculture activities. In this model, a barber in a peri-urban area accesses financing through REFP to 
to purchase additional tools, as well as renting a small building to set-up his barber shop and hiring 
additional  labour.  It  is  assumed  that  the  financing  will  be  through  a  seasonal  loan,  repayable  semi-
annually. 
30.  Finally,  we  analysed  the  profitability  of  two  small  farms  (maize  and  beans,  and  sesame  and 
soya beans), which represent those farmers that will receive business training under REFP, as well as 
participate in the savings associations ASCAs. However, these farmers will not have access to credit 
through REFP. These farmers are well represented by the activities currently implemented under the 
IFAD project PROMER. In the model we consider that farmers will slowly increase their areas under 
production from the initial 1.0ha in PY1 up to 2ha in PY5, with increments of 0.2ha per year. 
31. 
In order to closely reflect the actual performance of the models, we’ve considered a failure rate 
for the loans provided to producers, which has the effect of reducing the net benefits evaluated in the 
overall EFA. Based on data available from FARE, the failure rate of the projects has been set to 20%.  
32.  Results  of  the  Financial  Analysis.  The  analysis  of  the  proposed  models  show  that  there’s 
substantial increase in net revenue for smallholder farmers as show in the table below: 
Table 30: Income analysis 
160 
WOP(cid:9)(MZN)WP*(cid:9)(MZN)WOP(cid:9)(USD)WP*(cid:9)(USD)%(cid:9)increase#Actitivity1Shadenet94,522186,6961,5753,11297.52%2Cassava(cid:9)processing(cid:9)plant0350,33305,839NA3Cassava(cid:9)farm26,51361,9694421,033133.73%4Livestock(cid:9)prodcution53,18794,7118861,57978.07%5Fishermen30,39854,61850791079.68%6Naval(cid:9)Carpenter64,090230,9901,0683,850260.42%7Aquaculture11,78518,39219630756.06%8Maize(cid:9)and(cid:9)beans(cid:9)farm3,2309,06854151180.70%9Sesame(cid:9)and(cid:9)soyabeans(cid:9)farm5,25615,57888260196.42%10Small(cid:9)Barbershop22,80041,50038069282.02%*at(cid:9)full(cid:9)WPYearly(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)stream(cid:9)before(cid:9)taxes 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 31: Loan structure and IFAD contribution
III. Economic Analysis 
33.  Scope. The economic analysis was carried on the project as a whole to evaluate its effect on 
the overall Mozambican economy.  
34.  Methodology and assumptions. An overall Project Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) and 
economic  internal  rate  of  return  (EIRR)  have  been  estimated  by aggregating  the  net  incremental 
benefits of all production models phased according to Project Years in which they are expected to be 
implemented. Benefit streams are analysed for a total period of 20 years. This is justified based on the 
rate of adoption of project interventions by farmers, in order to fully analyse the benefits that accrue 
once revenue streams are substantially equal for all project beneficiaries  
35.  The chosen Social Discount Rate (SDR) is 10%, based on the typical rates applied by the World 
Bank.  
36.  Standard  Conversion  Factor  (SCF).  The  SCF  was  calculated  based  on  the  balance  of 
payments  information  published  by  the  Bank  of  Mozambique.  Other  sources  of  information  were 
UNCOMTRADE  international  trade  statistics  database138.  Data  on  subsidies  (on  the  import  of  fuels, 
mostly) was obtained from IMF Country Report on Mozambique, detailing that subsidies on fuels have 
ranged  between  1%  to  1.4%  of  GDP  between  2013  and  2015.  Mozambique  has  removed  the 
subsidies  on  fuel  in  July  2017,  however,  for  the  purposes  of  our  analysis  we  have  considered  a 
subsidy equivalent to 1.2% of GDP for the period considered in the balance of payments. The SCF is 
thus 0.88 based on the available data. 
Table 32: Trade data - Mozambique - 2012 – 2016 (in millions MZN) 
37.  Conversion  factors  and  economic  prices.  All  prices  used  in  the  analysis  were  gathered  at 
the domestic level. Mozambique applies import taxes ranging from 0% up to a maximum of 20% on 
138 https://comtrade.un.org/ 
161 
Overall(cid:9)In(cid:9)USDSize(cid:9)of(cid:9)financingBeneficiary(cid:9)contributionBanksShare(cid:9)of(cid:9)IFAD(cid:9)contribution(cid:9)(MZN)Share(cid:9)of(cid:9)IFAD(cid:9)contribution(cid:9)(USD)Total(cid:9)IFAD(cid:9)contributionFinancing(cid:9)windowEnterprises1Crowding-in(cid:9)fundShadenet400,00080,000160,000160,0002,667440,0002Crowding-in(cid:9)fundCassava(cid:9)processing(cid:9)plant750,000150,000300,000300,0005,0003,750,0003Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)CreditCassava(cid:9)farm18,00018,0003005,100,0004Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)CreditLivestock(cid:9)production52,0007,00045,0007502,925,0005Crowding-in(cid:9)fundFisheries450,00090,000180,000180,0003,000810,0006NAMaize(cid:9)and(cid:9)beans(cid:9)farm*NA7NASesame(cid:9)and(cid:9)soyabeans(cid:9)farm*NA8Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)CreditNaval(cid:9)Carpenter60,00060,0001,00010,200,0009Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)CreditAquaculture18,00018,0003004,500,00010Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)CreditSmall(cid:9)Barbershop18,00018,0003004,800,00032,525,000*analysed(cid:9)based(cid:9)on(cid:9)number(cid:9)of(cid:9)beneficiairies(cid:9)(and(cid:9)not(cid:9)enterprises)Failure(cid:9)rate(cid:9)of(cid:9)loans20%per(cid:9)single(cid:9)enterprise/beneficiary(cid:9)In(cid:9)MZNyearimportstax(cid:9)on(cid:9)importssubsidiesexportstax(cid:9)on(cid:9)exportsbalanceGDP/aaverage(cid:9)fuel(cid:9)subsidy(cid:9)(import)/b20126,1771,2971633,47035-2,70714,534163201310,0992,1211794,02440-6,07516,01917920148,7431,8361904,72547-4,01816,96119020157,9081,6611663,19632-4,71214,79816620165,2951,1121233,35234-1,94311,015123Data(cid:9)on(cid:9)impots(cid:9)and(cid:9)exports(cid:9)from(cid:9)World(cid:9)Trade(cid:9)Yearbook(cid:9)(cid:9)(https://comtrade.un.org/pb/first.aspx)/a(cid:9)GDP(cid:9)data(cid:9)from(cid:9)http://data.worldbank.org/country/mozambique/b(cid:9)IMF(cid:9)estimates(cid:9)that(cid:9)import(cid:9)subsidy(cid:9)on(cid:9)fuel(cid:9)was(cid:9)on(cid:9)average(cid:9)1.2%(cid:9)of(cid:9)GDP(cid:9)between(cid:9)2013(cid:9)and(cid:9)2015Balance(cid:9)of(cid:9)payments(cid:9)(USD(cid:9)millions) 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
most  goods  that  cross  the  border139.  Valued  Added  Tax  (VAT)  is  17%.  For  the  commodities  under 
analysis in our models, we note that the export tax applied is zero.  
38.  Based on the import tax for each of the project inputs as published by Mozambique’s Customs 
Authority,  as  well  as  based  on  the  VAT  and  export  taxes  it  was  possible  to  calculate  specific 
Conversion  Factors  for  each  input  and  output  related  to  the  production  models.  These  conversion 
factors are presented in the tables presented in the annexes to the this working paper. 
39.  Economic prices were converted from financial prices per single input and output based on their 
classification  as:  tradable  and  exported  goods/services,  tradable  and  imported,  non-tradable,  and 
shadow wage. The production/revenue of all models was treated as tradable exported goods (label Te 
in the EFA models), and as such the economic prices were obtained as the market prices, free of VAT 
and free of export taxes, adjusted by the SCF. Regarding the inputs, the economic price for tradable 
national goods (Tn), was calculated as the market price free of VAT. The economic price for tradable 
imported goods (Ti) was to set to the market price, free of VAT and free  of import duty, adjusted by 
the SCF. The economic price for non-tradable goods (NT) was set to the market price free of VAT. 
.  Shadow  wage.  The  unemployment  rate  in  Mozambique,  as  published  by  National  Statistics 
40. 
and recorded  by  Government of Mozambique  was 24.5%  in  2016. For the  purposes of our analysis 
we have calculated the economic wage in the project areas using the unemployment rate as a proxy. 
As  proposed  in  the  IFAD  Guidelines  for  EFA,  we  have  set:  EW  =  MW*(1-UR),  where  eW  is  the 
economic wage, mW the market wage and UR the unemployment rate. For the analysis carried in this 
EFA eW = 0.755*mW. 
41.  Project  costs.  Project  economic  costs  were  computed  COSTAB.  The  economic  costs  of  the 
project  were  obtained  from  COSTAB  based  on  a  standard  conversion  factor  of  0.88  as  discussed 
above. Where costs included in COSTAB were also computed in the activity models  the same were 
deducted  from  the  overall  economic  costs  to  avoid  double-counting.  As  such,  all  project  costs  that 
should be disbursed as credit to producers were deducted from the total costs used in this EFA. 
42.  Benefits  from  grants  extended  to  project  participants  have  been  excluded  from  the  overall 
project costs to avoid double-counting. 
43.  Project  profitability  indicators.  The  overall  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  of  the 
Project  is  estimated  at  17.2%.  The  Economic  Net  Present  Value  (ENPV)  is  MZN 4,101  million,  or 
USD 68.3 million.  As  ENPV  is  positive  and  EIRR  is  above  the  Social  Discount  Rate  the  project  is 
deemed economically viable and acceptable for investment.  
44.  Sensitivity  Analysis.  The  sensitivity  analysis  evaluated  the  robustness  of  the  proposed 
interventions. Proxies analysed were: reduction of project benefits (due, for example, to failure of the 
capacity building initiatives of the project), increase in project costs, delays (of 1 and 2 years), and the 
increase in the failure rate of the loans provided under REFP.  
45.  The sensitivity analysis also assessed the result in the delay of overall project benefits by one 
or two years (all production models). The results of the analysis are presented in the table below: 
Table 33: Sensitivity Analysis 
139 http://www.at.gov.mz/por/Pauta-Aduaneira 
162 
Republic(cid:9)of(cid:9)MozambiqueREFP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Rural(cid:9)Enterprise(cid:9)Financing(cid:9)ProjectSensitivity(cid:9)Analysis(cid:9)(Economic)Base(cid:9)caseIndicator10%-5%-10%-15%10%20%30%ENPV(cid:9)(millions(cid:9)MZN)4,1012,9181,7355523,8473,5933,339ENPV(cid:9)(millions(cid:9)USD)6849299646056EIRR17%15.2%13.2%11.0%16.6%16.0%15.5%Reduction(cid:9)in(cid:9)project(cid:9)benefits(cid:9)Increase(cid:9)in(cid:9)project(cid:9)costs 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
46.  The  results  of  the  analysis  show  that  the  reduction  of  project  benefits  of  up  to  15%  do  not 
endanger the economic suitability of the project. However, were benefits accrued from the project to 
drop to 20%, ENPV would drop to negative values, with the EIRR below SDR, rendering the project 
no longer economically viable. 
47.  An  increase  of  project  costs  of  a  maximum  of  30%  would  not  seriously  imperil  the  project  as 
ENPV would remain positive and EIRR well above the SDR.  
48.  An  increase  in  the  failure  of  the  loans  of  up  to  35%  (from  its  base  value  of  20%)  would  not 
cause  the  project  to  become  unfeasible,  as  ENPV  is  still  positive  and  EIRR  is  above  the  SDR. 
However, (and while not modelled in the tables), if the failure rate of the loan drops to 40% the project 
would  become  economically  unfeasible  as  ENPV  would  drop  to  negative  values  and  EIRR  would 
become lower than the SDR. 
49.  Finally, a delay in accrual of project benefits of 2 years would render the project economically 
unfeasible.  
163 
Republic(cid:9)of(cid:9)MozambiqueREFP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Rural(cid:9)Enterprise(cid:9)Financing(cid:9)ProjectSensitivity(cid:9)Analysis(cid:9)(Economic)Base(cid:9)caseIndicator10%25%30%35%1(cid:9)year2(cid:9)yearENPV(cid:9)(millions(cid:9)MZN)4,1012,885.51,670.1454.81,392-1,070ENPV(cid:9)(millions(cid:9)USD)6848.127.87.623-18EIRR17%15.2%13.1%10.9%13.6%8.6%Increase(cid:9)in(cid:9)failure(cid:9)rate(cid:9)of(cid:9)loansDelay(cid:9)in(cid:9)accrual(cid:9)of(cid:9)project(cid:9)benefits 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 34: REFP Economic Analysis 
164 
Republic of MozambiqueRural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP)Production ModelsEconomc Budget (in MZN millions)WithoutWithProduction ModelsProjectProject1 to 2012345678910111213141516171819201Tomato Shadenet11,724-2,940-1,3711,7345,12110,01611,66119,69521,02222,06722,83022,51222,60522,60522,60522,93722,57123,60223,60223,60223,6022Cassava processing plant016,02968,863126,411183,251232,377284,405324,203337,946347,055337,856340,839340,839345,912345,912345,912356,057356,057356,057356,057356,0573Cassava farm497,29430,805102,736202,279309,814417,928501,920562,076616,418670,760718,709755,470779,444792,230795,427795,427795,427795,427795,427795,427795,4274Livestock production155,98212,07624,13358,84097,270142,127183,339214,292236,237245,449250,326251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,9525Fishing9,783-4,165-4,467-4,387-2,752-9747889,3459,2829,1879,2919,1929,1229,2629,1929,1229,2629,1929,1229,2629,1926Maize and beans farm89,74616,19641,46075,213116,214158,253197,764221,708238,055248,373251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,2237Sesame and soya beans farm154,57356,907131,447208,446269,033332,998397,317421,212434,486444,433455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,4738Naval carpenter568,693121,657386,007733,4431,105,0831,449,5871,698,5871,821,9041,871,9671,886,5321,880,0851,881,3751,886,5321,880,0851,881,3751,886,5321,880,0851,881,3751,886,5321,880,0851,881,3759Aquaculture135,461-1,68719,83656,898113,627163,794202,975226,551233,547235,989236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,05510Barbershop 375,51724,993101,956216,307329,684457,841579,475656,284688,619708,778727,308723,921727,308727,308726,294727,308724,936726,294727,308727,308726,294ATotal production models cash flows 1,998,773269,871870,5991,675,1842,526,3443,363,9464,058,2324,477,2714,687,5804,818,6254,889,1574,928,0124,960,5544,972,1054,975,5074,981,9414,983,0424,986,6494,992,7514,986,4444,986,649Cash flows corrected for failure rate of loans (20%)1,998,773230,517731,0601,396,8792,098,1252,789,4073,365,6023,710,4013,884,5733,993,4614,052,6644,083,7494,109,7824,119,0244,121,7454,126,8924,127,7724,130,6584,135,5404,130,4944,130,658BProject Economic Costs (COSTAB)663,834690,596675,787528,098437,118398,282CNet cash flows (A-B)1,998,773-433,31740,465721,0921,570,0272,352,2892,967,3203,710,4013,884,5733,993,4614,052,6644,083,7494,109,7824,119,0244,121,7454,126,8924,127,7724,130,6584,135,5404,130,4944,130,658Incremental Economic Benefits-2,432,091-1,958,309-1,277,681-428,747353,516968,5471,711,6281,885,7991,994,6872,053,8912,084,9762,111,0092,120,2502,122,9712,128,1192,128,9992,131,8852,136,7672,131,7212,131,885millions MZNmillions USDENPV (@10% SDR)4,100.868.3EIRR17.2%ex.rate: USD/MZN60.0 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 35: Full sensitivity analysis 
165 
Republic(cid:9)of(cid:9)MozambiqueREFP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Rural(cid:9)Enterprise(cid:9)Financing(cid:9)ProjectSensitivity(cid:9)Analysis(cid:9)(Economic)Base(cid:9)caseIndicator10%-5%-10%-15%10%20%30%25%30%35%1(cid:9)year2(cid:9)yearENPV(cid:9)(millions(cid:9)MZN)4,1012,9181,7355523,8473,5933,3392,885.51,670.1454.81,392-1,070ENPV(cid:9)(millions(cid:9)USD)684929964605648.127.87.623-18EIRR17%15.2%13.2%11.0%16.6%16.0%15.5%15.2%13.1%10.9%13.6%8.6%Reduction(cid:9)in(cid:9)project(cid:9)benefitsWOWPPY1(cid:9)to(cid:9)201234567891011121314151617181920-5%1,998,773.4-444,843.23,911.8651,248.01,465,120.52,212,818.62,799,039.93,524,881.03,690,343.93,793,787.83,850,031.23,879,561.63,904,292.93,913,072.33,915,657.53,920,547.63,921,383.83,924,125.53,928,763.03,923,969.73,924,125.5-2,443,616.6-1,994,861.6-1,347,525.4-533,652.9214,045.2800,266.51,526,107.61,691,570.51,795,014.41,851,257.81,880,788.21,905,519.51,914,298.91,916,884.11,921,774.21,922,610.41,925,352.11,929,989.61,925,196.31,925,352.1-10%1,998,773.4-456,369.1-32,641.2581,404.11,360,214.32,073,348.32,630,759.83,339,360.93,496,115.33,594,114.73,647,398.03,675,374.23,698,803.83,707,121.23,709,570.23,714,203.03,714,995.23,717,592.53,721,986.03,717,445.03,717,592.5-2,455,142.5-2,031,414.6-1,417,369.3-638,559.174,574.9631,986.41,340,587.51,497,341.91,595,341.31,648,624.61,676,600.81,700,030.41,708,347.81,710,796.81,715,429.61,716,221.81,718,819.21,723,212.61,718,671.61,718,819.2-15%1,998,773.4-467,894.9-69,194.3511,560.11,255,308.11,933,878.02,462,479.73,153,840.93,301,886.73,394,441.73,444,764.83,471,186.73,493,314.73,501,170.03,503,483.03,507,858.43,508,606.53,511,059.63,515,209.03,510,920.33,511,059.6-2,466,668.3-2,067,967.7-1,487,213.3-743,465.3-64,895.4463,706.31,155,067.51,303,113.31,395,668.31,445,991.41,472,413.31,494,541.31,502,396.61,504,709.61,509,085.01,509,833.21,512,286.21,516,435.61,512,146.91,512,286.2Increase(cid:9)in(cid:9)project(cid:9)costs10%1,998,773.4-499,700.8-28,594.8653,513.31,517,217.02,308,577.22,927,491.83,710,401.03,884,572.53,993,460.84,052,664.44,083,749.14,109,782.04,119,023.54,121,744.74,126,892.24,127,772.44,130,658.44,135,540.04,130,494.54,130,658.4-2,498,474.2-2,027,368.2-1,345,260.1-481,556.4309,803.8928,718.41,711,627.61,885,799.21,994,687.42,053,891.12,084,975.72,111,008.62,120,250.12,122,971.32,128,118.82,128,999.02,131,885.02,136,766.62,131,721.12,131,885.020%1,998,773.4-566,084.3-97,654.3585,934.61,464,407.22,264,865.42,887,663.63,710,401.03,884,572.53,993,460.84,052,664.44,083,749.14,109,782.04,119,023.54,121,744.74,126,892.24,127,772.44,130,658.44,135,540.04,130,494.54,130,658.4-2,564,857.7-2,096,427.7-1,412,838.8-534,366.2266,092.0888,890.21,711,627.61,885,799.21,994,687.42,053,891.12,084,975.72,111,008.62,120,250.12,122,971.32,128,118.82,128,999.02,131,885.02,136,766.62,131,721.12,131,885.030%1,998,773.4-632,467.7-166,713.9518,355.91,411,597.42,221,153.72,847,835.43,710,401.03,884,572.53,993,460.84,052,664.44,083,749.14,109,782.04,119,023.54,121,744.74,126,892.24,127,772.44,130,658.44,135,540.04,130,494.54,130,658.4-2,631,241.1-2,165,487.3-1,480,417.5-587,176.0222,380.3849,062.01,711,627.61,885,799.21,994,687.42,053,891.12,084,975.72,111,008.62,120,250.12,122,971.32,128,118.82,128,999.02,131,885.02,136,766.62,131,721.12,131,885.0Increase(cid:9)in(cid:9)failure(cid:9)rate(cid:9)of(cid:9)loans25%1,998,773.4-443,155.85,580.2651,515.71,462,971.92,208,654.22,794,162.43,518,683.53,683,820.63,787,169.93,843,541.43,872,683.23,897,089.13,905,753.03,908,304.13,913,129.93,913,955.13,916,660.73,921,237.33,916,507.03,916,660.7-2,441,929.2-1,993,193.2-1,347,257.7-535,801.5209,880.8795,389.01,519,910.11,685,047.21,788,396.51,844,768.01,873,909.81,898,315.71,906,979.61,909,530.71,914,356.51,915,181.71,917,887.31,922,463.91,917,733.61,917,887.330%1,998,773.4-452,994.2-29,304.4581,939.41,355,917.12,065,019.42,621,004.93,326,965.93,483,068.63,580,878.93,634,418.33,661,617.43,684,396.23,692,482.53,694,863.63,699,367.63,700,137.83,702,663.03,706,934.53,702,519.63,702,663.0-2,451,767.5-2,028,077.8-1,416,834.0-642,856.366,246.1622,231.51,328,192.51,484,295.21,582,105.51,635,644.91,662,844.01,685,622.81,693,709.11,696,090.21,700,594.21,701,364.41,703,889.61,708,161.11,703,746.21,703,889.635%1,998,773.4-462,832.5-64,189.1512,363.21,248,862.21,921,384.72,447,847.43,135,248.43,282,316.63,374,587.93,425,295.33,450,551.53,471,703.33,479,212.03,481,423.03,485,605.33,486,320.53,488,665.43,492,631.73,488,532.23,488,665.4-2,461,605.9-2,062,962.5-1,486,410.2-749,911.2-77,388.7449,074.01,136,475.01,283,543.21,375,814.51,426,521.91,451,778.11,472,929.91,480,438.61,482,649.61,486,831.91,487,547.11,489,892.01,493,858.31,489,758.81,489,892.0Reduction(cid:9)in(cid:9)all(cid:9)benefits(cid:9)due(cid:9)to(cid:9)delays(cid:9)in(cid:9)implementation1(cid:9)year1,998,773.4-663,834.4-460,078.655,273.5868,781.01,661,007.02,391,124.63,365,602.03,710,401.03,884,572.53,993,460.84,052,664.44,083,749.14,109,782.04,119,023.54,121,744.74,126,892.24,127,772.44,130,658.44,135,540.04,130,494.5-2,662,607.8-2,458,852.0-1,943,499.9-1,129,992.4-337,766.4392,351.21,366,828.61,711,627.61,885,799.21,994,687.42,053,891.12,084,975.72,111,008.62,120,250.12,122,971.32,128,118.82,128,999.02,131,885.02,136,766.62,131,721.12(cid:9)year1,998,773.4-663,834.4-690,595.6-445,269.9202,962.5959,761.31,699,842.72,789,406.63,365,602.03,710,401.03,884,572.53,993,460.84,052,664.44,083,749.14,109,782.04,119,023.54,121,744.74,126,892.24,127,772.44,130,658.44,135,540.0-2,662,607.8-2,689,369.0-2,444,043.3-1,795,810.9-1,039,012.1-298,930.7790,633.21,366,828.61,711,627.61,885,799.21,994,687.42,053,891.12,084,975.72,111,008.62,120,250.12,122,971.32,128,118.82,128,999.02,131,885.02,136,766.6Reduction(cid:9)in(cid:9)project(cid:9)benefits(cid:9)Increase(cid:9)in(cid:9)failure(cid:9)rate(cid:9)of(cid:9)loansIncrease(cid:9)in(cid:9)project(cid:9)costsDelay(cid:9)in(cid:9)accrual(cid:9)of(cid:9)project(cid:9)benefits 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 36: Tomato shade net, 0.1ha – Financial budget 
166 
enterpriseTomato(cid:9)shadenet(cid:9)0.1ha,(cid:9)with(cid:9)projectParametersUnitsWOPWPPlot(cid:9)size(cid:9)(ha)0.10.1EquipmentUnitUnits(cid:9)nr.Cost/ha(cid:9)(MZN)Total(cid:9)(MZN)Yield(cid:9)(Kg/ha)30,00060,000WP(cid:9)-(cid:9)total(cid:9)of(cid:9)2(cid:9)cyclesshadenet(cid:9)(complete(cid:9)and(cid:9)ereceted)ha0.102,700,000270,000Number(cid:9)of(cid:9)cycles(cid:9)for(cid:9)Without(cid:9)Project(cid:9)(WOP)12Irrigation(cid:9)system(cid:9)(drip)ha0.10500,00050,000Sale(cid:9)Price(cid:9)at(cid:9)farme(cid:9)gate(cid:9)(MZN/Kg)5050Total320,000Seeds(cid:9)(MZN/ha)62,60062,600Fertilizer(cid:9)(NPK)(cid:9)(MZN/ha)20,00020,000Insecticide(cid:9)(MZN/ha)25,00025,000External(cid:9)Labour(cid:9)(hired,(cid:9)unskilled,(cid:9)daily(cid:9)rate)171171Based(cid:9)on(cid:9)average(cid:9)monthly(cid:9)rural(cid:9)wage,(cid:9)considering(cid:9)a(cid:9)21(cid:9)day(cid:9)work(cid:9)person-days(cid:9)month(cid:9)(National(cid:9)statistics)WOPWP1RevenuePY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Intensity(cid:9)rate100%60%65%70%75%80%85%90%90%90%90%90%90%90%90%90%90%90%90%90%90%Yield(cid:9)(kg)3,0003,6003,9004,2004,5004,8005,1005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,400Self(cid:9)consumption(cid:9)(kg,(cid:9)calculated(cid:9)as(cid:9)1%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)303639424548515454545454545454545454545454Post(cid:9)harvest(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(@10%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production(cid:9)WOP,(cid:9)@5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production(cid:9)WP)300180195210225240255270270270270270270270270270270270270270270Volume(cid:9)of(cid:9)sales(cid:9)(kg)2,6703,3843,6663,9484,2304,5124,7945,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,0765,076Revenue(cid:9)(MZN)133,500169,200183,300197,400211,500225,600239,700253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800253,800Investment(cid:9)CostsShadenet(cid:9)(replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)20(cid:9)years)270,0000000000000000000000Shadenet(cid:9)parts(cid:9)(valued(cid:9)@(cid:9)5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment(cid:9)cost)13,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,50013,500Drip(cid:9)irrigation(cid:9)system(cid:9)(replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)10(cid:9)years)50,00000000000050,000000000000Drip(cid:9)system(cid:9)parts(cid:9)(valued(cid:9)@(cid:9)5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment(cid:9)cost)2,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,50002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,500Total(cid:9)0320,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00063,50016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,000Operating(cid:9)costsSeeds(cid:9)(improved)6,26011,26812,20713,14614,08515,02415,96316,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,90216,902Fertilizers2,0003,6003,9004,2004,5004,8005,1005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,4005,400Insecticides7,5004,5004,8755,2505,6256,0006,3756,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,7506,750Water(cid:9)(available(cid:9)from(cid:9)irrigation(cid:9)scheme)00000000000000000000Total(cid:9)Operating(cid:9)costs15,76019,36820,98222,59624,21025,82427,43829,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,05229,052LabourHand(cid:9)watering(cid:9)(person-day)457,695Planting(cid:9)(person-day)91,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,539weeding(cid:9)(person-days)61,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,0261,026Application(cid:9)of(cid:9)fertilizer/insecticide(cid:9)(person-day)31,026513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513harvesting(cid:9)(person-day)91,0261,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,5391,539Family(cid:9)labour5,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,1305,130Total(cid:9)labour17,4429,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,7479,747O&MO&M(cid:9)farming(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)(shovels,(cid:9)hoes,(cid:9)buckets,(cid:9)wheelbarrow,(cid:9)etc)1,5761,9372,0982,2602,4212,5822,7442,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,9052,905Contribution(cid:9)to(cid:9)O&M(cid:9)main(cid:9)irrigation(cid:9)system(cid:9)(@(cid:9)MZN350(cid:9)per(cid:9)month)4,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,200O&M(cid:9)of(cid:9)shadenet(cid:9)(1%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment)002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,700O&M(cid:9)of(cid:9)drip(cid:9)irrigaton(cid:9)system(cid:9)(5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment)002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,500Total(cid:9)O&M5,7766,13711,49811,66011,82111,98212,14412,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,30512,305Total(cid:9)Costs38,978355,25258,22760,00361,77863,55365,32967,10467,10467,10467,104114,60467,10467,10467,10467,10467,10467,10467,10467,10467,104Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)financing94,522-186,052125,073137,397149,722162,047174,371186,696186,696186,696186,696139,196186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696Credit(cid:9)AnalysisFinancial(cid:9)inflowsDisbursement(cid:9)of(cid:9)short(cid:9)term(cid:9)loan160,000Transfer(cid:9)from(cid:9)previous(cid:9)period023,29124,00124,71125,42126,13226,84226,84226,84226,84245,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,842Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)own(cid:9)savings80,000Grants(cid:9)(crowding-in(cid:9)fund)160,0000Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)inflows400,00023,29124,00124,71125,42126,13226,84226,84226,84226,84245,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,842Financial(cid:9)outflowsShort(cid:9)term(cid:9)principal160,000Short(cid:9)term(cid:9)Interest26,064Transfer(cid:9)to(cid:9)next(cid:9)period(cid:9)(40%(cid:9)of(cid:9)operating(cid:9)costs(cid:9)for(cid:9)following(cid:9)year)23,29124,00124,71125,42126,13226,84226,84226,84226,84245,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,842Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)outflows209,35524,00124,71125,42126,13226,84226,84226,84226,84245,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,84226,842Net(cid:9)Financing190,645-710-710-710-710-710000-19,00019,000000000000Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)financing4,593124,363136,687149,012161,336173,661186,696186,696186,696167,696158,196186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696186,696Incremental(cid:9)net(cid:9)revenue-89,92929,84142,16554,49066,81479,13992,17492,17492,17473,17463,67492,17492,17492,17492,17492,17492,17492,17492,17492,174Total(cid:9)investment(cid:9)needs400,000FNPV(cid:9)@22%MZN(cid:9)156,290Beneficiary(cid:9)contribution(cid:9)(20%)80,000FIRR55%Loan(cid:9)from(cid:9)Financial(cid:9)Institution(cid:9)(40%)160,000B/C1.80Grant(cid:9)from(cid:9)crowding-in(cid:9)fund(cid:9)(40%)160,000Grace(cid:9)period0(cid:9)monthsInterest(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(APR)22.5% 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 37: Tomato shade net, 0.1ha – Economic analysis 
167 
enterpriseTomato(cid:9)shadenet(cid:9)0.1ha,(cid:9)with(cid:9)projectCF (inputs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:SCF0.88tomato(cid:9)seeds0.627Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFUnemployment(cid:9)rate24.5%fertilizers,(cid:9)herbicides,(cid:9)insecticides0.734Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFVAT17.0%shadenet,(cid:9)drip(cid:9)system,(cid:9)equipment0.700Export(cid:9)tax0.0%CF(cid:9)(outputs)Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(seeds)20.0%tomatoes0.752NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fertilizers,(cid:9)insecticides,(cid:9)herbicides)2.5%CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(shadenet,(cid:9)irrigation(cid:9)equipment)7.5%CF(cid:9)(non(cid:9)tradable)0.855MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxEP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxWOPWPRevenuePY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Gross(cid:9)benefits(cid:9)(MZN)100,410127,262137,867148,472159,077169,682180,287190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892190,892Investment(cid:9)CostsShadenet(cid:9)(replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)20(cid:9)years)0188,9090000000000000000000Shadenet(cid:9)parts(cid:9)(valued(cid:9)@(cid:9)5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment(cid:9)cost)009,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,4459,445Drip(cid:9)irrigation(cid:9)system(cid:9)(replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)10(cid:9)years)034,98300000000034,983000000000Drip(cid:9)system(cid:9)parts(cid:9)(valued(cid:9)@(cid:9)5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment(cid:9)cost)001,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,74901,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,749Total(cid:9)0223,89211,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19544,42911,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,195Operating(cid:9)costsSeeds(cid:9)(improved)3,9247,0637,6518,2408,8289,41710,00510,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,59410,594Fertilizers1,4682,6422,8623,0823,3023,5223,7423,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,9623,962Insecticides5,5033,3023,5773,8524,1284,4034,6784,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,9534,953Water(cid:9)(available(cid:9)from(cid:9)irrigation(cid:9)scheme)Total(cid:9)Operating(cid:9)costs10,89513,00614,09015,17416,25817,34218,42619,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,50919,509LabourHand(cid:9)watering(cid:9)(person-day)455,81000000000000000000000Planting(cid:9)(person-day)91,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,162weeding(cid:9)(person-days)6775775775775775775775775775775775775775775775775775775775775775Application(cid:9)of(cid:9)fertilizer/insecticide(cid:9)(person-day)3775387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387harvesting(cid:9)(person-day)97751,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,1621,162Family(cid:9)labour3,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,8733,873Total(cid:9)labour13,1697,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,3597,359O&MO&M(cid:9)farming(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)(shovels,(cid:9)hoes,(cid:9)buckets,(cid:9)wheelbarrow,(cid:9)etc)1,0891,3011,4091,5171,6261,7341,8431,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,9511,951Contribution(cid:9)to(cid:9)O&M(cid:9)main(cid:9)irrigation(cid:9)system(cid:9)(@(cid:9)MZN(cid:9)350(cid:9)per(cid:9)month)4,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,2004,200O&M(cid:9)of(cid:9)shadenet(cid:9)(1%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment)001,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,8891,889O&M(cid:9)of(cid:9)drip(cid:9)irrigaton(cid:9)system(cid:9)(5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment)001,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,7491,749Total(cid:9)O&M5,2895,5019,2479,3569,4649,5729,6819,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,7899,789TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS29,353249,75841,89143,08344,27545,46846,66047,85247,85247,85247,85281,08647,85247,85247,85247,85247,85247,85247,85247,85247,852Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits71,057-122,49695,976105,389114,801124,214133,627143,040143,040143,040143,040109,806143,040143,040143,040143,040143,040143,040143,040143,040143,040Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits-193,55424,91834,33143,74453,15762,57071,98371,98371,98371,98338,74971,98371,98371,98371,98371,98371,98371,98371,98371,983ENPV(cid:9)@10%256,310MZN(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)EIRR25.0%B/C(cid:9)ratio2.5Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)beneficiaries(cid:9)1652430303020311-2,9402,3032,5292,7552,9813,2073,4333,4333,4333,4332,6353,4333,4333,4333,4333,4333,4333,4333,4333,4332-3,6752,8793,1623,4443,7264,0094,2914,2914,2914,2913,2944,2914,2914,2914,2914,2914,2914,2914,2913-3,6752,8793,1623,4443,7264,0094,2914,2914,2914,2913,2944,2914,2914,2914,2914,2914,2914,2914-3,6752,8793,1623,4443,7264,0094,2914,2914,2914,2913,2944,2914,2914,2914,2914,2914,2915-2,4501,9202,1082,2962,4842,6732,8612,8612,8612,8612,1962,8612,8612,8612,8612,8616-3,7972,9753,2673,5593,8514,1424,4344,4344,4344,4343,4044,4344,4344,4344,434Total(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)11,724-2,940-1,3711,7345,12110,01611,66119,69521,02222,06722,83022,51222,60522,60522,60522,93722,57123,60223,60223,60223,602 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 38: Cassava small processing unit – Financial budget 
168 
EnterpriseCassava(cid:9)small(cid:9)processing(cid:9)unit,(cid:9)WPParametersRaw(cid:9)material(cid:9)processed(cid:9)(t/year)1,000At(cid:9)full(cid:9)time(cid:9)productionEquipmentunitnr.Cost/unitTotal(cid:9)(MZN)Chips(cid:9)produced(cid:9)(t/year)2501(cid:9)Kg(cid:9)chips(cid:9)from(cid:9)4Kg(cid:9)fresh(cid:9)rootsFacility/buildingm21001,500150,000Purchase(cid:9)price(cid:9)of(cid:9)fresh(cid:9)roots(cid:9)(MZN/Kg)2Chipping(cid:9)machinenumber245,00090,000Market(cid:9)price(cid:9)for(cid:9)chips(cid:9)(MZN/Kg)11.5Drying(cid:9)stationnumber115,00015,000Transport(cid:9)(per(cid:9)50Kg(cid:9)bag,(cid:9)for(cid:9)10Km)5Water(cid:9)tanks(cid:9)(2000l)number220,00040,000Electricity(cid:9)(MZN/year)68,100Evaluated(cid:9)from(cid:9)a(cid:9)flour(cid:9)processing(cid:9)plant(cid:9)of(cid:9)the(cid:9)same(cid:9)scaleMiscellaneous(cid:9)(handtools,(cid:9)protection(cid:9)equipment,(cid:9)unifoms)10,000Water,(cid:9)price(cid:9)per(cid:9)1000lt(cid:9)(MZN)6Total305,000Bags(cid:9)(50kg)(cid:9)(MZN/bag)7.5labour(cid:9)(person-month)3,591RevenuePY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Production(cid:9)rate70%75%80%85%90%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%Prouction(cid:9)of(cid:9)chips(cid:9)(kg)175,000187,500200,000212,500225,000237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500237,500Sale(cid:9)of(cid:9)chips(cid:9)(MZN)2,012,5002,156,2502,300,0002,443,7502,587,5002,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,2502,731,250Investment(cid:9)costsEquipment305,00000000000145,0000000000000Operating(cid:9)Costs#Purchase(cid:9)of(cid:9)raw(cid:9)material(cid:9)(kg)700,000750,000800,000850,000900,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000950,000Cost(cid:9)of(cid:9)raw(cid:9)material1,400,0001,500,0001,600,0001,700,0001,800,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,0001,900,000Bags5,00026,25028,12530,00031,87533,75035,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,62535,625Transport(cid:9)(farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)to(cid:9)factory)49,00056,25064,00072,25081,00090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,25090,250Transport(cid:9)(factory(cid:9)to(cid:9)market)12,25014,06316,00018,06320,25022,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,56322,563Water(cid:9)(@5lt(cid:9)per(cid:9)kg)519,95021,37522,80024,22525,65027,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,07527,075Electricity47,67051,07554,48057,88561,29064,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,69564,695Total(cid:9)(MZN)1,555,1201,670,8881,787,2801,904,2982,021,9402,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,2082,140,208LabourWashing,(cid:9)peeling,(cid:9)chipping(cid:9)(for(cid:9)1(cid:9)year)5215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460215,460Management110,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,000Total(cid:9)(MZN)225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460225,460O&MO&M(cid:9)on(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)(5%(cid:9)investment(cid:9)cost)15,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,250Replacement(cid:9)of(cid:9)machinery/drying(cid:9)station00000000000000000000Total(cid:9)(MZN)15,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,25015,250TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS2,100,8301,911,5982,027,9902,145,0082,262,6502,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,525,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,9182,380,918Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)Financing-88,330244,653272,010298,743324,850350,333350,333350,333350,333205,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333Credit(cid:9)AnalysisPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Financial(cid:9)inflowsDisbursement(cid:9)of(cid:9)short(cid:9)term(cid:9)loan/a300,000Transfer(cid:9)from(cid:9)previous(cid:9)period(cid:9)(working(cid:9)capital)0200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)own(cid:9)savings150,000Grants(cid:9)(crowding(cid:9)in(cid:9)fund)300,000Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)inflows750,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000Financial(cid:9)outflowsShort(cid:9)term(cid:9)principal300,000Short(cid:9)term(cid:9)Interest48,871Transfer(cid:9)to(cid:9)next(cid:9)period(cid:9)(working(cid:9)capital)200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)outflows548,871200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000200,000Net(cid:9)Financing201,1290000000000000000000Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)Financing112,799244,653272,010298,743324,850350,333350,333350,333350,333205,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333350,333MZNTotal(cid:9)financing(cid:9)package750,000FNPV(cid:9)@22%MZN(cid:9)1,352,634Beneficiary(cid:9)contribution(cid:9)(20%)150,000FIRRNALoan(cid:9)(40%)300,000B/C(cid:9)ratio1.11Grant(cid:9)(40%)300,000Grace(cid:9)period0(cid:9)monthsAverage(cid:9)Interest(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(APR)22.5% 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 39: Cassava small processing unit – Economic analysis 
169 
EnterpriseCassava(cid:9)small(cid:9)processing(cid:9)unit,(cid:9)WPCF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:SCF0.88cassava(cid:9)roots0.627Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFUnemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%Equipment0.700Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFSCF(cid:9)=(cid:9)1CF(cid:9)(outputs)VAT17.00%cassava(cid:9)chips0.752Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFExport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(applicable(cid:9)to(cid:9)all(cid:9)exports)0.00%CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(cassava(cid:9)roots)20.00%CF(cid:9)(non(cid:9)tradable,(cid:9)national)0.855SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(chipping(cid:9)machine,(cid:9)drying(cid:9)station)7.50%MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxEP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxRevenuePY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Sale(cid:9)of(cid:9)chips(cid:9)(MZN)1,513,6751,621,7951,729,9151,838,0341,946,1542,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,2742,054,274Investment(cid:9)costsEquipment213,39700000000101,4510000000000Operating(cid:9)Costs#Cost(cid:9)of(cid:9)raw(cid:9)material877,493940,1711,002,8491,065,5271,128,2051,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,8831,190,883Bags022,43624,03825,64127,24428,84630,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,44930,449Transport(cid:9)(farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)to(cid:9)factory)41,88048,07754,70161,75269,23177,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,13777,137Transport(cid:9)(factory(cid:9)to(cid:9)market)10,47012,01913,67515,43817,30819,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,28419,284Water(cid:9)(@5lt(cid:9)per(cid:9)kg)517,05118,26919,48720,70521,92323,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,14123,141Electricity40,74443,65446,56449,47452,38555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,29555,295Total(cid:9)(MZN)1,010,0741,086,2291,162,9171,240,1401,317,8971,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,1891,396,189LabourWashing,(cid:9)peeling,(cid:9)chipping(cid:9)(for(cid:9)1(cid:9)year)5162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672162,672Management(cid:9)(skilled)110,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,000Total(cid:9)(MZN)172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672172,672O&MO&M(cid:9)on(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)(5%(cid:9)investment(cid:9)cost)10,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,670Replacement(cid:9)of(cid:9)machinery/drying(cid:9)station00000000000000000000Total(cid:9)(MZN)10,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,67010,670Total(cid:9)Costs1,406,8131,269,5711,346,2601,423,4821,501,2401,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,680,9821,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,579,5311,579,531Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits106,862352,224383,655414,552444,914474,743474,743474,743474,743373,292474,743474,743474,743474,743474,743474,743474,743474,743474,743474,743ENPV(cid:9)@10%3,438,878MZN(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)EIRRNAB/C(cid:9)ratio1.3Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)enterprises75015015015010010010062,370169,400000116,02952,83457,54862,18366,73771,21171,21171,21171,21155,99471,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,211216,02952,83457,54862,18366,73771,21171,21171,21171,21155,99471,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,211316,02952,83457,54862,18366,73771,21171,21171,21171,21155,99471,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,21171,211410,68635,22238,36641,45544,49147,47447,47447,47447,47437,32947,47447,47447,47447,47447,47447,47447,474510,68635,22238,36641,45544,49147,47447,47447,47447,47437,32947,47447,47447,47447,47447,47447,474610,68635,22238,36641,45544,49147,47447,47447,47447,47437,32947,47447,47447,47447,47447,474Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)016,02968,863126,411183,251232,377284,405324,203337,946347,055337,856340,839340,839345,912345,912345,912356,057356,057356,057356,057356,057 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 40: Cassava farm, 1ha – Financial budget (without project) 
170 
EnterpriseCassava(cid:9)farm(cid:9)1ha,(cid:9)without(cid:9)projectParametersPlot(cid:9)size(cid:9)(ha)1.0Yield(cid:9)(Kg/ha)30,000One(cid:9)production(cid:9)cycle(cid:9)per(cid:9)yearSale(cid:9)Price(cid:9)at(cid:9)farme(cid:9)gate(cid:9)(MZN/Kg)2Farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)priceCuttings(cid:9)(MZN/ha)400400(cid:9)cuttings(cid:9)per(cid:9)ha,(cid:9)at(cid:9)a(cid:9)unit(cid:9)cost(cid:9)of(cid:9)10(cid:9)MZN/cuttingFertilizer(cid:9)(NPK)(cid:9)(MZN/ha)020:10:10,(cid:9)10(cid:9)(50Kg)(cid:9)bags(cid:9)@450/bagherbicide(cid:9)(MZN/ha)0glyphosate,(cid:9)5l/haInsecticide(cid:9)(MZN/ha)0lime(cid:9)(MZN/ha)05(cid:9)(50Kg)(cid:9)bags(cid:9)per(cid:9)haCompost(cid:9)(MZN/ha)1,000Cost(cid:9)evaluated(cid:9)as(cid:9)cost(cid:9)of(cid:9)materials(cid:9)used(cid:9)by(cid:9)farmer(cid:9)to(cid:9)produce(cid:9)compost(cid:9)based(cid:9)on(cid:9)organic(cid:9)material(cid:9)from(cid:9)his(cid:9)farms(cid:9)(weeds)External(cid:9)Labour(cid:9)(hired,(cid:9)unskilled,(cid:9)daily(cid:9)rate)171Based(cid:9)on(cid:9)average(cid:9)official(cid:9)monthly(cid:9)rural(cid:9)wage,(cid:9)considering(cid:9)a(cid:9)21(cid:9)day(cid:9)work(cid:9)person-days(cid:9)month(cid:9)(National(cid:9)statistics)RevenuePY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Output(cid:9)(kg)30,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,00030,000Self(cid:9)consumption(cid:9)(calculated(cid:9)as(cid:9)1%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)1%300300300300300300300300300300300300300300300300300300300300Post(cid:9)harvest(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(@20%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)20%6,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,000Revenue(cid:9)(MZN)47,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,40047,400Operating(cid:9)costsInputsCuttings(cid:9)400400400400400400400400400400400400400400400400400400400400Fertilizers00000000000000000000herbicide00000000000000000000Compost1,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,000Total(cid:9)Inputs1,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,4001,400LabourSkilledTractor:(cid:9)Land(cid:9)preparation(cid:9)(plowing,(cid:9)harrowing,(cid:9)ridging)00000000000000000000Unskilled#Land(cid:9)preparation(cid:9)(plowing,(cid:9)harrowing,(cid:9)ridging(cid:9)-(cid:9)non(cid:9)mechanized)101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,710destumping000000000000000000000Planting(cid:9)(person-days/ha)81,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,368weeding(cid:9)(person-days/ha)5513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513Application(cid:9)of(cid:9)lime/herbicide/fertilizer/insecticide(cid:9)(person-days)000000000000000000000harvesting(cid:9)(person-days/ha)101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,710Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(person-days/ha)101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,710Total(cid:9)labour7,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,0117,011TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS8,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,4118,411Net(cid:9)Revenue38,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,98938,989 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 41: Cassava farm, 1ha – Financial budget (with project) 
171 
EnterpriseCassava(cid:9)farm(cid:9)2ha,(cid:9)with(cid:9)projectParametersPlot(cid:9)size(cid:9)(ha)1Yield(cid:9)(Kg/ha)40,000One(cid:9)production(cid:9)cycle(cid:9)per(cid:9)yearherbicide(cid:9)(MZN/ha)3,500glyphosate,(cid:9)5l/haSale(cid:9)Price(cid:9)at(cid:9)farme(cid:9)gate(cid:9)(MZN/Kg)2.5Farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)priceInsecticide(cid:9)(MZN/ha)4,500Cuttings(cid:9)(MZN/ha)600600(cid:9)cuttings(cid:9)per(cid:9)ha,(cid:9)at(cid:9)a(cid:9)unit(cid:9)cost(cid:9)of(cid:9)10(cid:9)MZN/cuttinglime(cid:9)(MZN/ha)5,0005(cid:9)(50Kg)(cid:9)bags(cid:9)per(cid:9)haFertilizer(cid:9)(NPK)(cid:9)(MZN/ha)4,50020:10:10,(cid:9)10(cid:9)(50Kg)(cid:9)bags(cid:9)@450/bagCompost(cid:9)(MZN/ha)1,000Cost(cid:9)evaluated(cid:9)as(cid:9)cost(cid:9)of(cid:9)materials(cid:9)used(cid:9)by(cid:9)farmer(cid:9)to(cid:9)produce(cid:9)compost(cid:9)based(cid:9)on(cid:9)organic(cid:9)material(cid:9)from(cid:9)his(cid:9)farms(cid:9)(weeds)Tractor(cid:9)hire(cid:9)(per(cid:9)day/ha)2,000External(cid:9)Labour(cid:9)(hired,(cid:9)unskilled,(cid:9)daily(cid:9)rate)171Based(cid:9)on(cid:9)average(cid:9)official(cid:9)monthly(cid:9)rural(cid:9)wage,(cid:9)considering(cid:9)a(cid:9)21(cid:9)day(cid:9)work(cid:9)person-days(cid:9)month(cid:9)(National(cid:9)statistics)4000RevenuePY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Success(cid:9)rate(cid:9)of(cid:9)output60%65%70%75%80%85%90%95%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Output(cid:9)-(cid:9)fresh(cid:9)roots(cid:9)(kg)24,00026,00028,00030,00032,00034,00036,00038,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,000Self(cid:9)consumption(cid:9)(calculated(cid:9)as(cid:9)5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)5%1,2001,3001,4001,5001,6001,7001,8001,9002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Post(cid:9)harvest(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(@10%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)10%2,4002,6002,8003,0003,2003,4003,6003,8004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,000Marketable(cid:9)produce20,40022,10023,80025,50027,20028,90030,60032,30034,00034,00034,00034,00034,00034,00034,00034,00034,00034,00034,00034,000Revenue(cid:9)(MZN)51,00055,25059,50063,75068,00072,25076,50080,75085,00085,00085,00085,00085,00085,00085,00085,00085,00085,00085,00085,000Operating(cid:9)costsInputsCuttings(cid:9)600600600600600600600600600600600600600600600600600600600600Fertilizers4,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,5004,500herbicide3,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,5003,500lime5,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,000Compost1,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,000Sub-total(cid:9)Inputs8,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,600LabourSkilledTractor:(cid:9)Land(cid:9)preparation(cid:9)(plowing,(cid:9)harrowing,(cid:9)ridging)4,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,000Unskilled#Land(cid:9)preparation(cid:9)(plowing,(cid:9)harrowing,(cid:9)ridging(cid:9)-(cid:9)non(cid:9)mechanized)00000000000000000000destumping(cid:9)(person-days/ha)101,7100000000000000000000Planting(cid:9)(person-days/ha)81,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,3681,368weeding(cid:9)(person-days/ha)5513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513513Application(cid:9)of(cid:9)lime/herbicide/fertilizer/insecticide(cid:9)(person-days)104,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,2754,275harvesting(cid:9)(person-days)101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,7101,710Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(person-days)152,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,5652,565Sub-total(cid:9)labour16,14114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,43114,431TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS24,74123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,03123,031Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)Financing26,25932,21936,46940,71944,96949,21953,46957,71961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,969Credit(cid:9)AnalysisFinancial(cid:9)inflowsDisbursement(cid:9)of(cid:9)short(cid:9)term(cid:9)loan/a18,000Transfer(cid:9)from(cid:9)previous(cid:9)period(cid:9)(as(cid:9)working(cid:9)capital)08,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,600Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)own(cid:9)savings0Grants(cid:9)(graduation(cid:9)fund,(cid:9)crowding(cid:9)in(cid:9)fund)00Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)inflows18,0008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,600Financial(cid:9)outflowsShort(cid:9)term(cid:9)principal18,000000Short(cid:9)term(cid:9)Interest4,0500000Transfer(cid:9)to(cid:9)next(cid:9)period(cid:9)(as(cid:9)working(cid:9)capital)8,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,600Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)outflows30,6508,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,6008,600Net(cid:9)Financing-12,6500000000000000000000Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)Financing13,60932,21936,46940,71944,96949,21953,46957,71961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,96961,969Incremental(cid:9)net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)financing-25,380-6,770-2,5201,7305,98010,23014,48018,73022,98022,98022,98022,98022,98022,98022,98022,98022,98022,98022,98022,980Total(cid:9)financing(cid:9)package18,000FNPV(cid:9)@22%MZN(cid:9)6,099Loan(cid:9)(Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)Credit)18,000IRR25%Grace(cid:9)period0(cid:9)monthsB/C2.83Interest(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(APR)22.5% 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 42: Cassava farm, 1ha – Economic analysis  
172 
EnterpriseCassava(cid:9)farm(cid:9)1ha,(cid:9)with(cid:9)projectSCF0.88CF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:Unemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%cassava(cid:9)cuttings0.627Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFSCF(cid:9)=(cid:9)1Equipment0.700Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFVAT17.00%Fertilizers,(cid:9)herbicides,(cid:9)lime0.734Export(cid:9)tax0.00%CF(cid:9)(outputs)Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(cassava(cid:9)cuttings)20.00%cassava(cid:9)roots(cid:9)0.752NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(chipping(cid:9)machine,(cid:9)drying(cid:9)station)7.50%CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fertilizers,(cid:9)insecticides,(cid:9)herbicides,(cid:9)lime)2.50%CF(cid:9)(non(cid:9)tradable,(cid:9)national)0.855MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxEP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxWOPWPRevenuePY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Economic(cid:9)benefits(cid:9)(MZN)35,65138,35941,55644,75247,94951,14554,34257,53860,73563,93263,93263,93263,93263,93263,93263,93263,93263,93263,93263,93263,932Operating(cid:9)costsInputsCuttings(cid:9)251376376376376376376376376376376376376376376376376376376376376Fertilizers03,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,3023,302herbicide02,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,5682,568lime03,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,6693,669Compost855855855855855855855855855855855855855855855855855855855855855Sub-total(cid:9)Inputs1,10510,7706,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,2466,246LabourSkilledTractor:(cid:9)Land(cid:9)preparation(cid:9)(plowing,(cid:9)harrowing,(cid:9)ridging)3,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,0203,020Unskilled#Land(cid:9)preparation(cid:9)(non-mechanized)1,291destumping(cid:9)(person-days/ha)1001,2910000000000000000000Planting(cid:9)(person-days/ha)81,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,0331,033weeding(cid:9)(person-days/ha)5387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387387Application(cid:9)of(cid:9)lime/herbicide/fertilizer/insecticide(cid:9)(person-days)1003,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,2283,228harvesting(cid:9)(person-days)101,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,2911,291Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(person-days)151,2911,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,9371,937Sub-total(cid:9)labour5,29312,18610,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,89510,895Total(cid:9)Costs6,39922,95717,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,14217,142Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits29,25315,40224,41427,61030,80734,00337,20040,39743,59346,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,790Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits-13,850-4,839-1,6421,5544,7517,94811,14414,34117,53717,53717,53717,53717,53717,53717,53717,53717,53717,53717,53717,537ENPV(cid:9)@10%MZN(cid:9)58,827IRR30%B/C3.0Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)enterprises(cid:9)17,0002,0003,5004,0003,5003,0001,000130,80548,82755,22161,61468,00774,40080,79387,18693,58093,58093,58093,58093,58093,58093,58093,58093,58093,58093,58093,580253,90985,44896,636107,824119,012130,200141,388152,576163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764361,61097,655110,441123,228136,014148,800161,587174,373187,159187,159187,159187,159187,159187,159187,159187,159187,159187,159453,90985,44896,636107,824119,012130,200141,388152,576163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764163,764546,20773,24182,83192,421102,010111,600121,190130,780140,369140,369140,369140,369140,369140,369140,369140,369615,40224,41427,61030,80734,00337,20040,39743,59346,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,79046,790Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)497,29430,805102,736202,279309,814417,928501,920562,076616,418670,760718,709755,470779,444792,230795,427795,427795,427795,427795,427795,427795,427 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 43: Livestock – Financial budget (without project) 
173 
EnterpriseLivestock(cid:9)production,(cid:9)WOPParametersInitial(cid:9)stock(cid:9)cows(cid:9)(nr.)13Labour(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(MZN/person-day)171Initial(cid:9)stock(cid:9)bulls(cid:9)(nr.)1Labour(cid:9)(person-day/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)8.55Calving(cid:9)period(cid:9)(months)24Veterinary(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)15Calves(cid:9)mortality(cid:9)(%)50%.(cid:9)tick(cid:9)treatment(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)0Cow(cid:9)replacement2heifers(cid:9)per(cid:9)year.(cid:9)Internal(cid:9)parasite(cid:9)control(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)0Live(cid:9)weight(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)weaner(cid:9)(kg)22063%of(cid:9)cow(cid:9)weight.(cid:9)Vaccines(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)15Live(cid:9)weight(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)heifer(cid:9)(kg)28080%of(cid:9)cow(cid:9)weightFeeding(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)(cid:9)@cow(cid:9)weight0Live(cid:9)weight(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)cow(cid:9)(kg)350Working(cid:9)capital(cid:9)requirement(cid:9)(%(cid:9)of(cid:9)operating(cid:9)costs)20%Sale(cid:9)price(cid:9)live(cid:9)animals(cid:9)(MZN/kg(cid:9)LW)47.5farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)price2.925Stocks(cid:9)(heads)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Calving(cid:9)rate60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%Adults(cid:9)mortality5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%Calves44444444444444444444heifer22222222222222222222cows1212121212121212121212121212121212121212bulls11111111111111111111Sales(cid:9)(heads)weaners11111111111111111111heifers22222222222222222222cows22222222222222222222RevenueVariation(cid:9)of(cid:9)ideal(cid:9)weight(cid:9)of(cid:9)anima(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)time80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%Sales(cid:9)of(cid:9)weaners(cid:9)(MZN)8,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,3608,360Sales(cid:9)of(cid:9)heifers(cid:9)(MZN)21,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,28021,280Sales(cid:9)of(cid:9)cows(cid:9)(MZN)26,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,60026,600Total56,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,24056,240Operating(cid:9)costsSupplementary(cid:9)Feeds00000000000000000000Veterinary(cid:9)cost284284283283283283283283283283283283283283283283283283283283Total284284283283283283283283283283283283283283283283283283283283LabourHired(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(person-days(cid:9)per(cid:9)animal)000000000000000000000Family(cid:9)labour2,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,770Total2,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,770TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS3,0543,0543,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,0533,053NET(cid:9)REVENUE53,18653,18653,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,18753,187 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 44: Livestock – Financial budget (with project) 
174 
EnterpriseCattle(cid:9)production,(cid:9)WPParametersInitial(cid:9)stock(cid:9)cows(cid:9)(nr.)13Labour(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(MZN/person-day)171Initial(cid:9)stock(cid:9)bulls(cid:9)(nr.)1Labour(cid:9)(person-day/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)8.55Calving(cid:9)period(cid:9)(months)24Veterinary(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)286.2Calves(cid:9)mortality(cid:9)(%)10%.(cid:9)tick(cid:9)treatment(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)151.2Cow(cid:9)replacement8heifers(cid:9)per(cid:9)year.(cid:9)Internal(cid:9)parasite(cid:9)control(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)120Live(cid:9)weight(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)weaner(cid:9)(kg)30060%of(cid:9)cow(cid:9)weight.(cid:9)Vaccines(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)15Live(cid:9)weight(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)heifer(cid:9)(kg)40080%of(cid:9)cow(cid:9)weightFeeding(cid:9)(MZN/animal(cid:9)per(cid:9)year)(cid:9)@cow(cid:9)weight3,200Live(cid:9)weight(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)cow(cid:9)(kg)500ex.rate(cid:9)USD/MZN60Sale(cid:9)price(cid:9)live(cid:9)animals(cid:9)(MZN/kg(cid:9)LW)61farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)price(cid:9)(healthy(cid:9)animals)PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Stocks(cid:9)(heads)Calving(cid:9)rate60%65%70%75%80%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%Adults(cid:9)mortality5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%5%Calves68899101010101010101010101010101010heifer25788999999999999999cows1212121212121212121212121212121212121212bulls11111111111111111111Sales(cid:9)(heads)weaners11111111111111111111heifers22333333333333333333cows22333333333333333333RevenueVariation(cid:9)of(cid:9)ideal(cid:9)weight(cid:9)of(cid:9)animal(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)time70%75%80%85%90%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%95%Sales(cid:9)of(cid:9)weaners(cid:9)(MZN)12,81013,72514,64015,55516,47017,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,38517,385Sales(cid:9)of(cid:9)heifers(cid:9)(MZN)34,16036,60058,56062,22065,88069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,54069,540Sales(cid:9)of(cid:9)cows(cid:9)(MZN)42,70045,75073,20077,77582,35086,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,92586,925Total(cid:9)revenue89,67096,075146,400155,550164,700173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850173,850Operating(cid:9)costsSupplementary(cid:9)Feeds46,72054,40060,47061,81863,16564,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,51364,513Veterinary(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(includes(cid:9)drugs,(cid:9)vaccines,(cid:9)fees)6,0107,3288,1748,4928,8109,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,1289,128Sub-Total52,73061,72868,64470,31071,97673,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,64273,642LabourHired(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(person-days(cid:9)per(cid:9)animal)0.51,7962,1892,4422,5372,6322,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,7272,727Family(cid:9)labour2,0012,4622,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,7702,770Sub-Total3,7964,6525,2125,3075,4025,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,4975,497Total(cid:9)Costs56,52666,38073,85675,61777,37879,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,13979,139Net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)before(cid:9)financing33,14429,69572,54479,93387,32294,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,711Credit(cid:9)AnalysisPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Financial(cid:9)inflowsDisbursement(cid:9)of(cid:9)short(cid:9)term(cid:9)loan/a45,0000000000000000000000Transfer(cid:9)from(cid:9)previous(cid:9)period024,69127,45828,12428,79029,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,457Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)own(cid:9)savings7,000Grants(cid:9)(graduation(cid:9)fund,(cid:9)crowding(cid:9)in(cid:9)fund)00Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)inflows52,00024,69127,45828,12428,79029,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,457Financial(cid:9)outflowsShort(cid:9)term(cid:9)principal(cid:9)(@22.5%(cid:9)APR,(cid:9)seasonal)45,000Short(cid:9)term(cid:9)Interest10,125Transfer(cid:9)to(cid:9)next(cid:9)period24,69127,45828,12428,79029,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,457Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)outflows79,81627,45828,12428,79029,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,45729,457Net(cid:9)Financing-27,816-2,766-666-666-666000000000000000Net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)financing5,32726,92971,87879,26786,65694,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,71194,711Incremental(cid:9)net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)financing-47,859-26,25718,69026,08033,46941,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,52441,524Total(cid:9)financing(cid:9)package52,000FNPV(cid:9)@22%MZN(cid:9)43,877Loan(cid:9)(Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)Credit)45,000FIRR35%Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)farmer7,000B/C1.96Grace(cid:9)period0(cid:9)monthsInterest(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(APR)22.5% 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 45: Livestock, Economic analysis  
175 
EnterpriseCattle(cid:9)production,(cid:9)WPSCF0.88CF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:Unemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%feeds(cid:9)(non(cid:9)tradable,(cid:9)national)0.855Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFSCF(cid:9)=(cid:9)1veterinary(cid:9)drugs(cid:9)and(cid:9)chemicals0.752Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFVAT17.00%0.700Export(cid:9)tax0.00%CF(cid:9)(outputs)Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(veterinary(cid:9)drugs(cid:9)and(cid:9)chemicals)0.00%live(cid:9)animals0.752NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(feeds)7.50%CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)CF(cid:9)(non(cid:9)tradable,(cid:9)national)0.855MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxEP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxWOPWPPY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20RevenueSales(cid:9)of(cid:9)weaners(cid:9)(MZN)6,2889,63510,32311,01111,69912,38813,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,07613,076Sales(cid:9)of(cid:9)heifers(cid:9)(MZN)16,00525,69327,52844,04546,79849,55152,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,30452,304Sales(cid:9)of(cid:9)cows(cid:9)(MZN)20,00732,11634,41055,05658,49761,93865,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,37965,379Total(cid:9)revenue42,30067,44472,262110,113116,995123,877130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759130,759Operating(cid:9)costsSupplementary(cid:9)Feeds039,93246,49651,68452,83653,98855,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,14055,140Veterinary(cid:9)cost2134,5205,5126,1486,3876,6276,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,8666,866Sub-Total21344,45252,00757,83259,22360,61462,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,00562,005LabourHired(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(person-days(cid:9)per(cid:9)animal)01,3561,6531,8441,9151,9872,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,0592,059Family(cid:9)labour2,0921,5111,8592,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,0922,092Sub-Total2,0922,8663,5123,9354,0074,0794,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,1504,150TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS2,30547,31855,51961,76763,23064,69366,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,15666,156Net(cid:9)economic(cid:9)benefits(cid:9)financing39,99520,12616,74248,34653,76559,18464,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,60364,603Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Benefits-19,870-23,2538,35113,77019,18924,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,60824,608ENPV(cid:9)@10%MZN(cid:9)106,529EIRR35%B/C(cid:9)ratio1.84Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)enterprises3,900600700900800600300112,07610,04529,00832,25935,51038,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,762214,08811,71933,84237,63641,42945,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,22245,222318,11315,06843,51148,38953,26658,14358,14358,14358,14358,14358,14358,14358,14358,14358,14358,14358,14358,143416,10113,39438,67743,01247,34751,68251,68251,68251,68251,68251,68251,68251,68251,68251,68251,68251,682512,07610,04529,00832,25935,51038,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76238,76266,0385,02314,50416,13017,75519,38119,38119,38119,38119,38119,38119,38119,38119,38119,381Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)155,98212,07624,13358,84097,270142,127183,339214,292236,237245,449250,326251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952251,952 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 46: Fishery model – Financial budget (without project) 
176 
EnterpriseDugout(cid:9)canoe,(cid:9)WOPParametersunitsPrice(cid:9)(MZN)unitsPrice(cid:9)(MZN)Dugout(cid:9)canoe(cid:9)(5m)110,000Fish(cid:9)price(cid:9)(without(cid:9)ice)(cid:9)(MZN/kg)135Average(cid:9)trips(cid:9)per(cid:9)year(cid:9)(nr)1402(cid:9)times(cid:9)per(cid:9)dayFood(cid:9)per(cid:9)crew(cid:9)member200Average(cid:9)size(cid:9)of(cid:9)catch(cid:9)per(cid:9)trip(cid:9)(kg)30Hardlines(cid:9)(set)15,000Fish(cid:9)caught(cid:9)per(cid:9)year(cid:9)(kg)4200Ice(cid:9)box(cid:9)50(cid:9)lt210,000Labour(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(person-day)150RevenuePY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Fishing(cid:9)rate60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%60%Main(cid:9)production,(cid:9)without(cid:9)ice(cid:9)(kg)2,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,520Family(cid:9)self(cid:9)consumption,(cid:9)@1%(cid:9)of(cid:9)catch(cid:9)-(cid:9)kg)1%2525252525252525252525252525252525252525Post-catch(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(@(cid:9)10%(cid:9)of(cid:9)catch(cid:9)-(cid:9)kg)10%252252252252252252252252252252252252252252252252252252252252Marketable(cid:9)produce(cid:9)(kg)2,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,2432,243Sub-total(cid:9)revenue78,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,49878,498Investment(cid:9)costsDugout(cid:9)canoe0000000000000010,00000000Hand(cid:9)lines(cid:9)(set)15,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,000Sub-total(cid:9)investment(cid:9)costs5,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,00015,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,000Operating(cid:9)costsCanoe(cid:9)Maintenance(cid:9)(@5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)purchase(cid:9)price)500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500Food(cid:9)for(cid:9)crew(cid:9)(@2(cid:9)crew(cid:9)members(cid:9)for(cid:9)180(cid:9)person-days)18021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,60021,600LabourFamily(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(@2(cid:9)family(cid:9)members)14021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,00021,000Sub-total(cid:9)operating(cid:9)costs43,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,10043,100TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS48,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,10058,10048,10048,10048,10048,10048,100Net(cid:9)revenue30,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,39820,39830,39830,39830,39830,39830,398 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 47: Fishery model - Financial budget (with project) 
177 
EnterprisePlanck(cid:9)canoe(cid:9)with(cid:9)motor,(cid:9)WPParametersunitsPrice(cid:9)(MZN)unitsPrice(cid:9)(MZN)Planck(cid:9)canoe(cid:9)(7(cid:9)-(cid:9)9(cid:9)m)155,000Fish(cid:9)price(cid:9)(with(cid:9)ice)(cid:9)(MZN/kg)45Average(cid:9)trips(cid:9)per(cid:9)year(cid:9)(nr(cid:9)of(cid:9)person-days)150Food(cid:9)per(cid:9)crew(cid:9)member200Average(cid:9)size(cid:9)of(cid:9)catch(cid:9)per(cid:9)trip(cid:9)(kg/day)65Hardlines(cid:9)(set)15,000Fish(cid:9)caught(cid:9)per(cid:9)year(cid:9)(kg)9750Ice(cid:9)box(cid:9)50(cid:9)lt210,000Labour(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(person-day)150Outboard(cid:9)motor(cid:9)(15hp)195,000Fuel(cid:9)(l)155surface(cid:9)gillnet(cid:9)4"-5"(cid:9)200m145,000Ice(cid:9)(industrial)(cid:9)(MZN/kg)15handlines(cid:9)+(cid:9)net140,000RevenuePY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Fishing(cid:9)rate60%65%70%75%80%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%85%Main(cid:9)production,(cid:9)without(cid:9)ice(cid:9)(kg)5,8506,3386,8257,3137,8008,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,2888,288Family(cid:9)self(cid:9)consumption,(cid:9)@1%(cid:9)of(cid:9)catch(cid:9)(kg)1%5963687378838383838383838383838383838383Post-catch(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(@(cid:9)5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)catch(cid:9)-(cid:9)kg)5%293317341366390414414414414414414414414414414414414414414414Marketable(cid:9)produce(cid:9)(with(cid:9)ice(cid:9)-(cid:9)kg)5,4995,9576,4166,8747,3327,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,7907,790Sub-total(cid:9)revenue247,455268,076288,698309,319329,940350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561350,561Investment(cid:9)costsPlanck(cid:9)canoe155,0000000000000000000000Outboard(cid:9)motor(cid:9)(15(cid:9)hp)195,000Fishiing(cid:9)gear(cid:9)(set)185,0000000000000000000000Hardlines(cid:9)(set)15,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,000Ice(cid:9)box220,0000010,0000010,0000010,0000010,0000010,0000010,0000Sub-total(cid:9)investment(cid:9)costs260,0005,0005,00015,0005,0005,00015,0005,0005,00015,0005,0005,00015,0005,0005,00015,0005,0005,00015,0005,000Operating(cid:9)costsCanoe(cid:9)Maintenance(cid:9)(@5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)purchase(cid:9)price)5%02,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,750Engine(cid:9)maintenance(cid:9)(@5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)purchase(cid:9)cost)5%04,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,7504,750Food(cid:9)for(cid:9)crew(cid:9)(@3(cid:9)crew(cid:9)members(cid:9)+(cid:9)owner(cid:9)for(cid:9)120(cid:9)person-days)15072,00078,00084,00090,00096,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000102,000Fuel(cid:9)(40l(cid:9)per(cid:9)3(cid:9)fish-day)66,00071,50077,00082,50088,00093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,50093,500Ice(cid:9)(industrial,(cid:9)weight(cid:9)60%(cid:9)of(cid:9)catch)60%31,59037,07442,99849,35956,16063,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,39963,399Sub-total(cid:9)operating(cid:9)costs169,590194,074211,498229,359247,660266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399266,399LabourCrew(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(@3(cid:9)crew(cid:9)members)(cid:9)15013,50014,62515,75016,87518,00019,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,12519,125Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(proxy:(cid:9)1(cid:9)crew(cid:9)member(cid:9)cost)2,7003,1693,6754,2194,8005,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,4195,419Sub-total(cid:9)labor16,20017,79419,42521,09422,80024,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,54424,544TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS445,790216,868235,923265,453275,460295,943305,943295,943295,943305,943295,943295,943305,943295,943295,943305,943295,943295,943305,943295,943Net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)Financing-198,33551,20852,77543,86654,48054,61844,61854,61854,61844,61854,61854,61844,61854,61854,61844,61854,61854,61844,61854,618Credit(cid:9)AnalysisFinancial(cid:9)inflowsDisbursement(cid:9)of(cid:9)short(cid:9)term(cid:9)loan/a180,000Transfer(cid:9)from(cid:9)previous(cid:9)period020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)own(cid:9)savings90,000Grants(cid:9)(crowding(cid:9)in(cid:9)fund)180,0000Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)inflows450,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Financial(cid:9)outflowsShort(cid:9)term(cid:9)principal180,00000Short(cid:9)term(cid:9)Interest40,50000Transfer(cid:9)to(cid:9)next(cid:9)period20,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)outflows240,50020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Net(cid:9)Financing209,5000000000000000000000Net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)Financing11,16551,20852,77543,86654,48054,61844,61854,61854,61844,61854,61854,61844,61854,61854,61844,61854,61854,61844,61854,618Incremental(cid:9)net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)Financing-19,23320,81022,37713,46824,08224,22014,22024,22024,22014,22024,22024,22014,22024,22034,22014,22024,22024,22014,22024,220Total(cid:9)financing(cid:9)package450,000FNPV(cid:9)@22%59,454Beneficiary(cid:9)contribution(cid:9)(20%)90,000FIRR107%Loan(cid:9)(40%)180,000B/C1.02Grant(cid:9)(crowding-in(cid:9)fund,(cid:9)40%)180,000Grace(cid:9)period0(cid:9)monthsAverage(cid:9)Interest(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(APR)22.5% 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 48: Fishery model – Economic analysis 
178 
EnterprisePlanck(cid:9)canoe(cid:9)with(cid:9)motor,(cid:9)WPSCF0.88CF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:Unemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%fishing(cid:9)boat0.716Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFVAT17.00%Equipment0.700Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fish)0.00%outboard(cid:9)motor0.700Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fuel)20.00%fuel0.627Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(outboard(cid:9)motor)7.50%CF(cid:9)(outputs)NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fishing(cid:9)boats)5.00%fresh(cid:9)fish0.752SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(equipment*)7.50%CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)Tax*fishing(cid:9)gear,(cid:9)ice(cid:9)box,(cid:9)hardlinesCF(cid:9)(non(cid:9)tradable,(cid:9)national)0.855EP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxWOPWPRevenuePY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Marketable(cid:9)produce(cid:9)(fresh(cid:9)fish,(cid:9)with(cid:9)ice(cid:9)-(cid:9)kg)59,041186,120201,630217,140232,650248,160263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670Sub-total(cid:9)revenue59,041186,120201,630217,140232,650248,160263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670263,670Investment(cid:9)costsPlanck(cid:9)canoe039,3980000000000000000000Outboard(cid:9)motor(cid:9)(15(cid:9)hp)066,4680000000000000000000Fishiing(cid:9)gear(cid:9)(set)059,4710000000000000000000Hardlines(cid:9)(set)3,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,4983,498Ice(cid:9)box013,993006,997006,997006,997006,997006,997006,9970Sub-total(cid:9)investment(cid:9)costs3,498182,8283,4983,49810,4953,4983,49810,4953,4983,49810,4953,4983,49810,4953,4983,49810,4953,4983,49810,4953,498Operating(cid:9)costsCanoe(cid:9)Maintenance(cid:9)(@5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)purchase(cid:9)price)35801,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,9701,970Engine(cid:9)maintenance(cid:9)(@5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)purchase(cid:9)cost)003,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,3233,323Food(cid:9)for(cid:9)crew(cid:9)18,46261,53866,66771,79576,92382,05187,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,17987,179Fuel(cid:9)(40l(cid:9)per(cid:9)3(cid:9)fish-day)41,36844,81548,26251,70955,15758,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,60458,604Ice(cid:9)(industrial,(cid:9)weight(cid:9)60%(cid:9)of(cid:9)catch)027,00031,68836,75042,18848,00054,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,18854,188Sub-total(cid:9)operating(cid:9)costs18,820129,906148,462162,100176,113190,501205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264205,264LabourCrew(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(@3(cid:9)crew(cid:9)members)(cid:9)010,19311,04211,89112,74113,59014,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,43914,439Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(proxy:(cid:9)1(cid:9)crew(cid:9)member(cid:9)cost)15,8552,0392,3922,7753,1853,6244,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,0914,091Sub-total(cid:9)labor15,85512,23113,43414,66615,92617,21418,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,53118,531TOTAL(cid:9)COSTS38,173324,965165,395180,264202,534211,214227,293234,290227,293227,293234,290227,293227,293234,290227,293227,293234,290227,293227,293234,290227,293Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits20,868-138,84536,23536,87630,11636,94636,37729,38036,37736,37729,38036,37736,37729,38036,37736,37729,38036,37736,37729,38036,377Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits-159,71415,36716,0079,24816,07815,5098,51215,50915,5098,51215,50915,5098,51215,50915,5098,51215,50915,5098,51215,509ENPV(cid:9)@10%-MZN(cid:9)41,905IRR5%B/C(cid:9)ratio1.31Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)enterprises2703040505050501-4,1651,0871,1069031,1081,0918811,0911,0918811,0911,0918811,0911,0918811,0911,0918811,0912-5,5541,4491,4751,2051,4781,4551,1751,4551,4551,1751,4551,4551,1751,4551,4551,1751,4551,4551,1753-6,9421,8121,8441,5061,8471,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,8194-6,9421,8121,8441,5061,8471,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8195-6,9421,8121,8441,5061,8471,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,8191,4696-6,9421,8121,8441,5061,8471,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,8191,4691,8191,819Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)9,783-4,165-4,467-4,387-2,752-9747889,3459,2829,1879,2919,1929,1229,2629,1929,1229,2629,1929,1229,2629,192 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 49: Naval carpenter – Financial budget 
179 
EnterpriseNaval(cid:9)carpenterParametersCost(cid:9)(MZN)Planck(cid:9)canoe(cid:9)(9(cid:9)m)60,000labour(cid:9)(MZN/person-days)171low(cid:9)quality(cid:9)canoe(cid:9)(7m)45,000Reduction(cid:9)in(cid:9)labour(cid:9)per(cid:9)boat22%With(cid:9)ProjectUnitUnit(cid:9)price(cid:9)(MZN)WOPMain(cid:9)servicePY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Boat(cid:9)construction(cid:9)(cid:9)(9m)unit567888888888888888888InputsElectrical(cid:9)toolsset60,0001Operating(cid:9)costsWood(cid:9)plankslumpsum20,000567888888888888888888Paint,(cid:9)vernish,(cid:9)gluelumpsum3,000567888888888888888888Equipment(cid:9)(fastners,(cid:9)hinges,(cid:9)springs,(cid:9)etc)lumpsum2,000567888888888888888888Electricity(cid:9)MZN/month1,5001212121212121212121212121212121212121212LabourHired(cid:9)labourperson-days210163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8163.8RevenueOutput(cid:9)buildup80%80%90%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Boat(cid:9)construction(cid:9)9m225,000288,000336,000432,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000CostsElectrical(cid:9)tools(cid:9)(partially(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)2(cid:9)years(cid:9)@(cid:9)10%(cid:9)of(cid:9)cost)60,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,000Wood(cid:9)planks100,00096,000112,000144,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000160,000paint,(cid:9)vernish,(cid:9)glue15,00014,40016,80021,60024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,000Equipment(cid:9)(fastners,(cid:9)hinges,(cid:9)springs,(cid:9)etc)10,0009,60011,20014,40016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,00016,000Electricity(cid:9)14,40014,40016,20018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000Labour35,91022,40822,40825,20928,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,01028,010O&M(cid:9)on(cid:9)tools(cid:9)(5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment)5%03,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,000Total(cid:9)Costs160,910219,808179,808224,409255,010249,010249,010255,010249,010249,010255,010249,010249,010255,010249,010249,010255,010249,010249,010255,010249,010Net(cid:9)Income(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)Financing64,09068,192156,192207,591224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990Returns(cid:9)to(cid:9)family(cid:9)labor61315171717171717171717171717171717171717Financial(cid:9)inflowsDisbursement(cid:9)of(cid:9)short(cid:9)term(cid:9)loan/a60,000Transfer(cid:9)from(cid:9)previous(cid:9)period00000000000000000000Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)own(cid:9)savings30,000Grants(cid:9)(graduation(cid:9)fund,(cid:9)crowding(cid:9)in(cid:9)fund)00Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)inflows90,0000000000000000000000Financial(cid:9)outflowsShort(cid:9)term(cid:9)principal60,00000Short(cid:9)term(cid:9)Interest13,5000Transfer(cid:9)to(cid:9)next(cid:9)periodSub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)outflows73,5000000000000000000000Net(cid:9)Financing16,5000000000000000000000Net(cid:9)income(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)financing64,09084,692156,192207,591224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990230,990224,990230,990Incremetal(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Income20,60292,102143,501160,900166,900166,900160,900166,900166,900160,900166,900166,900160,900166,900166,900160,900166,900166,900160,900166,900Total(cid:9)financing(cid:9)package60,000FNPV(cid:9)@22%MZN(cid:9)555,503Loan(cid:9)(Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)Credit)60,000FIRRNAContribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)farmer0B/C(cid:9)ratio1.80Grace(cid:9)period0(cid:9)monthsInterest(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(APR)22.5% 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 50: Naval carpenter – Economic analysis 
180 
EnterpriseNaval(cid:9)carpenterSCF0.88CF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:Unemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%Electric(cid:9)tools(cid:9)(Ti)0.716Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFVAT17.00%Wood(cid:9)planks,(cid:9)other(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)(Ti)0.700Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(all(cid:9)commodities)0.00%paint,(cid:9)vernish,(cid:9)etc(cid:9)(Ti)0.627Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(electric(cid:9)tools)5.00%Electricity(cid:9)(Tn)0.752Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(wood(cid:9)planks,(cid:9)other(cid:9)equipment)7.50%CF(cid:9)(outputs)NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(paint,(cid:9)vernish,(cid:9)glue,(cid:9)etc)20.00%Fishing(cid:9)boat0.752SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxEP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxWOPWPPY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Economic(cid:9)benefitsBoat(cid:9)construction(cid:9)(9(cid:9)m)169,231216,615252,718324,923361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026361,026CostsElectrical(cid:9)tools042,979004,298004,298004,298004,298004,298004,2980Wood(cid:9)planks69,96667,16878,362100,751111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946111,946paint,(cid:9)vernish,(cid:9)glue9,4029,02610,53013,53815,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,043Equipment(cid:9)(fastners,(cid:9)hinges,(cid:9)springs,(cid:9)etc)6,9976,7177,83610,07511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,19511,195Electricity(cid:9)010,83110,83112,18513,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,53813,538Labour27,11216,91816,91819,03321,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,14721,147O&M(cid:9)on(cid:9)tools(cid:9)(5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)investment)5%02,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,1492,149Total(cid:9)Costs113,477155,787126,626157,731179,316175,018175,018179,316175,018175,018179,316175,018175,018179,316175,018175,018179,316175,018175,018179,316175,018Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits55,75460,829126,092167,192181,710186,008186,008181,710186,008186,008181,710186,008186,008181,710186,008186,008181,710186,008186,008181,710186,008Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits5,07470,338111,438125,955130,253130,253125,955130,253130,253125,955130,253130,253125,955130,253130,253125,955130,253130,253125,955130,253ENPV(cid:9)@10%MZN(cid:9)921,787EIRR#NUM!B/C(cid:9)ratio1.98Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)enterprises10,2002,0002,2002,0002,0001,5005001121,657252,184334,384363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,0152133,823277,402367,822399,761409,217409,217399,761409,217409,217399,761409,217409,217399,761409,217409,217399,761409,217409,217399,7613121,657252,184334,384363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,0154121,657252,184334,384363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015372,015363,419372,015591,243189,138250,788272,564279,011279,011272,564279,011279,011272,564279,011279,011272,564279,011279,011272,564630,41463,04683,59690,85593,00493,00490,85593,00493,00490,85593,00493,00490,85593,00493,004Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)568,693121,657386,007733,4431,105,0831,449,5871,698,5871,821,9041,871,9671,886,5321,880,0851,881,3751,886,5321,880,0851,881,3751,886,5321,880,0851,881,3751,886,5321,880,0851,881,375 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 51: Aquaculture - Production model 
181 
enterprise(cid:9)semi-commercial(cid:9)pondParametersWOPWPPond(cid:9)size(cid:9)(m2)150300Fish(cid:9)feed(cid:9)needed(cid:9)per(cid:9)m2(cid:9)(g)200Fish(cid:9)produced(cid:9)per(cid:9)cycle,(cid:9)tilapia(cid:9)100(cid:9)g(cid:9)(number)300600Weight(cid:9)at(cid:9)sale(cid:9)full-grown(cid:9)(O.mossambicus)(cid:9)(kg)1Fish(cid:9)fingerling(cid:9)survival(cid:9)rate90%Months(cid:9)per(cid:9)cycle1010Cycles(cid:9)per(cid:9)year(cid:9)(including(cid:9)down(cid:9)time)11quantitiesWOPWPItemUnitPY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5-PY20InflowsProductivity(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(due(cid:9)to(cid:9)works)80%85%90%95%90%Fish(cid:9)fingerling(cid:9)survival(cid:9)rate70%75%80%85%90%Fresh(cid:9)full-grown(cid:9)fish(cid:9)sales(cid:9)(tilapia)kg270336383432485486Total(cid:9)InflowsOutflowsself(cid:9)consumption(cid:9)(@(cid:9)10%)kg273438434849InvestmentConstruction(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)hireday20Harvest(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)hireday133333RecurrentFingerling(cid:9)purchase(cid:9)(tilapia,(cid:9)Oreochromis(cid:9)mossambicus)/anumber300600600600600600Purchased(cid:9)fish(cid:9)feed/bkg06060606060Self-made(cid:9)fish(cid:9)feed/ckg100kitchen(cid:9)waste(cid:9)etc.(cid:9)used(cid:9)as(cid:9)feish(cid:9)feedkg50Limekg2020202020LabourHired(cid:9)labor(cid:9)for(cid:9)pond(cid:9)enlargement2(cid:9)person-day30Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(feeding,(cid:9)pond(cid:9)cleaning,(cid:9)harvesting)/dperson-day101818181818/a(cid:9)two(cid:9)fingerlings(cid:9)per(cid:9)m2/b(cid:9)includes(cid:9)transport(cid:9)to(cid:9)farm(cid:9)gate/c(cid:9)for(cid:9)self(cid:9)made(cid:9)fish(cid:9)feed:(cid:9)maize(cid:9)bran(cid:9)and(cid:9)farmyard(cid:9)manure(cid:9)fro(cid:9)one(cid:9)adult(cid:9)cattle(cid:9)or(cid:9)20(cid:9)goats/d(cid:9)approximately(cid:9)1(cid:9)hour(cid:9)per(cid:9)day(cid:9) 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 52: Aquaculture – Financial budget 
182 
enterprise(cid:9)semi-commercial(cid:9)pondParametersWOPWPPond(cid:9)size(cid:9)(m2)150300Fish(cid:9)feed(cid:9)needed(cid:9)per(cid:9)m2(cid:9)(g)200Fish(cid:9)produced(cid:9)per(cid:9)cycle,(cid:9)tilapia(cid:9)100(cid:9)g(cid:9)(number)300600Fish(cid:9)fingerling(cid:9)survival(cid:9)rate50%80%WOPWPFinancial(cid:9)budgetUnitUnit(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(MZN)PY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20RevenueFresh(cid:9)small(cid:9)fish(cid:9)sales(cid:9)(tilapia)kgFresh(cid:9)medium(cid:9)fish(cid:9)sales(cid:9)(tilapia)kg6517,55021,84024,86328,08031,49331,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,59031,590self(cid:9)consumption(cid:9)(@(cid:9)10%)kg1,7552,1842,4862,8083,1493,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,159Sub-total(cid:9)revenue15,79519,65622,37625,27228,34328,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,43128,431CostsInvestmentConstruction(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)hireday1002,000000000000000000Harvest(cid:9)equipmentset250250750750750750Recurrent(cid:9)Costs000000000000000Fingerling(cid:9)purchase(cid:9)(tilapia)number61,6503,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,3003,300Purchased(cid:9)fish(cid:9)feedkg2201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,3201,320Self-made(cid:9)fish(cid:9)feedkg4350000000000000000kitchen(cid:9)waste(cid:9)etc.(cid:9)used(cid:9)as(cid:9)feish(cid:9)feedkg150000000000000000Limekg25500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500Labour000000000000000Hired(cid:9)labor(cid:9)for(cid:9)pond(cid:9)enlargementperson-day17110,260000000000000000Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(feeding,(cid:9)pond(cid:9)cleaning,(cid:9)harvesting)person-day1711,7103,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,0783,078Total(cid:9)costs4,01021,2088,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,1988,198Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)Financing11,78563216,66519,88223,29523,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,392Credit(cid:9)AnalysisFinancial(cid:9)inflowsDisbursement(cid:9)of(cid:9)short(cid:9)term(cid:9)loan/a18,000Transfer(cid:9)from(cid:9)previous(cid:9)period(cid:9)(as(cid:9)working(cid:9)capital)00000000000000000000Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)own(cid:9)savings4,500Grants(cid:9)(graduation(cid:9)fund,(cid:9)crowding(cid:9)in(cid:9)fund)00Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)inflows22,5000000000000000000000Financial(cid:9)outflowsShort(cid:9)term(cid:9)principal18,000000Short(cid:9)term(cid:9)Interest4,0500000Transfer(cid:9)to(cid:9)next(cid:9)period(cid:9)(as(cid:9)working(cid:9)capital)0Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)outflows22,0500000000000000000000Net(cid:9)Financing4500000000000000000000Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)Financing1,08216,66519,88223,29523,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,39223,392Incremental(cid:9)net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)financing-10,7034,8808,09711,51011,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,60711,607Total(cid:9)financing(cid:9)package18,000Loan(cid:9)(Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)credit)18,000FNPV(cid:9)@22%MZN(cid:9)26,986Payment(cid:9)frequencyannualIRR74%Interest(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(APR)22.5%B/C2.41 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 53: Aquaculture – Economic Analysis 
183 
enterprise(cid:9)semi-subsistence(cid:9)pondSCF0.88CF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:Unemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%fingerlings(cid:9)(tilapia,(cid:9)Ti)0.627Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFVAT17.0%fish(cid:9)feed(cid:9)(Ti)0.627Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(all(cid:9)commodities)0.0%harvest(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)(Ti)0.700Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fingerlings,(cid:9)tilapia)20.0%lime(cid:9)(Ti)0.734Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fish(cid:9)feed)20.0%CF(cid:9)(outputs)NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(harveset(cid:9)equipment)7.5%Tilapia(cid:9)(Te)0.752SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(lime)2.50%CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxCF(cid:9)(non(cid:9)tradable)0.855EP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxWOPWPEconomic(cid:9)budgetUnitUnit(cid:9)cost(cid:9)(MZN)PY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Economic(cid:9)benefitsSales(cid:9)of(cid:9)tilapia11,88014,78416,83019,00821,31821,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,38421,384CostsInvestmentConstruction(cid:9)equipment(cid:9)hireday1,709Harvest(cid:9)equipmentset1755250000525000052500005250000Recurrent(cid:9)Costs000000000000000Fingerling(cid:9)purchase(cid:9)(tilapia)number1,0342,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,0682,068Purchased(cid:9)fish(cid:9)feedkg0827827827827827827827827827827827827827827827827827827827827Self-made(cid:9)fish(cid:9)feedkg29900000000000000000000kitchen(cid:9)waste(cid:9)etc.(cid:9)used(cid:9)as(cid:9)feish(cid:9)feedkg5000000000000000000000Limekg0427427427427427427427427427427427427427427427427427427427427LabourHired(cid:9)labor(cid:9)for(cid:9)pond(cid:9)enlargementperson-day07,7460000000000000000000Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(feeding,(cid:9)pond(cid:9)cleaning,(cid:9)harvesting)person-day1,2912,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,3242,324Total(cid:9)costs2,84915,6275,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,6475,647Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits9,031-84311,18313,36115,67115,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,737Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits-9,8742,1524,3306,6406,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,7066,706ENPV(cid:9)@10%MZN(cid:9)36,428EIRR48%B/C(cid:9)ratio2.98Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)enterprises15,0002,0003,0004,0003,0002,0001,0001-1,68722,36626,72231,34231,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,4742-2,53033,54940,08347,01347,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,2113-3,37444,73253,44462,68462,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,94862,9484-2,53033,54940,08347,01347,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,21147,2115-1,68722,36626,72231,34231,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,47431,4746-84311,18313,36115,67115,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,73715,737Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)135,461-1,68719,83656,898113,627163,794202,975226,551233,547235,989236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055236,055 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 54: Small barbershop - Financial budget 
184 
enterprise:small(cid:9)barbershopWOPWPnr(cid:9)MZN/unittotal(cid:9)(MZN)Parametersnumber(cid:9)of(cid:9)customers(cid:9)per(cid:9)month(cid:9)(haircut)100250Investmentnumber(cid:9)of(cid:9)customers(cid:9)per(cid:9)month(cid:9)(shaving)100250electric(cid:9)shaver(cid:9)kit21,4502,900number(cid:9)of(cid:9)customers(cid:9)per(cid:9)month(cid:9)(haircut+shaving)50125straight(cid:9)razor23,3916,781cost(cid:9)of(cid:9)haircut(cid:9)(MZN/person)200200brush(cid:9)kit27371,474cost(cid:9)for(cid:9)shaving(cid:9)(MZN/person)250250plastic(cid:9)chairs27001,400cost(cid:9)for(cid:9)haircut+shaving300300miscellaneous(cid:9)(combs,(cid:9)broom,(cid:9)water(cid:9)bucket)5,000Electricity(cid:9)(MZN/month)5001,250Total(cid:9)investment17,556292.592Water(cid:9)(MZN/month)300750Miscellaneous(cid:9)(lotions,(cid:9)soaps,(cid:9)after(cid:9)shave)8002,000WOPWPPY1-20PY1234567891011121314151617181920rate(cid:9)of(cid:9)customer(cid:9)increase60%70%80%90%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Revenuehaircuts20,00030,00035,00040,00045,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000shaving25,00037,50043,75050,00056,25062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,50062,500haircut(cid:9)+(cid:9)shaving15,00022,50026,25030,00033,75037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,50037,500Total(cid:9)revenue60,00090,000105,000120,000135,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000150,000Investment(cid:9)Costselectric(cid:9)shavers(cid:9)(at(cid:9)least(cid:9)one(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)3(cid:9)years)2,9001,4501,4501,4501,4501,4501,450straight(cid:9)razors(cid:9)(at(cid:9)least(cid:9)one(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)5(cid:9)years)6,7813,3913,3913,391brush(cid:9)kit1,474737737737737737737737737737chairs(cid:9)(at(cid:9)least(cid:9)one(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)2(cid:9)years)1,400700700700700700700700700700miscellaneous(cid:9)(partially(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)-(cid:9)10%(cid:9)-(cid:9)every(cid:9)year)5,000500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500500Operational(cid:9)CostsElectricity6,0009,00010,50012,00013,50015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,00015,000Water3,6005,4006,3007,2008,1009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,000Lotion(cid:9)and(cid:9)soaps9,60014,40016,80019,20021,60024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,00024,000rent(cid:9)of(cid:9)shop(cid:9)(10(cid:9)m2(cid:9)floor(cid:9)area)6,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,000LabourHired(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(MZN/month)18,00018,00018,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,00036,000Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)18,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000Total(cid:9)Costs37,20088,35676,10082,337105,150109,937111,891111,387108,500109,937109,950113,328108,500111,387108,500109,937113,341109,937108,500111,387108,500Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)Financing22,8001,64428,90037,66329,85040,06338,10938,61341,50040,06340,05036,67241,50038,61341,50040,06336,65940,06341,50038,61341,500Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Revenue-21,1566,10014,8637,05017,26315,30915,81318,70017,26317,25013,87218,70015,81318,70017,26313,85917,26318,70015,81318,700Returns(cid:9)to(cid:9)family(cid:9)labour3.335.005.836.677.508.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.338.33Financial(cid:9)inflowsDisbursement(cid:9)of(cid:9)short(cid:9)term(cid:9)loan/a18,000Transfer(cid:9)from(cid:9)previous(cid:9)period0000000000000000000Contribution(cid:9)from(cid:9)own(cid:9)savings5,000Grants(cid:9)(graduation(cid:9)fund,(cid:9)crowding(cid:9)in(cid:9)fund)0Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)inflows23,0000000000000000000000Financial(cid:9)outflowsShort(cid:9)term(cid:9)principal18,00000Short(cid:9)term(cid:9)Interest2,9320Transfer(cid:9)to(cid:9)next(cid:9)period0000000000000000000Sub-Total(cid:9)financial(cid:9)outflows20,9320000000000000000000Net(cid:9)Financing2,0680000000000000000000Net(cid:9)Revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)financing3,71228,90037,66329,85040,06338,10938,61341,50040,06340,05036,67241,50038,61341,50040,06336,65940,06341,50038,61341,500Incremetal(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Revenue-19,0886,10014,8637,05017,26315,30915,81318,70017,26317,25013,87218,70015,81318,70017,26313,85917,26318,70015,81318,700Total(cid:9)financing(cid:9)package18,000FNPV(cid:9)@22.5%MZN(cid:9)31,440Loan(cid:9)(Line(cid:9)of(cid:9)credit)18,000FIRR57.5%Payment(cid:9)frequencysemi-annualB/C1.31Interest(cid:9)rate(cid:9)(APR)22.5% 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 55: Small barbershop - Economic Analysis 
185 
enterprise:small(cid:9)barbershopSCF0.88CF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:Unemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%electric(cid:9)shavers(cid:9)and(cid:9)razors(cid:9)(Ti)0.700Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFVAT17.0%plast(cid:9)chairs(cid:9)(Ti)0.627Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(all(cid:9)commodities)0.0%lotions(cid:9)and(cid:9)soaps(cid:9)(Ti)0.627Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(razors,(cid:9)shavers,(cid:9)etc)7.5%CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(plastic(cid:9)chairs)20.0%CF(cid:9)(non(cid:9)tradable)0.855NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(lotions(cid:9)and(cid:9)soaps)20.0%SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxEP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxWOPWPPY1-20PY1234567891011121314151617181920Revenuehaircuts17,09425,64129,91534,18838,46242,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,735shaving21,36832,05137,39342,73548,07753,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,41953,419haircut(cid:9)+(cid:9)shaving12,82119,23122,43625,64128,84632,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,05132,051Total51,28276,92389,744102,564115,385128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205128,205Investment(cid:9)Costselectric(cid:9)shavers(cid:9)(at(cid:9)least(cid:9)one(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)3(cid:9)years)2,029001,015001,015001,015001,015001,015001,0150straight(cid:9)razors(cid:9)(at(cid:9)least(cid:9)one(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)5(cid:9)years)4,74500002,37200002,37200002,3720000chairs(cid:9)(at(cid:9)least(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)every(cid:9)2(cid:9)years)8770439043904390439043904390439043904390miscellaneous(cid:9)(partially(cid:9)replaced(cid:9)-(cid:9)10%(cid:9)-(cid:9)every(cid:9)year)3,134313313313313313313313313313313313313313313313313313313313Operational(cid:9)CostsElectricity5,1287,6928,97410,25611,53812,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,82112,821Water3,0774,6155,3856,1546,9237,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,6927,692Lotion(cid:9)and(cid:9)soaps6,0179,02610,53012,03413,53815,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,04315,043rent(cid:9)of(cid:9)shop(cid:9)(10(cid:9)m2(cid:9)floor(cid:9)area)05,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,1285,128LabourHired(cid:9)labour(cid:9)(MZN/month)013,59013,59013,59027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,18027,180Family(cid:9)labour(cid:9)13,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,59013,590Total(cid:9)Costs27,81264,42757,51061,50579,22682,20684,13983,22081,76782,20682,78284,57881,76783,22081,76782,20685,15482,20681,76783,22081,767Net(cid:9)Revenue23,47012,49632,23341,05936,15945,99944,06644,98546,43845,99945,42343,62746,43844,98546,43845,99943,05145,99946,43844,98546,438Increment(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Revenue-10,9738,76317,58912,68922,52920,59621,51522,96822,52921,95420,15722,96821,51522,96822,52919,58122,52922,96821,51522,968ENPV(cid:9)@10.0%MZN(cid:9)136,376EIRR115.9%B/C1.52Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)enterprises16,0002,0003,0003,0003,0003,0002,000124,99364,46682,11972,31791,99888,13189,96992,87691,99890,84787,25492,87689,96992,87691,99886,10291,99892,87689,96992,876237,48996,699123,178108,476137,998132,197134,954139,314137,998136,270130,881139,314134,954139,314137,998129,153137,998139,314134,954337,48996,699123,178108,476137,998132,197134,954139,314137,998136,270130,881139,314134,954139,314137,998129,153137,998139,314437,48996,699123,178108,476137,998132,197134,954139,314137,998136,270130,881139,314134,954139,314137,998129,153137,998537,48996,699123,178108,476137,998132,197134,954139,314137,998136,270130,881139,314134,954139,314137,998129,153624,99364,46682,11972,31791,99888,13189,96992,87691,99890,84787,25492,87689,96992,87691,998Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)375,51724,993101,956216,307329,684457,841579,475656,284688,619708,778727,308723,921727,308727,308726,294727,308724,936726,294727,308727,308726,294 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 56: Beans crop model 
186 
Beans(cid:9)Crop(cid:9)ModelYields(cid:9)and(cid:9)Inputs(Per(cid:9)ha)WOPWPYears(cid:9)1(cid:9)to(cid:9)2012345(cid:9)to(cid:9)20UnitYieldsKg400500600700800800Post-harvest(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(10%@(cid:9)WOP,(cid:9)5%(cid:9)@(cid:9)WP)Kg801001021059680Self(cid:9)consumption(cid:9)(5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)Kg202530354040Total(cid:9)marketable(cid:9)productionkg300375468560664680OperatingInputsUnimproved-seeds(cid:9)Kg1500000Improved(cid:9)seedsKg01010101010NPK(cid:9)(Basal(cid:9)application)Kg03030303030ANKg03030303030Fungicides(cid:9)(epoxiconazole)Litre011111LaborLand(cid:9)clearingperson-days333333Ploughingperson-days333333Discing/Harrowingperson-days233333Plantingperson-days222233First(cid:9)weedingperson-days122222Second(cid:9)weedingperson-days022222Fertilizingperson-days023444Harvestingperson-days222345Dryingperson-days000000Threshing/handperson-days222223Threshing/Mechanisedperson-days011111Transport(cid:9)field(cid:9)to(cid:9)houseperson-days111122Total(cid:9)LaborFamily(cid:9)labourperson-days162324262931 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 57: Maize crop model 
Table 58: Crop pattern - maize and beans farm 
187 
Maize(cid:9)Crop(cid:9)ModelYIELDS(cid:9)AND(cid:9)INPUTSWithout(Per(cid:9)ha)ProjectWith(cid:9)projectYears(cid:9)1(cid:9)to(cid:9)2012345(cid:9)to(cid:9)20UnitYieldsKg1,0001,4001,5001,6001,7001,800Post-harvest(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(10%(cid:9)@WOP,(cid:9)5%(cid:9)@(cid:9)WP)Kg1007075808590Self(cid:9)consumption(cid:9)(1%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)Kg507075808590Total(cid:9)marketable(cid:9)productionkg8501,2601,3501,4401,5301,620OperatingInputsHybrid(cid:9)maize(cid:9)seedsKg02525252525Unimproved(cid:9)seeds(OPVS)-MaizeKg3500000NPK(cid:9)(Basal(cid:9)application)Kg02020202020ANKg02020202020HerbicidesLitres000000Packaging(cid:9)(50Kg)Bags172527293132LaborLand(cid:9)clearingperson-days233333Ploughingperson-days233333Discing/Harrowingperson-days222222Plantingperson-days223444First(cid:9)weedingperson-days122223Second(cid:9)weedingperson-days022223Fertilizingperson-days022223Harvestingperson-days223445Dryingperson-days000000Threshing/handperson-days234556Transport(cid:9)field(cid:9)to(cid:9)houseperson-days211122Total(cid:9)LaborFamily(cid:9)labourperson-days152225282934CROPPING(cid:9)PATTERNS(in(cid:9)Units)WOPWPYears(cid:9)Unit1(cid:9)to(cid:9)2012345(cid:9)to(cid:9)20Cropping(cid:9)IntensityPercent*334047536067Cropping(cid:9)PatternExisting(cid:9)TechnologyMaizeha0.6-----Beansha0.4-----Sub-total(cid:9)Existing(cid:9)Technologyha1.0-----New(cid:9)TechnologyMaizeha-0.70.80.91.01.1Beansha-0.50.60.70.80.9Sub-total(cid:9)New(cid:9)Technologyha-1.21.41.61.82.0Total(cid:9)Cropped(cid:9)Area1.01.21.41.61.82.0 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 59: Maize and beans farm - Financial budget 
188 
Farm(cid:9)model:(cid:9)maize(cid:9)and(cid:9)beans,(cid:9)2haParametersMaizeMZNMZN.farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)price(cid:9)(kg)11.46Beans.unimproved(cid:9)seed(cid:9)(kg)41.farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)price(cid:9)(kg)12.improved(cid:9)seed(cid:9)(kg)100.unimproved(cid:9)seed(cid:9)(kg)65NPK(cid:9)(kg)35.improved(cid:9)seed(cid:9)(kg)55AN(cid:9)(kg)26Fungicides(cid:9)(lt)650Labor(cid:9)(unskilled,(cid:9)person-day)171Bags(cid:9)(each)20Financial(cid:9)Budget(in(cid:9)MZN)WOPWP1(cid:9)to(cid:9)201234567891011121314151617181920Main(cid:9)ProductionMaize5,84510,10812,37714,85217,53420,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,42220,422Beans1,4402,2503,3704,7046,3747,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,3447,344Sub-total(cid:9)Main(cid:9)Production7,28512,35815,74619,55623,90827,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,76627,766Operating(cid:9)costsInputsUnimproved(cid:9)seedsmaize86100000000000000000000beans39000000000000000000000Improved(cid:9)seeds000000000000000maize01,7502,0002,2502,5002,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,7502,750beans0275330385440495495495495495495495495495495495495495495495495NPK(cid:9)(Basal(cid:9)application)01,0151,1901,3651,5401,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,7151,715AN07548841,0141,1441,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,2741,274Fungicides0325390455520585585585585585585585585585585585585585585585585Packaging204353432518612713713713713713713713713713713713713713713713713Sub-total(cid:9)purchased(cid:9)inputs1,4554,4725,2265,9876,7567,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,5327,532Labor000000000000000Family(cid:9)labour2,5994,6005,8827,4218,92611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,166Sub-total(cid:9)labor2,5994,6005,8827,4218,92611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,16611,166Total(cid:9)Production(cid:9)Costs4,0549,07211,10813,40915,68218,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,69818,698Net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)BEFORE(cid:9)Financing3,2303,2864,6386,1478,2269,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,0689,068Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Revenue561,4082,9174,9965,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,8375,837FNPV(cid:9)@22%MZN(cid:9)16,332FIRRNAB/C1.46 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 60: Maize and beans farm - Economic Analysis 
189 
Enterprisefarm(cid:9)1:(cid:9)maize(cid:9)and(cid:9)beansSCF0.88CF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:Unemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%maize,(cid:9)beans(cid:9)-(cid:9)improved(cid:9)seeds(cid:9)(Ti)0.734Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFVAT17.00%fertilizers,(cid:9)fungicides,(cid:9)(Ti)0.734Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(all(cid:9)commodities)0.00%packaging(cid:9)(Ti)0.734Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(maize,(cid:9)beans(cid:9)seeds)2.50%unimproved(cid:9)seeds(cid:9)(Tn)0.752Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fertilizers,(cid:9)fungicides)2.50%CF(cid:9)(outputs)NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(packaging)2.50%maize,(cid:9)beans(cid:9)(Te)0.752SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxEP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEconomic(cid:9)budget(in(cid:9)MZN)WOPWP1(cid:9)to(cid:9)201234567891011121314151617181920Main(cid:9)ProductionMaize4,2897,4179,08210,89812,86614,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,98514,985Beans1,0571,6512,4733,4524,6775,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,3895,389Sub-total(cid:9)Main(cid:9)Production5,3459,06811,55514,35017,54420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,37420,374Operating(cid:9)costsInputsUnimproved(cid:9)seedsmaize648beans293Improved(cid:9)seedsmaize1,2841,4681,6511,8342,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,0182,018beans202242283323363363363363363363363363363363363363363363363363NPK(cid:9)(Basal(cid:9)application)-7458731,0021,1301,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,2581,258AN-553649744839935935935935935935935935935935935935935935935935Fungicides-238286334382429429429429429429429429429429429429429429429429Packaging150259317380449523523523523523523523523523523523523523523523523Sub-total(cid:9)purchased(cid:9)inputs1,0913,2813,8354,3944,9575,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,5275,527LaborFamily(cid:9)labour1,9623,4734,4415,6036,7398,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,431Sub-total(cid:9)labor1,9623,4734,4415,6036,7398,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,4318,431Total(cid:9)costs3,0536,7548,2769,99711,69713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,95713,957Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)benefits(cid:9)2,2922,3143,2794,3535,8476,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,4176,417Incremental(cid:9)net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)AFTER(cid:9)Financing219862,0613,5544,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,1254,125Returns(cid:9)to(cid:9)family(cid:9)labourENPV(cid:9)@10%MZN(cid:9)26,851EIRRNAB/C1.45Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)beneficiaries(cid:9)39,1507,0008,0008,0006,1505,0005,000116,19622,95030,47440,92844,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,91944,919218,51026,22934,82846,77551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,335318,51026,22934,82846,77551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,33551,335414,22920,16326,77435,95839,46439,46439,46439,46439,46439,46439,46439,46439,46439,46439,46439,46439,464511,56916,39321,76729,23432,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,085611,56916,39321,76729,23432,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,08532,085Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)89,74616,19641,46075,213116,214158,253197,764221,708238,055248,373251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223251,223 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 61: Soya beans crop model 
190 
Soya(cid:9)bean(cid:9)crop(cid:9)modelYIELDS(cid:9)AND(cid:9)INPUTSWOPWP(Per(cid:9)ha)Years(cid:9)1(cid:9)to(cid:9)2012345(cid:9)to(cid:9)20UnitYieldsKg4008008509501,1001,300Post-harvest(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(10%(cid:9)@(cid:9)WOP)Kg40808595110130Total(cid:9)marketable(cid:9)productionKg3607207658559901,170OperatingInputsUnimproved(cid:9)seeds(cid:9)Kg30.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Improved(cid:9)seeds(cid:9)Kg-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)20.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)20.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)20.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)20.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)20.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)NPK(cid:9)(Basal(cid:9)application)Kg-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)ANKg-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)HerbicidesLitres-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Packing(cid:9)50(cid:9)Kg(cid:9)(bags)number71415172023LabourLand(cid:9)clearingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Ploughingperson-days1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Discing/Harrowingperson-days1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Plantingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Direct(cid:9)seedingperson-days1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)First(cid:9)weedingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Second(cid:9)weedingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Fertilizingperson-days-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Harvestingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)3.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)3.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)4.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Threshing/handperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)3.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)3.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)3.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Dryingperson-days-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Transport(cid:9)field(cid:9)to(cid:9)houseperson-days1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Total(cid:9)LaborFamiily(cid:9)labourperson-days16.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)16.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)16.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)18.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)19.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)20.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9) 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 62: Sesame crop model 
Table 63: Sesame and soya crop pattern 
191 
Sesame(cid:9)crop(cid:9)modelYIELDS(cid:9)AND(cid:9)INPUTSWOPWP(Per(cid:9)ha)PY1(cid:9)to(cid:9)2012345(cid:9)to(cid:9)20UnitYieldsKg200.0300.0400.0450.0550.0700.0Post-harvest(cid:9)loss(cid:9)(@(cid:9)10%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)Kg20.030.040.045.055.070.0Self(cid:9)consumption(cid:9)(@(cid:9)5%(cid:9)of(cid:9)production)Kg10.015.020.022.527.535.0Total(cid:9)marketable(cid:9)produceKg170.0255.0340.0382.5467.5595.0OperatingInputsUnimproved(cid:9)seedsKg3.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Improved(cid:9)seedsKg-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)NPK(cid:9)(Basal(cid:9)application)Kg-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)AN(cid:9)(kg)Kg-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)10.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Pesticidelt-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Packing(cid:9)(50Kg(cid:9)bags)number3578912LaborLand(cid:9)clearingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Ploughing(cid:9)person-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Discing/Harrowingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Plantingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)First(cid:9)Pesticide(cid:9)applicationperson-days-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Second(cid:9)Pesticide(cid:9)applicationperson-days-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)0.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)First(cid:9)weedingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)3.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Second(cid:9)weedingperson-days1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Fertilizingperson-days-(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)1.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Harvestingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Treshingperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Transport(cid:9)field(cid:9)to(cid:9)houseperson-days2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)2.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Total(cid:9)LaborFamily(cid:9)labourperson-days17.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)16.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)15.0(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)16.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)17.5(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)Sesame(cid:9)+(cid:9)soya(cid:9)bean(cid:9)farmCROPPING(cid:9)PATTERNS(in(cid:9)Units)WOPWith(cid:9)projectYears(cid:9)Unit1(cid:9)to(cid:9)2012345(cid:9)to(cid:9)20Cropping(cid:9)IntensityPercent*3340476087100Cropping(cid:9)PatternExisting(cid:9)TechnologySesameha0.5-----Soya(cid:9)Beanha0.5-----Sub-total(cid:9)Existing(cid:9)Technologyha1.0-----New(cid:9)TechnologySesameha-0.60.81.01.41.5Soya(cid:9)Beanha-0.60.60.81.21.5Sub-total(cid:9)New(cid:9)Technologyha-1.21.41.82.63.0Total(cid:9)Cropped(cid:9)Area1.01.21.41.82.63.0 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 64: Sesame and soya beans farm - Financial budget 
192 
Farm(cid:9)model:(cid:9)sesame(cid:9)+(cid:9)soya(cid:9)beans,(cid:9)3haParametersSesameMZNSoya(cid:9)beanMZN.farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)price(cid:9)(kg)45.farm(cid:9)gate(cid:9)price(cid:9)(kg)30.unimproved(cid:9)seed(cid:9)(kg)40.unimproved(cid:9)seed(cid:9)(kg)60.improved(cid:9)seed(cid:9)(kg)100.improved(cid:9)seed(cid:9)(kg)60NPK(cid:9)(kg)35Fungicides(cid:9)(lt)650AN(cid:9)(kg)26Bags(cid:9)(each)20Labor(cid:9)(unskilled,(cid:9)person-day)171Labour(cid:9)(skilled)2325Financial(cid:9)Budget(in(cid:9)MZN)WOPWP1(cid:9)to(cid:9)201234567891011121314151617181920Main(cid:9)ProductionSesame3,8255,7387,6508,60610,51913,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,38813,388Soya(cid:9)beans5,40010,80011,47512,82514,85017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,550Sub-total(cid:9)Main(cid:9)Production9,22516,53819,12521,43125,36930,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,93830,938Operating(cid:9)costsInputsUnimproved(cid:9)seedsSesame6000000000000000000000Soya(cid:9)beans90000000000000000000000Improved(cid:9)seeds000000000000000Sesame0120160200280300300300300300300300300300300300300300300300300Soya(cid:9)beans07207209601,4401,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,800NPK(cid:9)(Basal(cid:9)application)05255957701,1201,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,3131,313AN0390442572832975975975975975975975975975975975975975975975975Fungicides0390520650910975975975975975975975975975975975975975975975975Packaging188349384429500597597597597597597597597597597597597597597597597Labor000000000000000Family(cid:9)labour2,8223,2833,7455,0967,8499,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,6199,619Total(cid:9)Production(cid:9)Costs3,9705,7776,5668,67612,93015,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,57815,578Net(cid:9)revenue(cid:9)5,25610,76012,55912,75512,43815,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,35915,359Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Revenue5,5057,3047,4997,18310,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,10410,104FNPV(cid:9)@22%36,662FIRRNAB/C(cid:9)ratio2.19 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 65: Sesame and soya beans farm - Economic Analysis 
193 
Enterprisefarm(cid:9)2:(cid:9)sesame(cid:9)+(cid:9)soya(cid:9)beansSCF0.88CF(cid:9)(costs)From(cid:9)financial(cid:9)to(cid:9)economic(cid:9)prices:Unemployment(cid:9)rate24.50%maize,(cid:9)beans(cid:9)-(cid:9)improved(cid:9)seeds(cid:9)(Ti)0.734Te(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)exported(cid:9)(for(cid:9)outputs)EP=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX)(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*CFVAT17.00%fertilizers,(cid:9)fungicides,(cid:9)(Ti)0.734Tn(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)nationalEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(all(cid:9)commodities)0.00%packaging(cid:9)(Ti)0.734Import(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(maize,(cid:9)beans(cid:9)seeds)2.50%unimproved(cid:9)seeds(cid:9)(Tn)0.752Ti(cid:9)-(cid:9)Tradable,(cid:9)imported(cid:9)(inputs)EP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(fertilizers,(cid:9)fungicides)2.50%CF(cid:9)(outputs)NT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Non(cid:9)tradableEP(cid:9)=(cid:9)MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport(cid:9)tax(cid:9)(packaging)2.50%maize,(cid:9)beans(cid:9)(Te)0.752SW(cid:9)-(cid:9)Shadow(cid:9)WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)CF(cid:9)(labour)0.755MP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Market(cid:9)PriceVAT(cid:9)-(cid:9)Valued(cid:9)Added(cid:9)TaxIMPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)import(cid:9)TaxEP(cid:9)-(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)PriceEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEXPTAX(cid:9)-(cid:9)Export(cid:9)TaxEconomic(cid:9)budget(in(cid:9)MZN)WOPWP1(cid:9)to(cid:9)201234567891011121314151617181920Main(cid:9)ProductionSesame2,8774,3155,7546,4737,91210,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,06910,069Soya(cid:9)beans4,0628,1238,6319,64611,16913,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,20013,200Sub-total(cid:9)Main(cid:9)Production6,93812,43814,38516,11919,08123,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,26923,269Operating(cid:9)costsInputsUnimproved(cid:9)seedsSesame45Soya(cid:9)beans677Improved(cid:9)seedsSesame88117147205220220220220220220220220220220220220220220220220Soya(cid:9)beans5285287041,0571,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,3211,321NPK(cid:9)(Basal(cid:9)application)-385437565822963963963963963963963963963963963963963963963963AN-286324420611715715715715715715715715715715715715715715715715Fungicides-286382477668715715715715715715715715715715715715715715715715Packaging138256282314367438438438438438438438438438438438438438438438438LaborUnskilled2,1302,4792,8273,8475,9267,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,2627,262Total(cid:9)costs2,9904,3094,8976,4759,65511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,63511,635Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits3,9488,1309,4879,6459,42611,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,63411,634Incremental(cid:9)Net(cid:9)Economic(cid:9)Benefits4,1815,5395,6965,4787,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,6867,686ENPV(cid:9)@10%MZN(cid:9)57,471EIRRNAB/C(cid:9)ratio2.25Phasing(cid:9)in(cid:9)of(cid:9)benefitsWOP:(cid:9)PY1-20WP:(cid:9)PY1234567891011121314151617181920#(cid:9)of(cid:9)beneficiaries(cid:9)39,1507,0008,0008,0006,1505,0005,000156,90766,41067,51265,98381,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,43881,438265,03775,89877,15675,40993,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,072365,03775,89877,15675,40993,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,07293,072449,99758,34659,31457,97071,54971,54971,54971,54971,54971,54971,54971,54971,54971,54971,54971,54971,549540,64847,43648,22347,13058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,170640,64847,43648,22347,13058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,17058,170Total(cid:9)(cid:9)('000(cid:9)MZN)154,57356,907131,447208,446269,033332,998397,317421,212434,486444,433455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473455,473 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Appendix 11: 
Draft project implementation manual 
Main elements are on file and partly included in appendix 4. The complete PIM will be added after QA. 
195 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 12: 
Compliance with IFAD policies 
Policy 
IFAD Strategic 
Framework 2016-
2025: « Enabling 
Inclusive and 
Sustainable Rural 
Transformation » 
Country level 
policy engagement 
Rural finance 
policy 
Alignment with IFAD Policy 
IFAD’s fifth Strategic Framework covers the period 2016-2025, serving as an overarching 
policy  guideline  to  provide  direction  to  IFAD’s  work,  and  as  a  key  instrument  for 
consolidating 
the  new  global 
environment  and  positions  IFAD  to  play  a  crucial  role  within  it  –  by  enabling  the 
transformation of rural areas in a manner that is both more inclusive and sustainable. The 
framework has three strategic objectives:  
IFAD’s  development  effectiveness. 
It  responds 
to 
1.  SO1: Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities – investing in rural 
people to enhance their access to and control over assets and resources. REFP 
supports this SO by aiming to increase people’s access and use of appropriate 
and sustainable financial services in rural areas.  
2.  SO2:  Increase  poor  rural  people’s  benefits  from  market  participation  – 
improving  the engagement of  poor  rural  people in  markets  for  goods, services 
and  wage  labour.  REFP  aims  to  improve  rural  household  livelihoods  through 
Subcomponent  2.2:  “Support  to  business  plan  validation  and  market  linkages” 
by facilitating and validating business plans and identifying viable market outlets 
and linking rural enterprises to the markets.  
3.  SO3: Strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of 
poor  rural  people’s  economic  activities.  REFP  recognizes 
the  key 
importance  of  environmental  sustainability  to  ensure  continued  profits  and 
improved  livelihoods.  The  integration  of  capacity  building  activities  on  climate 
change  adaptation  and  the  environmental  sustainability  of  REFP  is  further 
described in the SECAP Review Note. 
IFAD  promotes  policy  engagement  in  projects  in  order  to  reach  two  main  objectives:  (i) 
help  create  an  enabling  environment  for  implementation  and  achieving  the  project's 
impact, and (ii) help create the conditions for a large number of rural population to  move 
out of poverty. It is a key element of the scaling up agenda. IFAD's role is not intended to 
advocate  for  specific  policy  outcomes;  it  is  rather  to  assist  Governments  to  use  the 
experience  gained  in  innovative  and  change  oriented  IFAD  supported  projects  in  the 
design or reform of policies, and to facilitate dialogue among national stakeholders on key 
policy issues. REFP recognizes the importance of harmonization with existing structures 
and  places emphasis on  utilising  relevant systems,  where  adequate, that are already  in 
place.  
IFAD's Rural Finance Policy (2009) has six guiding principles to be applied at the micro, 
meso and macro levels: (i) support access to a variety of financial services; (ii) promote a 
wide  range  of  financial  institutions,  models  and  delivery  channels;  (iii)  support  demand 
driven  and  innovative  approaches;  (iv)  encourage  –  in  collaboration  with  private  sector 
partners  –  market-based  approaches  that  strengthen  rural  financial  markets,  avoid 
distortions in the financial sector and leverage IFAD’s resources; (v) develop and support 
long-term strategies focusing on sustainability and poverty outreach; and (vi) participate in 
policy dialogues that promote an enabling environment for rural finance. 
Consistent with the goals of IFAD’s rural finance policy and technical guidance, REFP will 
support a number of demand-driven and innovative approaches to rural financial services: 
including  i)  developing  and  validating  basic  business  plans,  financial  literacy  and 
community-based  microfinance;  ii)  technical  assistance  to  selected  financial  service 
providers to strengthen their capacity to service smallholder farmers as well as technical 
assistance directly to smallholders In line with the IFAD Rural Finance Policy that permits 
the  use  of  lines  of  credit  in  specific  and  well  defined  circumstances  and  sector 
environments, REFP will also be engaged in the refinancing of  union and retail financial 
intermediaries.  
IFAD‘s policy on targeting defines its priority target group as the poorest rural people with 
productive  potential.  REFP  will  apply  a  strong  pro-poor  social  inclusion  strategy  for  the 
197 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
disadvantaged categories (in particular women, women headed households and youths, 
as  well  as  HIV  affected  entrepreneurs  jto  enable  them  to  participate in and  benefit  from 
capacity building initiatives  and  access  loans  that  will  empower  them to establish  viable 
rural  on  and  off  farm  MSEs.  The  project  will  further  target  5000  youths  (50%  male  and 
50%  female)  to  build  their  capacity  in  entrepreneurial  and  business  skills,  provide  them 
with seed capital for the youths to engage in micro to small scale enterprises, and provide 
mentorship to graduated youths. Youth beneficiaries will account for 20% of the target. 
Compliance with 
IFAD’s Targeting 
Policy – Reaching 
the Poor (2010) 
The goal of IFAD’s ENRM policy is to enable poor rural people to escape from and remain 
out of poverty through more productive and resilient livelihoods and ecosystems. REFP 
follows these principles by aiming to render the rural enterprise activities more 
sustainable and resilient to climate shocks. This is done through increased capacity on 
climate adaptive practices and risk management, and by conducting regular due diligence 
on the compliance with ENRM regulations by the financial service providers. The project 
will place attention to both land access and land management, both for communities and 
individual farmers, as these are key to successful agricultural development. This will 
furthermore align REFP to the ongoing Terra Segura project and the strategic objectives 
of other international donors. 
Environment and 
Natural Resource 
Management 
Policy  
Climate Change 
Strategy 
Knowledge 
management 
IFAD’s Climate Change Strategy notes that IFAD’s goal is to maximize the fund’s impact 
on rural poverty in a changing climate. Climate change has been actively considered in 
the design of REFP, more specifically within the SECAP Review Note. REFP will aim to 
increase smallholders’ climate resilience by encouraging the diversification of income 
streams and promoting climate adaptive practices. Where possible, the project will 
explore compliance with the ongoing Local Plans of Adaptation which are an integral part 
of the National Climate Change Adaptation Management Strategy implemented by the 
Ministry of Land, Environment, and Rural Development (MITADER). 
The  Knowledge  Management  strategy  suggests  that  projects  should  have  baseline 
studies  and  should  have  dedicated  frameworks  for  knowledge  management  in  order  to 
"learn  systematically  and  collectively  from  its  own  projects  and  projects,  and  from  the 
experience  of  its  partners,  particularly  poor  rural  people,  in  order  to  deliver  high-quality 
services  and  to  enable  its  development  partners  to  find  innovative  ways  to  overcome 
poverty, and to use the knowledge acquired to foster pro-poor policy reforms."  
The REFP M&E system will form the foundation of the knowledge management and 
learning system and will thus be a primary instrument of information capture and storage, 
based on the indicators detailed in the results framework. Tools such as case studies, 
stakeholder interviews and surveys will be used to deepen understanding of factors 
contributing to successes and failures, and to enable full documentation of impacts from 
the field and beneficiaries. Particular attention will be given to documenting, innovative 
models, information sharing with stakeholders, and Learning Routes.  
Scaling-up 
The  definition  adopted  by  IFAD  for  scaling-up  is:  “expanding,  adapting  and  supporting 
successful  policies,  projects  and  knowledge,  so  that  they  can  leverage  resources  and 
partners to deliver larger results for a greater number of rural poor in a sustainable way”. 
Scaling  up  results  does  not  mean  transforming  small  IFAD  projects  into  larger  projects. 
REFP aims to leverage greater impact through partnerships with already existing financial 
service providers and replicating the approaches that have been proven successful. 
198 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
Major landscape characteristics and issues   
Socio-cultural context 
1.  Mozambique  sits  on  the  southeast  coast  of  Africa,  with  a  population  of  24,5  million  977,863 
people. The country has experienced a rapid economic expansion over the past decades but this 
has  had  only  a  moderate  impact  on  poverty  reduction.  The  2015  Human  Development  Index 
placed Mozambique as 180th out of the 188 countries and territories. Mozambique faces a number 
of  socio-cultural  challenges,  such  as  chronic  food  insecurity  (34%  of  the  population140),  low  life 
expectancy  (50.3  years),  high  death  rates  caused  by  malaria  (29%  for  the  general  population), 
and high HIV rates (11.5%)141. 
2. 
 As of 2015, the agricultural sector contributed to about 25% of GDP and represented over 20% of 
exports. Smallholder farmers represent almost 90% of the in-country productivity. Over half of the 
cultivated land is dedicated to the production of maize, rice, and cassava. Agriculture remains the 
main  source  of  income  for  more  than  80%  of  the  population  and  provides  employment  for 
approximately 80% of the total workforce. Agricultural output has been greatly affected by weather 
events, such as severe droughts and flooding in the south, and erratic rainfall in the north.  
3.  Since  the  elections  in  2014,  there  has  been  ongoing  political  tension  and  armed  conflict  was 
reported  in  parts  of  the  centre  and  north  of  the  country. A  ceasefire  was  declared  in  December 
2016.  
.  
Natural Resources  
4.  Mozambique has a 2470km coastline with coastal plains below 200m covering around 40% of the 
country142. The Zambezi is the largest of about 25 main rivers flowing to the Indian Ocean, most 
of which are transnational143.  
5.  Terrestrial  ecosystems  are  composed  of  woodlands,  grasslands,  wooded  savannas  and 
bushlands.  99%  of  total  cultivated  land  is  distributed  amongst  4.2million  smallholdings,  28%  of 
which are headed by women144. Nationwide, over 82% of jobs depend on Mozambique’s natural 
resources and it is estimated that the natural capital contributes up to 50% of GDP145. Agricultural 
encroachment  and  unsustainable  production  of  bio-energies  (i.e.  firewood)  are  leading  to 
deforestation  and  soil  degradation  and  further  threats  to  the  environment  include  illegal  mining, 
logging including its illegal practice, hunting, poaching, and overfishing.  
6.  Wetland  and  freshwater  ecosystems  are  extensive,  varied  and  are  comprised  of  rivers  and 
lakes (natural and artificial). Inland waters cover 13,000km2.  
7.  Marine  ecosystems  include  seagrass  beds  (490km2)  and  coral  reefs  (1,890km2).  Major 
challenges  in  marine  NRM  remain  including  coastal  erosion,  marine  habitat  degradation, 
overfishing by unlicensed  operators, encroachment by  industrial fishing vessels, and a  shortage 
of human resources and  infrastructure for implementation of fisheries laws and regulations. The 
fishery  and  aquaculture  sector  in  Mozambique  is  characterised  by  semi-  and  industrial  fleets 
whose catches (shrimp mainly) are directly exported. Small-scale/artisanal fishing (vessels <10m, 
canoes mostly), provides the bulk of catches (91%), which are not closely monitored. The catch 
from artisanal fisheries plays an important role in domestic consumption and food security in both 
coastal  and  inland  areas.  In  2014,  about  334,000  people,  (1.4  %  of  the  population),  was 
estimated to depend directly  or  indirectly  on  artisanal fisheries. The contribution of the sector to 
the national GDP is estimated to be in the range of 2- 3%146.   
140 WFP 2016  
141 World Bank country overview: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/mozambique/overview  
142 USAID 2013 
143 Silici et al. 2015  
144 MASA 2015 
145 MICOA and PEI, Environmental Economic Analysis of Natural Resource Management, Mozambique, 2012   
146 CSPE IFAD 2017  
199 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
8.  Mozambique  is  also  rich  in  mineral  resources,  with  the  mining  sector  contributing  1.7%  of  the 
GDP in 2012. Over 12,000 people are involved in artisanal gold mining147. All land in Mozambique 
is the property of the State, with use and benefit rights granted to land users.  
Current climate, historical trends and projections  
9.  According to the Koppen-Geiger climate classification, most of Mozambique has a Tropical semi-
arid  climate.  The  seasonal  rainfall  pattern  coincides  with  the  position  of  the  Intertropical 
Convergence  Zone  (ITCZ)  which  brings  about  150-300mm  of  rain/month  in  the  north  and  50-
150mm rain/month in the south. El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) causes drier than average 
conditions  during  the  rainy  season  in  its  warm  phase  (El  Nino)  and  relatively  cold  and  wet 
conditions in its cold phase (La Nina).  
10.  Mozambique  is  one  of  Africa’s  most  vulnerable  countries  to  climate  change.  Frequent  extreme 
weather  events  combined  with  poverty  and  weak  institutional  development  render  the  country 
especially  vulnerable.  The  occurrence  of  climate  related  hazards  such  as  droughts,  floods  and 
cyclones  are  increasing,  resulting  in  devastating  impacts.  Central  Mozambique  experiences 
frequent agricultural losses due to droughts, floods, and uncontrolled bush fires while the densely 
populated  coastal  lowlands  suffer  from  severe  erosion,  saltwater  intrusion,  loss  of  vital 
infrastructure  and  the  spread  of  diseases  such  as  malaria,  cholera,  and  influenza148.  Erratic 
rainfall patterns result in low ground water resources.  
11.  According  to  the  ND-GAIN  index  (2013)149,  which  summarizes  a  country’s  vulnerability  level, 
Mozambique ranks 142 out of 178 countries. The country is categorised as 36th on vulnerability 
and 144th on readiness.  
12.  Mozambique  is  frequently  affected  by  tropical  cyclones  occurring  during  the  hot  and  humid 
season.  In  January  2012,  cyclone  Leon-Eline  affected  4.5  million  of  its  population9  and  in  2016, 
cyclone Dineo affected 650,000 people. The country  is simultaneously experiencing an increase 
in the mean annual temperatures and a decrease in annual rainfall (at a rate of 3.1% per decade 
between  1960  and  2006)9.  The  south  has  become  hotter  and  dryer  and  suffers  from  more 
frequent persistent droughts, while the coastal regions face more frequent episodic floods.  
13.  Climate  projections  show  a  significant  average  temperature  rise  (ranging  from  a  minimum 
increase  of  1.0°C  for  2010-2100  to  a  maximum  increase  of  4.6°C  for  2010-2090)9.  Rainfall 
projections  show  no  significant  change  in  total  annual  rainfall  on  the  national  level,  but  the 
regional and seasonal changes are substantial. Climate models project a considerable increase in 
the  proportion  of  total  rainfall  that  will  fall  during  heavy  rain  events,  coupled  with  elongated  dry 
spells.  
14.  Climate change will affect water availability and food security in Mozambique in numerous ways, 
especially  through  i.)  decreased  yields,  ii.)  increased  risks  of  crop  failure,  iii.)  low  groundwater 
tables, iv.) empty wells, v.) a lack of water for consumption and irrigation and vi.) an increased risk 
of severe floods and droughts. 
15.  The Mozambican population is not only vulnerable to climate change due to its physical situation, 
but  also  due  to  the  socioeconomic  issues  that  aggravate  negative  climate  change  effects  and 
decrease the population’s adaptive capacity. Climate change is expected to cause a drop in GDP 
of  4-14%  or  costs  of  up  to  USD  7.6  billion  dollars  by  2050150.  The  country’s  poor  infrastructure 
(6%  of  highways  are  paved)  will  limit  mobility  in  case  of  extreme  events.  Population  growth 
(2.5%/year)  increases  pressure  on  natural  resources.  Moreover,  there  will  be  a  disproportionate 
effect of climate change on women and girls, since they are more dependent on natural resources 
for household and agricultural tasks151.  
Key Issues 
16.  Taking into account the rural finance and enterprise drive of REFP, the key relevant issues are: 
147 Mozambican Ministry for the Coordination of Environmental Affairs, 2014.  
148 Netherlands Commission for Environmental Assessment, 2015.  
149 GAIN index summarizes a country’s vulnerability to climate change and other global challenges in combination with 
readiness to improve resilience. http://index.gain.org/country/mozambique 
150 Winqvist, 2011.  
151 Midgley, S.; Dejene, A. Mattick, A. (2012); Mucavele, S. (2010): Gender and Climate Change in Mozambique. 
200 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
17.  High  natural  resource  dependency  and  vulnerability.  Mozambican  smallholders  are  primary 
dependents of the availability and quality of natural resources, such as good soils for cultivation, 
grazing lands,  water supply,  and fish supply. Without any buffers or alternative  income streams, 
smallholder farmers and fishermen are highly vulnerable to climatic shocks. 50% of the country’s 
protein per capita comes from fish. Fishermen form part of the poorest communities in the country 
and  if action is not taken, their situation is  likely  to  worsen. Fishermen have reported that some 
species no longer show up in their nets, and the overall catch is declining. It is estimated that the 
overall artisanal catch has declined by almost 30% in the last 25 years. This decline in fish supply, 
coupled with a growing human population can result in a 70% decrease in protein availability by 
2030 as compared to 1995152. Climate change is expected to worsen this issue, as Mozambique’s 
coastline is highly vulnerable to cyclones, storm surges and flooding.  
18.  Degrading  natural  resource  base.  The  availability  and  quality  of  Mozambique’s  natural 
resources  is  continuously  declining.  This  process  is  largely  due  to  poor  natural  resource 
management. Increasing investments in good agricultural practices and buffers for difficult periods 
can reverse this trend. 
19.  Increase in extreme events. The increasing occurrence of intense rainfall events and droughts 
means an increasing number of shocks to smallholders, with increasing severity.  
20.  Integration of good environmental and social practices into the policies and procedures of 
financial institutions. Financial institutions can play a major role in promoting and financing only 
good environmental and social practices, yet their in-house capacity to assess this is often limited. 
Lessons learned from IFAD projects and programmes in Mozambique 
21.  Mozambique  is  the  seventh  largest  portfolio  among  IFAD-supported  operations  in  the  East  and 
Southern Africa region. The 2017 Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation153 found that the 
national resources management and environmental dimension of the portfolio was weak overall. 
This partly contributed to undermining potential positive impacts and sustainability of the projects 
with  respect  to  food  security  and  production,  considering  the  high  dependency  of  producers’ 
livelihoods, including the economically active poor, on natural resources. The CSPE recommends 
that “IFAD-supported projects in Mozambique should include among their principles full attention 
to  sustainable  natural  resources  management  and  to  strengthening  climate-change  resilience 
Moreover,  natural  resources management  and  climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation  should 
be mainstreamed in all project activities, including capacity development and technology transfer.”  
22.  It was also noted that too little attention was paid to IFADs Climate Change Strategy in the design 
of the projects. However, the PROSUL project included a grant component funded by  the multi-
donor  IFAD-based  Adaptation  for  Smallholder  Agriculture  Programme,  which  enabled  climate-
change  adaptation  measures  to  be  integrated  across  the  project’s  three  value-chains.  Some  of 
these were proving to be beneficial for different groups of rural poor.  
Assessment of social and environmental legislative frameworks in Mozambique  
23.  REFP will be in compliance with the following Mozambican laws and regulations. The descriptions 
are  not  a  comprehensive  review  of  environmental  legislation  in  Mozambique,  but  rather  a 
summary of the regulatory ‘drivers’.  
24.  Since  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  held  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1992, 
Mozambique  has  established  institutions  to  address  the  need  of  protecting  biodiversity  and 
tropical  forests.  The  Ministry  for  Land,  Environment,  and  Rural  Development  (MITADER)  is 
charged with preparing environmental and climate policies and coordinating their implementation. 
MITADER  is  the  Government  of  Mozambique’s  focal  point  for  all  international  48  Mozambique 
Environmental  Threats  and  Opportunities  Assessment  conventions  related  to  biodiversity 
conservation (e.g., CBD, CITES), and it coordinates Mozambique’s REDD+ preparations and the 
climate change adaptation strategy. MITADER is represented at provincial level by the Provincial 
Directorate for the Coordination of Environmental Affairs (DPCAA).  
25.  In Mozambique, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process is a legal requirement under 
the  Environmental  Law  (Law  no.  20/97)  for  any  activities  which  may  have  direct  or  indirect 
152 https://www.rare.org/mozambique 
153 Draft CPE, IFAD 2017  
201 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
impacts  on  the  environment.  The  Environmental  Law  requires  that  activities  (whether  by  their 
nature, location or dimensions) which are likely to cause significant environmental impacts need 
to  be  licensed  by  MITADER,  based  on  the  outcomes  of  the  EIA  process.  In  1998  the  first 
Regulation  on  an  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  (EIA)  was  established  (Decree  76/98). 
The latest regulation was established in 2015 (Decree 54/2015)154 155.  
26.  Article 8 of the Environmental Law requires that the Government create adequate mechanisms so 
as to involve the various sectors of civil society, local communities and environmental protection 
organizations  in  the  preparation  of  policies  and  legislation  for  the  management  of  the  country’s 
natural resources.  
27.  Article 9 prohibits the production and deposit of any toxic and polluting substances on soils, sub-
soils, water or atmosphere as well as the conduct of activities that will tend to accelerate erosion 
and  desertification,  deforestation  or  any  other  form  of  environmental  degradation  beyond  the 
limits  established  by  law.  Although  REFP  activities  will  not  cause  significant  environmental 
impacts, it is recommended that the ESMP includes direct consultations with MITADER to create 
adequate mechanisms relevant to MFIs, as articulated in Article 8.  
28.  The  National  Environmental  Policy  (Resolution  no.  5/1995)  was  established  to  manage 
natural and environmental resources so as to maintain their functional and productive capacity for 
current and future generations.  
29.  The  Regulation  regarding  the  Environmental  Auditing  Process  (Decree  no.  25/2011)  was 
to  compliance  with 
to  regulate  supervisory  and  auditing  activities  related 
established 
environmental protection standards at the national level. 
30.  Appendix 1 of the SECAP Review Note outlines the international treaties related to environmental 
protection to which Mozambique is a signatory.  
31.  Mozambique  has  made  progress  in  establishing  institutions  whose  mandates  contribute  to 
environmental  protection,  biodiversity  conservation  and  forest  management156.  However,  it 
appears  that  there  remain  some  weaknesses  in  institutional  capacity,  organization  and 
coordination.  The  various  responsibilities  concerning  environmental  protection  are  dispersed 
among  several  ministries.  This  renders  the  concentration  of  human  and  financial  resources  and 
equipment  for  the  protection  of  the  environment  difficult.  At  the  same  time,  the  limits  of 
responsibilities among institutions are not clear, which, when coupled with weak coordination, can 
result in the duplication or absence of efforts among institutions.  
32.  Despite the existing national regulations  as outlined in section  V., the traditional use of rigorous 
environmental audits and impact assessments to screen and rank loan applicants is not relevant 
to  the  majority  of  microenterprise  projects  in  Mozambique.  Indeed,  the  small  size  of  loans 
demanded  counteracts  the  applicability  of  traditional  environmental  impact  assessments. 
Moreover, it appears that no justice system exists which prosecutes environmental violations and 
no single provision that squarely imposes environmental liability on lenders could be found. 
The nexus between microenterprise development and environmental degradation  
33.  Microenterprises make up a large portion of the business firms in developing countries. As such, 
micro-lending programmes have often been viewed as a means of developing the microenterprise 
sector and alleviating poverty. Given the customarily informal nature of the microenterprise sector, 
its size, and the high incidence of poverty involved, it is important to consider the nexus between 
microenterprise development and cumulative environmental degradation.  
34.  REFPs  SECAP  Review  Note  aims  to  promote  improved  environmental  management  and 
occupational safety by recommending that the issues in the sector are confronted directly through 
a  combination  of  private  and  public  actions.  The  microfinance  institutions  supported  by  REFP 
should engage in the promotion of environmental awareness and eco efficiency among clients 
while simultaneously limiting their exposure to lending risks caused by social, environmental, and 
climate issues. The rationale being that it is best to prevent environmental degradation and avoid 
social risks rather than to remediate them after the damage has occurred. 
154Netherlands Commission for environmental assessments (2017)  
155 Anadarka (2014) 
156 USAID (2013) 
202 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
35.  The  challenge  remains  in  how  to  mitigate  environmental  and  social  impacts  that  could  be 
generated  by  REFP  supported  activities.  Traditional  existing  measures157  include  i.)  the 
“command-and-control”, ii.) economic incentives, and iii.) increased lender liability.  
36.  Due  to  a  lack  in  enforcement  capability  in  the  rural  sector  combined  and  unavailable  legislative 
frameworks, the command-and-control approach would not be appropriate in regards to REFP 
given the anticipated heavy burden on government enforcement agencies that this will cause.  
37.  The economic incentive approach, involving “tradable emission permits” and subsidies for the 
adoption of “clean technologies,” for example, could be valuable to REFP supported activities, but 
the  implementation  of  these  measures  requires  a  pre-existing  base  of  extensive  scientific  field 
data, and the ability to model financial and pollution interactions accurately so as to design permit 
and  subsidy  programs,  make  available  affordable  technological  solutions,  and  identify  the 
resources necessary to bear the fiscal costs of the subsidies.  
38.  The  third  approach,  increasing  lender  liability,  is  recommended.  This  involves  using  financial 
intermediaries  to  support  environmental  and  social  protection  agencies  in  enforcing  relevant 
regulations.  The  financial  institutions  supported  by  REFP  interact  closely  with  the  small 
businesses  and  should  provide  opportunities  to  positively  influence  their  clients’  environmental 
and social performance by engaging in active environmental and social screening. It is important, 
however, to note the shift in the administrative and enforcement burden from the government to 
the financial institutions.  
39.  One  possibility  is  to  formalize  the  enterprises  to  ensure  compliance  with  existing  government 
regulations  governing  business  registration,  taxes,  zoning,  minimum  wage  and  social  security 
provisions, and environmental protection.  
Potential programme social, environmental and climate change impacts and risks 
Key Potential impacts  
40.  REFP’s main expected positive impacts are: 
 
Increased  income  and  savings  for  rural  male  and  female  entrepreneurs  in  the 
programme area 
  Enhanced efficiency and effectiveness of private and public institutions supported by 
REFP 
  Rural households empowered with entrepreneurial skills  
 
Increased financial inclusion 
  Creation and diversification of income generating opportunities  
 
Increased  awareness  of  sustainable  environmental  and  natural 
management  
resource 
41.  The combined effect of these benefits will be reduced poverty, improved food security, improved 
livelihoods and enhanced resilience of rural households.  
42.  REFPS’s main potential negative impacts are:  
  Elite  capture.  It  is  possible  that  the  majority  of  benefits  will  flow  to  high  income 
beneficiaries.  Focusing  on  institutions  with  explicit  and  measurable  intentions  of 
creating  substantial  benefits  to  low  income  populations  can  avoid  unnecessary  elite 
capture.  With  appropriate  processes,  a  strong  targeting  strategy,  and  financial 
inclusion, the risk of elite capture can be largely be avoided.  
  Environmental  impact  of  small-scale  infrastructure  developed  by  institutions 
financed  by  REFP.  This  includes,  for  example,  small  bank  branches,  storage 
facilities,  roads  or  market  sheds.  Negative  effects  could  include  clearance  of 
vegetation,  loss  of  habitat,  water  run  off  disruption,  noise  of  construction,  improper 
157 Wenner, M., Wright, N., & Lal, A. (2004). Environmental protection and microenterprise development in the developing 
world. A model based on Latin American experience. Journal of Micro- finance, 6(1), 95–122. 
203 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
waste  management  and  increased  competition  over  freshwater  resources.  The 
potential negative impacts of each intervention are expected to be minor, and only the 
accumulation of negative impacts will pose a significant risk.  
 
Increased  exposure  of  a  vulnerable  population.  A  possible  negative  impact  of 
interventions  stimulating  rural  enterprise  development  is  loan  acquisition  and 
situations of indebtedness. Project activities should include loan risk assessments for 
both formal and informal financial services supported.  
  Occupational  safety.  The enterprise  development supported  by  REFP may  lead to 
increased  employment.  While  this  is  a  positive  result,  it  is  important  that  measures 
are  taken  to  avoid  occupational  risks  (such  as  working  with  chemicals)  and  ensure 
social protection (such as the prevention of child labour).  
  Gender.  Household  duties  and  childcare  can  impede  women  from  engaging  in 
entrepreneurial  activities.  Attention  must  be  paid  to  ensure  that  women  are  not  left 
with  a  heavier  burden  of  household  and  farm  chores  and  the  inability  to  engage  in 
entrepreneurship.  
 
Increased  school  dropout.  A  greater  demand  for  labour  may  arise  from  increased 
enterprise activities. Social assessments must be carried out to ensure that children 
are not taken out of school to be placed in the labour force. The highest dropout rates 
are found amongst girls and as such, gender equality is also at risk.  
  Climate risks. Destructive climate related events could affect beneficiaries’ potential 
to  pay  back  loans.  REFP  will  emphasize  planning  for  long  term  financial  service 
provision.  Proposed  financial  service  innovations/  outreach  mechanisms  will  be 
rigorously tested and business models/ pro forma estimates will be purposely modest 
to  accommodate  climate  driven  or  macro-economic  impacts.  REFP  should,  in  the 
short  run,  increase  households’ resilience  by  increasing  financial  buffers. Over  time, 
increased  savings  and  incomes  driven  by  investments  will  reduce  exposure  to 
extreme weather events.  
Climate change and adaptation 
43.  As described in section I, the direct effects of climate change include increasing temperatures and 
increasing  frequency  and  intensity  of  extreme  events.  Unfortunately,  definite  information  on  the 
expected impact of these changes on specific agricultural commodities or value chains is difficult 
to obtain.  
44.  Climate  change  adaptation  is  not  a  key  component  of  REFP,  but  it  is  an  important  means  for 
farmers  to  capitalize  on  their  entrepreneurial  activities  and  protect  their  investments.  While 
increased access to finance and exposure to technologies will generate autonomous adaptation, 
REFP  should  encourage  capacity  building  in  climate  change  adaptation.  The  SECAP  Review 
Note suggests that a Senior Environmental and Social consultant is hired on a retainer contract, 
to conduct capacity building exercises as well as biannual social and environmental assessments. 
The TORs for this position are outlined in Appendix 2.   
45.  Some elements under REFP do promote climate resilience, such as the promotion of alternative 
income-generating  activities.  The  more  a  household  has  the  ability  to  diversify  income  streams, 
the more likely it will be resilient to climatic shocks.  
46.  For crop related entrepreneurial activities, REFP  will  encourage the production  of crops that are 
adapted to the changing climate.  
 Environmental and social category  
47.  REFP has been classified as Category B. The project may generate some minor adverse social 
and environmental impacts. These impacts are limited by the size of the entrepreneurial activities 
envisaged  and  can  remedied  by  appropriate  preventative  actions  outlined  in  the  Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP). While the cumulative effect of these adverse impacts may 
be consequent, and less easily mitigated by the project, their severity will be limited.  
Climate risk classification  
204 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
48.  Based  on  available  information  about  historical  climate  hazard  occurrences,  current  climate 
trends  and  future  climate  scenarios,  REFP  has  been  classified  as  a  Moderate  Risk  project. 
Beneficiaries  of  REFP,  especially  those  engaged  in  the  agribusiness,  are  highly  sensitive  to 
climate risks. Climatic shocks may disrupt the planned trajectory of entrepreneurial activities and 
delay the repayment of loans. That said, climate issues have been taken into consideration in the 
design  and  adjustments  have  been  integrated  (such  as  capacity  building  initiatives  on  climate 
change  adaptation,  the  promotion  of  green  technologies,  and  policy  dialogue  to  improve 
agricultural sector strategies) to capitalize on local risk management capacities. Given that some 
impacts  are  uncertain,  precautionary  principles  will  be  applied,  such  as  specific  environmental 
and social assessments during project implementation.  
Recommended features of project design and implementation  
Mitigation Measures  
49.  REFP  will  include  the  following  measures  aimed  at  mitigating  the  potential  negative  impacts 
identified in section VI: 
  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMP) should be 
developed to detail a.) the measures to be taken during the implementation and 
operation of a project to eliminate or offset adverse environmental and social impacts, 
or to reduce them to an acceptable level; an b.) the action needed and institutional 
responsibilities to implement these measures. The ESMP will also make explicit 
reference to the IFC Exclusion List158 outlining investments not eligible for project 
support.  
  The recruitment of a Senior Environmental and Social Consultant on a retainer 
contract. Further outlined in Appendix 2, the expert will be responsible for: 
i.  The incorporation of capacity building initiatives on sustainable ENRM 
and climate change adaptation in the projects activities. This includes 
trainings on good agricultural practices for entrepreneurs in the agribusiness 
sector, the promotion of green technologies, etc. and the capitalization of 
climate risk management capacities.  
ii.  Capacity building of officers from the Ministry of Land, Environment and 
Rural Development (MITADER) at the provincial levels to conduct regular 
assessments of due diligence of FSPs in terms of their environmental and 
social policies and procedures, and their capacity to implement them.  
iii.  The increase in dialogue with climate risk institutions (red cross, etc) and 
policy dialogue to improve agricultural strategies.  
iv.  Conduct regular social and environmental impact assessments of REFP 
supported activities.  
v.  Conduct due diligence on the FSPs supported by REFP and their portfolios to 
assess their existing environmental and social policies and procedures, their 
capacity to implement them, and the environmental and social issues 
associated with the existing and future activities. If gaps exist, the expert will 
design an operational plan to address these.  
  Monitoring on the implementation of the ESMP as part of the overall M&E system;  
50.  It is important to note that while environmental assessments may identify a number of issues, the 
lack of effective infrastructure and accessible alternative technologies in Mozambique will limit its 
operational  value.  Therefore,  it  is  recommended  that  REFP  increases  the  environmental 
awareness  of  microcredit  clients  and  promotes  voluntary  compliance  rather 
than 
enforcement. Profit, health benefits, and sustainability of their resource inputs are examples of the 
main incentives for clients of microfinance institutions.  
158 See IFCs Project Exclusion List 
http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ifc+projects+database/projects/aips+
added+value/ifc_project_exclusion_list  
205 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
51.  As regards risk management, it is recommended that the microfinance institutions use simplified 
environmental  and  social  assessment  tools  to  identify  a  businesses’  environmental  impact,  and 
choose a mitigation strategy for those businesses at risk from climatic events. The first step is to 
develop  a  list  of  entrepreneurial  activities  in  the  ESMP  that  are  known  unequivocally  to  pose 
serious environmental and social risks. The ESMP should also make explicit reference to the IFC 
Exclusion List159 outlining investments not eligible for project support.  
Incentives for good practices  
52.  The following measures could generate positive impacts:  
  Combine asset transfer with appropriate training on environmental management, e.g. 
grazing and manure management for livestock provision, water-efficient irrigation 
management for irrigation equipment provision, etc. The E&S consultant will be 
responsible for this.  
 
 
Incentivize service providers to mainstream environmental and social issues in their 
approach.   
Incentivize the development of products that specifically address financial risks 
related to weather variability and extreme events. This should be encouraged in the 
ESMP.  
Monitoring and Evaluation  
Guidance for monitoring and evaluation of the project’s environmental and social performance should 
be detailed in the Environmental and Social Management Plan. The project M&E and KM officers 
should  work  in  close  collaboration  with  the  Environmental  and  Social  consultant  to  assess  the 
performance of service providers. 
159 See IFCs Project Exclusion List 
http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ifc+projects+database/projects/aips+
added+value/ifc_project_exclusion_list  
206 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
Annex 1: International Conventions and Regional Protocols Ratified by Mozambique to Protect 
the Environment 
Mozambique has ratified the following international conventions and protocols with direct relevance to 
the management of natural resources, conservation of biodiversity, and protection of the environment.  
Convention or Protocol  
Convention  or  Protocol  Year  of  Ratification  Convention  on  the  International  Trade  in 
Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) 1981  
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone 1993  
the 
International  Trade 
Montreal Convention on Ozone Destroying Substances 1993  
Bamako  Convention  on  the  Ban  of  the  Import  into  Africa  and  the  Control  of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes within Africa 1996  
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 1994  
United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity 1994  
United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat  Desertification  in  countries  affected  by  severe 
drought or desertification, particularly in Africa 1996  
Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of  Across-Border  Movement  and  Elimination  of 
Dangerous Residues 1996  
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 2001  
Kyoto Protocol 2005  
Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage 1982  
Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar Convention) 2003  
Convention  on 
Convention)  
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) 2004  
Convention on Migratory Species (CMS)  
Memorandum  of  Agreement  in  the  Indian  Ocean  and  South  East  Asia  for  the  marine 
turtles  
African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources 1981  
SADC Protocol on Wildlife Conservation and Law Enforcement 1999  
The Monitoring of Illegal Killing of Elephants (MIKE) in the SADC region 1997  
International  Treaty  on  the  Establishment  of  the  Greater  Limpopo  Transfrontier 
Conservation Area 2002  
Protocol  on  Shared  Watercourse  Systems  in  the  Southern  Africa  Development 
Community (SADC) 2000  
Agreement  on  the  Action  Plan  for  the  Environmentally  Sound  Management  of  the 
Common Zambezi River System 1987  
The  Convention  on  Protection,  Management  and  Development  of  the  Marine  and 
Coastal Environment in the Eastern Africa Region (1985) 1996  
Protocol for Tourism Development in the SADC region (1998) 2001 
in  Hazardous  Chemicals 
(Rotterdam 
Year 
of 
Ratification 
1981 
1993 
1993 
1996 
1994 
1994 
1996 
1996 
2001 
2005 
1982 
2003 
2004 
1981 
1999 
1997 
2002 
2000 
1987 
1996 
2001 
207 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
Annex 2: Terms of reference of an Environment and social consultant 
The Rural Enterprise Finance Project (REFP) is a national Project that will be implemented in 
Mozambique. Mozambique has made progress in establishing institutions whose mandates contribute 
to environmental protection, biodiversity conservation and forest management designing 
environmental and social regulations. However, it appears that there remain some weaknesses in 
institutional capacity, organization and coordination on the enforcement of such regulations. The 
various responsibilities concerning environmental protection are dispersed among several ministries. 
This renders the concentration of human and financial resources and equipment for the protection of 
the environment difficult. Furthermore, no single provision that squarely imposes environmental 
liability on lenders could be found.  
Given the customarily informal nature of the microenterprise sector, its size, and the high incidence of 
poverty involved, it is important to consider the nexus between microenterprise development and 
cumulative environmental degradation.  
During the design mission conducted in June-July 2017, it was observed that environmental and 
social procedures are not consistently and satisfactorily implemented by all Financial Service 
Providers (FSPs). Some management plans do exist, but they only briefly describe potential impacts, 
not all the major issues, and mitigation measures are not clearly described. The approval of loans to 
REFP beneficiaries should adhere to adequate social and environmental norms. 
The implementation of capacity building on climate and environmental aspects of REFP, and the 
monitoring of social and environmental compliance will be carried out by a senior consultant on a 
retained contract for 110 days/year.  
Responsibilities of the consultant:  
1.  Capacity building of officers from the Ministry of Land, Environment and Rural Development 
(MITADER) at the provincial level to conduct regular assessments of due diligence of FSPs in 
terms of their environmental and social policies and procedures, and their capacity to implement 
them.  
2.  Adequate incorporation of capacity building initiatives on sustainable ENRM and climate change 
adaptation  in  the  projects  activities.  This  includes  trainings  on  good  agricultural  practices  for 
entrepreneurs  in  the  agribusiness  sector,  the  promotion  of  green  technologies,  etc.  and  the 
capitalization of climate risk management capacities.  
3.  Planning and implementing environmental awareness activities for beneficiaries and FSPs. This 
can  be  done  through  the  capacity  building  activities  where  potential  environmental  issues  and 
good environmental management practices are presented. 
4.  The  contracting  and  procurement  of  services  and  supplies  involved  in  the  implementation  of 
capacity building activities within component 2.1 of REFP (and with prior approval by the PMU).  
5. 
Initiate dialogue with climate risk institutions (red cross, etc) and policy dialogue to improve 
agricultural strategies.  
6.  Review existing project documentation, in particular all documentation related to safeguard 
implementation (project manual, ESMP, etc.). In this review determine whether the coverage is 
comprehensive, the depth of the analysis is adequate and that various requirements are 
consistent with IFADs safeguard policies.  
7.  Produce a bi-annual environmental and social report which includes: 
a.  An appraisal of the inclusion of environmental and social provisions in the approval of 
loans  by  FSPs.  In  case  of  absence  or  inadequacy  of  these  policies,  an  operational 
plan should be developed. 
b.  An  assessment on  whether all Mozambican legislative requirements have  been met 
by REFP activities. 
c.  An  examination  of  the  monitoring  mechanisms  for  environmental  and  social 
components of the project. 
208 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
d.  Proposals  of  remedial  action  measures  that  are  commensurate  to  the  nature,  scale 
and  potential  of  the  project’s  environment  and  social  impacts.  This  must  include 
budget,  timing  and  overarching  schedule  as  well  as  responsibilities  and  institutional 
arrangements. 
Duration:  
 110 days within one year, during which the consultant must deliver results. Upon assessment of 
performance, the contract may be renewed or terminated.  
 90 days of training (6 batches of 15) 
10 days for 1st annual social and environmental report  
10 days for 2nd annual social and environmental report  
The exact duration and development of the contract will be adapted to the specificities of 
performance, in accordance with the progressive phasing in the target districts of REFP. Detailed 
activities to be implemented by the LSP will be outlined in the ESMP.  
Estimated budget: USD38,500/year  
Fee/day: USD350  
209 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 13: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
References 
Anadarka (2014). [ONLINE] Available at:  
http://www.mzlng.com/content/documents/MZLNG/EIA/Volume_I/English/Chapter_2-
_LNG_Final_EIA_Sept_2014_Eng.pdf 
Gildemacher, P., Audet-Bélanger, G., Mangnus, E., Van de Pol, F., Tiombiano, D., Sanogo, K. 
[ONLINE] Available at:  
 http://common-
fund.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Publications/Special_Publications/CFC2014_Paper_Sesame.pdf 
IFAD (2011). Republic of Mozambique Country Strategic Opportunities Programme. [ONLINE] 
Available at: https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/ e395d564-be85-4c87-91b4-
9dd1d5e46c7fuploads/2016/09/USAID_Land_Tenure_Mozambique_Pro le.pdf  
Midgley, S. et al. (2012). Adaptation to Climate Change in Semi-Arid Environments. Experience and 
Lessons From Mozambique. FAO [ONLINE] Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i2581e.pdf  
Midgley, S.; Dejene, A.; Mattick, A. (2012): Adaptation to Climate Change in Semi-Arid Environments: 
Experience and Lessons from Mozambique. FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/015/i2581e/i2581e00.pdf 
Mucavele, S. (2010): Gender and Climate Change in Mozambique. 
Ministério da Agricultura e Segurança Alimentar (MASA), (2015). Anuário de Estatísticas Agrárias 
2012-2014. [ONLINE] Available at: http://fsg.afre.msu. 
edu/Mozambique/survey/Anuario_Estatistico_2012_2014_Final.pdf  
Ministry for Coordination of Environmental Affairs (2012). National Climate Change Adaptation and 
Mitigation Strategy. [ONLINE] Available at: http:// 
www.cgcmc.gov.mz/attachments/article/148/National%20Climate%20Chan- 
ge%20Strategy_lowerres.pdf  
Ministry for the Coordination of Environmental Affairs (2014). Fifth National Report on the 
Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity in Mozambique. [ONLINE] Available at: 
https://www.cbd.int/doc/world/mz/mz-nr- 05-en.pdf  
Ministry of Agriculture (2010). Strategic Plan for Agricultural Development PEDSA 2010‐2019. 
[ONLINE] Available at: http://fsg.afre.msu.edu/mozambi- que/caadp/pedsa_ nal-english_22_nov.pdf  
Ministry of Agriculture (2012). Resultados Do Inquérito Agrário Integrado (IAI) 2012 – Fase II. 
[ONLINE] Available at: http://www.masa.gov.mz/images/ stories/pdf_ 
les/Julho_2015/resultados_do_inquerito_2012.pdf  
Netherlands Commission for Environmental Assessment (2015). [ONLINE] Available at:  
https://ees.kuleuven.be/klimos/toolkit/documents/689_CC_moz.pdf  
Netherlands Commission for Environmental Assessment (2015). Climate Change Pro le Mozambique. 
[ONLINE] Available at: https://ees.kuleuven.be/ klimos/toolkit/documents/689_CC_moz.pdf  
Netherlands Commission for environmental assessments (2017). [ONLINE] Available at:  
http://www.eia.nl/en/countries/af/mozambique/eia 
Silici, L. et al. (2015) Sustainable Agriculture for Small-Scale Farmers in Mozambique: A Scoping 
Report. [ONLINE] Available at: http://pubs.iied.org/ pdfs/14654IIED.pdf  
USAID (2013). Mozambique Environmental Threats and Opportunities Assessment. [ONLINE] 
Available at: http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pnaea332.pdf  
Wenner, M., Wright, N., & Lal, A. (2004). Environmental protection and microenterprise development 
in the developing world. A model based on Latin American experience. Journal of Micro- finance, 6(1), 
95–122. 
Wingqvist, G.Ö. (2011). Environment and Climate Change Policy Brief – Mozambique Generic 
Outline. [ONLINE] Available at: http://sidaenvi- ronmenthelpdesk.se/wordpress3/wp-
content/uploads/2013/04/Mozambi- que-Env-and-CC-Policy-Brief_20111.pdf  
World Bank (2010). Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change Mozambique. [ONLINE] Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/ 
en/978481468178764388/pdf/702640v10ESW0P0IC000EACC0Mozambi- que.pdf  
World Bank (2016). Development Indicators and Country Pro le: Mozambique. [ONLINE RESOURCE] 
Available at: http://data.worldbank.org/country/ mozambique (accessed October 2016)  
210 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 14:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Appendix 14: 
Contents of the Project Life File 
To be updated after QE. 
211 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 15: 
Financial Management Assessment Questionnaire (FMAQ) 
Project: Mozambique – REFP (Rural Enterprise Finance 
Project) 
Date : 07/09/2017 
Implementing Entity:  Banco Nacional de Investimento, 
S.A./National Bank for Development and Investment  (BNI) as 
delegated by the Ministry of Finance and Economy 
Assessment  completed by: Richard Batamanye 
Date : 07/09/2017 
Review completed by:  
Date :  
Overview 
1.  Banco Nacional de Investimento, S.A. was incorporated on June 14, 2010. The Bank is 
100% owned by the Mozambican State through Instituto de Gesttão das Participações do 
Estado (IGEPE), with a share capital of MT 2,240 million as at 31 December 2016;  
2.  Under  the  statute,  BNI  is  mandated  to  operate  as  a  financial  institution  focusing  on 
development financing and investments; 
3.  Under the development financing mandate, BNI finances projects in manufacturing, value 
chains, agriculture, and SMEs; 
4.  The  investment  mandate  is  covered  under  advisory  and  research  (strategy,  MBO, 
acquisitions,  fundraising  and  fund  management);  capital  markets;  and  intermediation 
between buyers and sellers of financial instruments; 
5.  BNI  is  governed  by  a  Board  of  Directors  composed  of  the  President,  2  Executive 
Directors  and  2  Non-Executive  Directors.  There  are  also  committees  responsible  for 
various  functions  –  key  among  others  being  Internal  Audit,  Risk  and  Compliance 
Committee and a Remuneration Committee. 
In  addition  to  the  independent  Audit  Department,  there  are  business  and  support 
departments  including  the  following:  (a)  Credit  and  Market;  (b)  Advisory  and  Financial 
Strategy;    (c  )  Information  Systems;  (d)  Human  Resources  Management;    (e)  Financial 
Reporting; and the Back Office; 
6. 
7.  BNI  does  not  have  experience  with  managing  IFAD  financed  projects  but  has  some 
experience with other donor/development partner financing like the Islamic Development 
Bank and the Dutch financed Zambezia Valley project (Agro business and Entrepreneur 
financing); 
8.  BNI accounting is done under banking software for entire operations guided by a financial 
and  procedures  manual  except  for  the  Zambezia  Valley  Project,  where  a  stand-alone 
accounting software is implemented and a separate financial manual was developed; 
9.  Audit of BNI is done by a private audit firms. The current auditor of BNI is Deloitte and the 
previous one has been PwC. 
10.  The  Zambezia  Valley  Project  is  audited  by  a  private  auditor  appointed  by  BNI.  It  is 
proposed that RFEP will be audited by a private audit firm acceptable to IFAD and GoM. 
212 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 14:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Risk Assessment and Mitigation Measures 
Risk 
Inherent Risk 
Ris
k 
H 
Residu
al  FM 
Risk 
H 
Risk  Mitigating  Measures 
incorporated 
into  Project 
Design 
  TI  perception 
index 
for 
2016  shows  Mozambique 
scored 27 (down from 31 in 
2015) on the 1 – 100 scale 
with  a  rank  of  142  out  of 
176  Countries  assessed. 
ranking 
This 
puts 
the  high 
in 
Mozambique 
risk category. 
to 
  The last PEFA assessment 
in 
of  Mozambique  was 
the 
2015.  Compared 
previous  one  carried  out  in 
2010,  71%  Mozambique’s 
indicators  either  improved 
or remained the same. Key 
among  areas  of  deficiency 
is  procurement  practices 
continue 
which 
lag 
behind 
international  best 
practices 
to 
been 
  The  Country  has  suffered 
liquidity problems and there 
has 
high 
depreciation  of  the  MZN. 
This  will  limit  GoM’s  ability 
to 
counterpart 
contribution to the project. 
make 
very 
Control Risk 
Organisation & Staffing 
  BNI, the proposed LIA is a share company, 
an  Investment  and  Development  Bank 
100%  owned  by 
the  Government  of 
It  has  a  management 
Mozambique. 
structure,  Operations  departments,  and 
support 
include 
departments  which 
financial  management  and  reporting,  IT 
and  Human  Resources.  BNI  has  separate 
internal  audit  department  and  a  separate 
compliance and risk department. 
  The  current  set  up  of  the  BNI  is  such  that 
the project management is responsibility of 
separately  set  up  PMUs.  Staff  from  the 
LPA  are  assigned 
to  oversee/monitor 
specific  aspects  of  the  project  but  are  not 
part of day to day management; 
  PMU  staff  are  competitively  hired  on  fixed 
term contracts.  
  The existing cadre of staff does not provide 
assurance  of  availability  of  a  well-qualified 
and experienced staff to be fully dedicated 
to the project. 
  Some  BNI  staff  that  may  be  assigned  to 
  Stand-alone  PMU  will  be 
established  with  BNI  as  a 
supervising entity. Three Sub 
Project 
Units/Provincial 
Management  Units  (PPMUs) 
will  be  set  up  to  facilitate 
access  of  the  implementing 
partners  and  beneficiaries  to 
Project  Management  and  to 
ease  monitoring  of  activities. 
The  Project  Coordinator, 
Finance  Manager,  M&E 
Finance 
Rural 
Officer, 
Specialist,  among  others  will 
be recruited. 
The 
  Staff  will  be  competitively 
hired with BNI/MEF providing 
oversight. 
Project 
Coordinator  will  report  to  the 
CEO of BNI or his designate. 
  The  Umbrella  Fund  will  be 
separate 
the  PMU, 
from 
hosted  at  the  Advisory  and 
Research  Division  of  BNI. 
H 
H 
213 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Risk 
oversee operations of REFP may not have 
experience with IFAD procedures 
Ris
k 
Risk  Mitigating  Measures 
incorporated 
into  Project 
Design 
The  fund  will  be  responsible 
to the PMU. 
Residu
al  FM 
Risk 
  BNI  current  staff  at 
the 
Advisory 
and  Research 
Division  will  be  responsible 
the  Umbrella  Fund. 
for 
During 
implementation 
however,  should  staff  needs 
the 
arise, 
responsibility of BNI to recruit 
the  required  staff  with  the 
recruitment  costs,  salaries 
and  related  costs  charged 
within the management fee 
this  will  be 
staff  will 
be 
  Recruited 
exposed 
IFAD  specific 
procures  at  start  up  and 
during implementation 
in 
  PMU  to  be  separated  from 
Umbrella 
facilitate 
fund 
professional  management  of 
the funds 
to 
  BNI  budget  calendar  will  be 
followed.  This  will  require 
proactive  follow  up  by  the 
the 
Project  Coordinator  of 
agreed budget calendar.  
  As  a  decision  has  been 
made 
that  BNI  will  use 
TOMPRO  for  accounting  for 
REFP,  budget  input  into  the 
accounting software will be a 
requirement  as 
this  will 
facilitate review of trends and 
budget control. 
an 
and 
that 
  Budgeting should involve the 
Project 
team, 
finance 
technical  staff,  procurement 
officer 
officer 
responsible  for  M  &  E.  This 
should  ensure 
the 
expenditures  categories  are 
well aligned and the logframe 
is  considered  at  budgeting 
also 
time. 
It 
the 
realistically 
procurement 
as 
procurement  action  timelines 
will be clearly attended 
should 
inform 
plan 
  Implementing 
partners 
should  be  included  in  the 
budgeting process 
M 
Budgeting 
  BNI 
budget 
preparation 
by 
establishing 
the  macroeconomic  and 
banking  as  well  as  sectoral  assumption 
which  are  likely  to  impact  the  bank's 
performance.  
starts 
  The 
  The  preparation  involves  all  the  Bank's 
Sectors  by  providing  the  inputs  needed 
such  as  the  projected  activities  taking  into 
account the Medium Term Strategy.  
coordination  and  mandate 
is  made 
for 
elaborating 
the 
Department  of  Planning  and  Reporting 
whose  role 
to  collect,  collate  and 
analyse  budget  inputs  from  other  sectors 
and then carryout financial modeling. 
the  Budget 
is 
leading 
  For  Zambezia  Valley  Project,  budgets  are 
done  under  a  separate  arrangement,  with 
the  PMU 
the  preparation  and 
consolidation.  BNI  only  offers  oversight 
the  Credit 
and 
Committee  that  is  the  governing  body  of 
the project.  
approval 
through 
  Risks  in  this  area  have  been  identified  as 
failure  to  meet  budget  deadlines  for  the 
non- 
submission 
availability of clear planning schedules and 
lack  of  clarity  of  REFP  requirements  at 
both the higher and lower levels. 
the  AWPB’s, 
of 
  The bank is required by its shareholders to 
report  the  Budget  execution  monthly  and 
semi-annually. 
M 
214 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 14:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Risk 
Ris
k 
Risk  Mitigating  Measures 
incorporated 
into  Project 
Design 
Residu
al  FM 
Risk 
Funds flows and disbursement 
  The  foreign  currency  bank  accounts  are 
held  in  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon  (New 
York),  Bank  of  New  York  Mellon 
(Frankfurt),  Caixa  Geral  de  Deposito 
(Lisbon), 
Bank 
First 
(Johanesburg). 
Rand 
and 
  The local currency bank accounts are held 
at Banco de Moçambique (Central Bank of 
Mozambique)  and  Banco  Comercial  e  de 
Investimento, S.A. 
  The  accounts  are  managed  by 
the 
Operations  Director  under  the  supervision 
of the Chief Finance Officer. 
  The  decision  to  open  and  the  location  of 
the  Banks 
rests  with 
bank  accounts 
Executive Committee. 
  Projects  may  have 
individual  bank 
accounts  depending  on  the  requirements 
of the funding partner. 
  The  key  risk  is  that  there  are  diverse 
partners  with  a  number  of  funds  and 
different 
project 
implementation  where  funds  may  not  be 
properly  used  for  the  purposes  for  which 
they are meant. 
locations 
for 
M 
215 
in 
  BNI,  with  the  authority  of 
MEF  will  open  a  designated 
account 
the 
in  USD 
Central  Bank 
(Bank  of 
Mozambique)  designated  in 
USD.  An  operating  account 
designated  MZN  will  be 
opened in a commercial bank 
acceptable  to  both  GoM  and 
IFAD.  
  The  Umbrella  Fund  will  have 
a  separate  account  opened 
specifically 
to  hold  and 
manage  the  fund  financial 
resources 
  MEF  will  communicate  the 
authorised  signatories  of  all 
bank accounts to IFAD. 
of 
basis 
  Funds  to  PPMUs  will  be  on 
planned 
the 
activities/activity 
based 
advances.  PPMUs  will  have 
Sub-Operating  accounts  for 
this  purpose.    Subsequent 
transfers  will 
after 
justification 
previous 
advances 
be 
of 
M 
  FARE 
has 
been 
pre-
identified as an implementing 
partner 
design. 
at 
Accordingly,  for  its  related 
activities,  a  specific  bank 
account  will  be  opened, 
for 
managed  by  FARE 
purposes 
proper 
monitoring  and  reporting  on 
project funds. 
of 
   Funds flow to other partners 
in 
the 
will  be  specified 
service 
individual 
agreements  or  MOUs  as 
shall  be  defined  at  time  of 
their procurement 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Risk 
Ris
k 
that  are 
Internal Controls 
  BNI  has  internal  controls  policies  and 
procedures 
in  place.  These 
procedures  and  policies  include  the  risk 
recognition, assessment  and management 
through  among  others,  assets  insurance, 
colateral  for  credit  risk,  activities  control 
and segregation of duties by implementing 
that  assures 
a  governance  structure 
independence 
directors, 
implementation  of  an  information  system 
that  guarantees  that  only  authorized  staff 
has access to specific information; 
the 
of 
   BNI  also  has  an  external  independent 
H 
auditor. 
  There  is  an  Independent  Internal  Audit 
Department 
the 
Internal  Audit,  Risk  and  Compliance 
Committee. 
reporting  directly 
to 
  These  are  all  documented  in  the  policies 
and procedures under use by the bank. 
  The  key  risk  here  is  the  complexity  of  the 
products  under  the  projects  particularly 
under  the  Umbrella  Fund  where  each 
product require own controls. 
& 
Policies 
Systems, 
Accounting 
Procedures 
  BNI  as  a  business  concern  and  bank  has 
implemented  an  accounting  software  that 
its 
has  been  developed 
accounting  needs.  This  system  is  not 
suitable for project accounting as the chart 
of  accounts  may  be  inadequate  to  reflect 
the project Components, sub-components, 
and expenditure categories up to individual 
activity level.  
in-house 
for 
  Use of the software would require separate 
use  of  MS  Excel  for  data  manipulation  to 
report  by  category  and  component  by 
financier  is  time  consuming  and  prone  to 
errors. 
  BNI  current  financial  management  manual 
is  based  on  the  core  business  operations 
and the in-house accounting system, this is 
not suitable for REFP. 
M 
Reporting & monitoring 
  Being  a  regulated  financial  institution,  BNI 
reporting  is  guided  by  industrial  and  legal 
requirements. 
  The  monthly 
report  contains 
financial 
216 
Residu
al  FM 
Risk 
M 
M 
Risk  Mitigating  Measures 
incorporated 
into  Project 
Design 
  BNI  will  enforce  opening  of 
the  specific  bank  accounts 
required  and  ensure  there  is 
regular bank reconciliations. 
  BNI  will  ensure  that  there  is 
proper  segregation  of  duties, 
which  should  be  enhanced 
through  clearly  defining  the 
the 
role  of  NPMU  and 
Umbrella Fund management. 
  Ensure  that  an  off  the  shelf 
software 
– 
accounting 
implemented. 
TOMPRO 
Implementation of the budget 
module  of  TOMPRO  will 
ensure  budget  control  while 
the other key control aspects 
will  be  provided  for  in  the 
PIM 
is 
transfer 
the  cost  of 
  Segregation  of  duties  at 
project  level  will  be  ensured 
through  job  descriptions  of 
project 
specific 
assigned/recruited  staff  who 
will be supervised within BNI 
  An  off  the  shelf  accounting 
software will be implemented 
by  REFP.  For  purposes  of 
knowledge 
and 
reduced  shared  costs  such 
training, 
as 
TOMPRO  which  is  currently 
being  used  by  other  projects 
has been recommended.  
  The software will be properly 
coded  to  address  the  needs 
of  the  project  and  should  be 
capable  of  capturing  and 
in 
reporting  by  category 
addition 
to  sub-component 
and  financier.  This  will  be 
used  for  REFP  and  will  be 
continue 
to 
expected 
throughout 
project 
implementation. 
  Specific  guidelines  will  be 
the  REFP 
in 
included 
manual. 
  The  reporting  arrangements 
under  BNI  are  regular  and 
would  be  adequate  under 
REFP. There need to ensure 
that this is fitted in the project 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 14:  Contents of the Project Life File 
Risk 
the  month.  The  report 
information  of 
compares 
the  current  year's  month 
performance  with  its  homologous  period 
performance.  This  report  is  approved  by 
Board Members. 
  The  semiannual  report  includes  financial 
information  regarding  the  current  year's 
semester  compared  to  the  budget  and  its 
previous  year's  homologous  period.  This 
report  is  published  in  the  media  and  is 
submitted 
for 
consideration.  This  report  is  approved  by 
Board of Directors. 
the  Central  Bank 
to 
  The annual report is audited and approved 
by  General  Assembly  and  is  published  in 
the  media.  This  report  must  be  submitted 
to  the  Central  Bank  and  to  the  Ministry  of 
economy and Finance for approval. 
  The key risk under the project is obtaining 
and consolidating all information in a timely 
and  required  format.  There  is  also  a  risk 
reporting  could  adversely  affect 
that 
withdrawal applications. 
   
Internal audit 
  Internal  Audit  Department  of  BNI 
is 
responsible  for  provision  of  internal  audit 
services.  
  It  is  an  independent  Department  reporting 
the  Audit,  Risk  and  Compliance 
to 
Committee of the Board. 
  It operates on the basis of audit plans that 
are  approved  by  the  Audit,  Risk  and 
Compliance Committee of the Board. 
  It 
is  currently  adequately  staffed  and 
management  of  BNI  have  indicated  that 
the  department  will  have  responsibility  to 
provide internal audit services to REFP.  
Statutory Audit 
  The statutory audit of BNI  is conducted by 
private  audit  firms  with  the  current  one 
being Deloitte; 
  The audit for the FYE 31 December, 2016 
was  concluded  17  March,  2017,  two  and 
half  months  following  the  end  of  the  fiscal 
year; 
  The 
  Audit  quality  may  be  compromised  as  a 
consequence  of  failure  to  follow  audit 
guidelines and TOR. 
financial 
only 
submitted  for  the  external  Stakeholders 
such  as  the  Central  Bank,  Ministry  of 
Finance  and  the  Shareholders  after  being 
audited  and  approved  by  the  General 
statements 
are 
Ris
k 
Risk  Mitigating  Measures 
incorporated 
into  Project 
Design 
Residu
al  FM 
Risk 
environment. 
  Draft  financial  statements  for 
audit  will  be  availed  to  the 
auditor  not  later  than  three 
months  following  end  of  the 
fiscal  year  to  facilitate  early 
start of the audit;  
  Quarterly reporting should be 
should 
encouraged.  This 
ease  access  to  reports  and 
form  part  of  a  more 
will 
interim 
comprehensive 
as 
financial 
reports  will  be 
quarterly 
updated 
to  produce  semi-
annual reports 
reporting 
  BNI  will  also  have  to  ensure 
levels  of 
that  appropriate 
reporting  are  established  to 
manage  possible 
conflict 
relating 
Junior/Senior 
traditional set of reporting set 
up in the bank 
to 
it 
  Need  to  make  internal  audit 
arrangements  for  REFP,  to 
have 
the 
included 
internal  audit  plan  at  least 
once in a year for NPMU but 
with  regular  coverage  of  the 
Umbrella Fund. 
in 
  It  will  be  a  requirement  that 
internal  audit  reports  or  at 
least  their  recommendations 
and  an  action  plan 
for 
implementation  of  the  same 
are shared with IFAD. 
  REFP  external  audits  will  be 
carried  out  by  private  audit 
firms; 
statements 
  BNI  will  ensure  that  the  draft 
are 
financial 
approved  by  the  end  March 
and  availed  to  the  auditor 
well  in  time  to  facilitate  early 
completion of the audit; and 
  Terms of Reference for audit 
to  clearly  specify  IFAD  audit 
requirements,  including  the 
timing for submission of audit 
reports. 
M 
M 
M 
M 
217 
Republic of Mozambique 
Rural Enterprise Financing Project (REFP) 
Detailed design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Risk 
Assembly at most until March, 31. 
Ris
k 
Risk  Mitigating  Measures 
incorporated 
into  Project 
Design 
Residu
al  FM 
Risk 
Overall FM Risk 
H 
M 
i Women (heads of households, wives and young women) will account for at least 50% of the target. The youth will also account 
for at least 20% of the target. 
ii An individual is likely to be trained in more than one topic 
iiiiii Average size of ASCA is 10 members 
218 
