Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ADNAP
National Fisheries Administration
AfDB
ANE
ARA
African Development Bank
National Roads Administration
Regional Water Administrations
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
BNI
BMP
National Investment Bank
Best Management Practices
CEPAQ
Aquaculture Research Centre in Chókwè
CIF
Crowding In Fund
CLGRC
Local Committees for Risk Management
COMFAM
National Committee for Food Fortification in Mozambique
CONDES
National Council on Sustainable Development
CONSAN
National Council for Food and Nutrition Security
CP
CPMT
CQS
CUT
DIPOL
DNA
DNEA
Crude Protein
Country Programme Management Team
Selection Based on the Consultants’ Qualifications
Single Treasury Accounts
Directorate of Maritime and Fisheries Policies
National Water Directorate
National Directorate for Agriculture Extension
DNGRH
National Directorate for the Management of Water Resources
DNSA
DPMAIP
DPOPH
DUAT
EAA
ECA
EDM
ENSO
EP
National Directorate of Agrarian Services
Provincial Directorates of Sea, Inland Waters and Fisheries
Provincial Directorates of Public Works and Housing
Land Use and Benefits Rights
Ecosystem Approach to Aquaculture
Agriculture Trade Company
Electricity of Mozambique
El Niño Southern Oscillation
Fisheries School
e-SISTAFE
State Financial Management Information System
ESAN II
National Strategy for Food Security and Nutrition Policy
ESIA
ESMF
ESMP
FAO
FFP
FNG
GAIN
GALS
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management Framework
Environment and Social Management Plan
Food and Agriculture Organisation
Fund for the Promotion of Fisheries
Fill the Nutrient Gap
Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition
Gender Action Learning System
GDP
GIS
GNI
GoM
HDI
HH
Gross Domestic Product
Geographic Information System
Gross National Income
Government of Mozambique
Human Development Index
Household
HIV/AIDS
Human Immunodeficiency Virus / Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
ICB
IDEPA
IDPPE
IFC
IIP
IIAM
INAM
International Competitive Bidding
National Institute for the Development of Fisheries and Aquaculture
Institute for the Development of Small-Scale Fisheries
International Finance Corporation
Institute for Fisheries Research
Mozambique Agriculture Research Institute
National Meteorological Institute
INAQUA
National Aquaculture Institute
INGC
INIP
INIR
National Institute for Disaster Management
National Institute of Fish Inspection
National Institute of Irrigation
INTOSAI
International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions
IPSAS
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
ITC
ITCZ
LAP
LCS
LoC
M&E
Iniciativa de Terras Comunitarias (Mozambican organization)
Intertropical Convergence Zone
Local Adaptation Plan
Least-Cost Selection
Line of Credit
Monitoring and Evaluation
MASA
Ministries of Agriculture and Food Security
MCA
MCS
MDG
MEF
Marine Conservation Area
Monitoring, Control and Surveillance
Millennium Development Goal
Ministry of Economy and Finance
MIMAIP
Ministry of Sea, Inland Waters and Fisheries
MIREME
Ministry of Mineral Resources and Energy
MISAU
MIT
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Industry and Trade
MITADER
Ministry for Land, Environment and Rural Development
MOPH
Ministry of Housing and Public Works
MoF
MoU
MTR
NCB
Ministry of Finance
Memorandum of Understanding
Mid-Term Review
National Competitive Bidding
NCCAMS
National Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation Strategy
NPSC
NRM
PADA
National Project Steering Committee
Natural Resource Management
Aquaculture Development Action Plan
PAMRDC
Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Malnutrition in Mozambique
PARPA
PCRs
PCU
PDO
PDP
PDT
PEFA
PES
POPA
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Community Level Savings and Credit Groups
Project Coordination Unit
Project Development Objective
Fisheries Masterplan
Project Delivery Team
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Economic and Social Plan
Operating Plan for Food Production
PPABAS
Sofala Bank Artisanal Fishing Project
PPACDNN
Cabo Delgado and Northern Nampula Artisanal Fishing
PPAGI
PPAN
PPD
PPP
Inhambane and Gaza Coastal Fishing Development Project
Nampula Artisanal Fisheries Project
Public Procurement Decree
Public Private Partnership
PROCAVA
Inclusive Agri-Food Value-Chain Development Programme
PROPESCA
Artisanal Fisheries Promotion Project
QCBS
RBA
REFP
RfQ
SBCC
SDAE
SDGs
Quality and Cost Based Selections
Rome-Based Agency
Rural Enterprise Finance Project
Request for Quotations
Social Behaviour Change Communication
District Services for Economic Activities
Sustainable Development Goals
SDMAs
District Services for Women and Social Action
SEA
Strategic Environmental Assessment
SECAP
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
SETSAN
Technical Secretariat for Food Security and Nutrition
SIC
Selection of Individual Consultants
SISTAFE
State Financial Management System
SSS
SUN
TBD
TBM
TC
TFC
TVC
Single Source Selection
Scaling Up Nutrition
To Be Determined
Temporary Bench Mark
Total Costs
Total Fixed Costs
Total Variable Costs
UFSA
UNDAF
USD
WFP
Public Procurement Authority
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
United States Dollar
World Food Programme
Executive Summary
1/28
Country Context. Mozambique enjoyed stable economic growth for over two decades in the range of 7-8% per year. In
2015, the main contributors to the economy were services (53.2%), agriculture (25.2%) and industry (21.5%). Since 2015,
economic performance has been significantly affected by a debt burden of USD 9.89 billion, which the Government of
Mozambique (GoM) is striving to reschedule. The on-going decentralization process is expected to bring new governance
modalities to government administration, which is favourable to community participation in decision making. The recent
wave of terrorist attacks in the northern Province of Cabo Delgado raised some concern for the country´s security.
Increased extreme climatic events, marked by cyclones Idai and Kenneth in a span of a few weeks in March/April 2019,
are evidence of the country's climatic vulnerability.
Poverty. In 2014, 46.1% of the population lived under the poverty line. Poverty is highest in the northern region (55.1%)
and more prevalent in rural areas (50.1%) where 70% of the population lives. Small-scale agriculture and fisheries play a
leading role in the household economy. Poor access to inputs, technical assistance, financial services and markets
together with adverse weather conditions limit production, productivity and profitability of agriculture and fisheries. In 2013,
24% of households were food insecure and stunting affected 43% of children under five.
Strategic and Policy Context. Mozambique´s National Development Strategy for 2015-35 outlines the vision for the
country´s development. Under the, National Five-Year Plan 2015-19, aquaculture is regarded as a promising alternative
for food production and poverty alleviation. Small-scale aquaculture constitutes a major element in Mozambique´s
Fisheries Master Plan 2010-19. The Aquaculture Development Strategy 2008-17 is currently under review, as part of the
the implementation of the five-year Aquaculture Development Action Plan (PADA), which initiated in 2019. PADA revolves
is focused on three pillars: (i) increased aquaculture production, productivity and competitiveness; (ii) improved access to
markets and financial services; and (iii) institutional development. Through PADA, it is expected that national aquaculture
production increases from the 1,835 tons produced in 2017 to 30,000 tons in 2023. PRODAPE is expected to contribute
significantly in this ambitious transformation of the aquaculture sector.
Investment Opportunity. IFAD has partnered with the GoM for the development of the fisheries and aquaculture over the
past two decades. Aquaculture pilot activities have been implemented under PROPESCA and PROAQUA. However, the
aquaculture value chain is still nascent and thus requires significant, but strategic support, to meet supply and demand-
side requirements for optimal functionality, as well as profitable and sustained stakeholder engagement. This represents
an opportunity for continued IFAD investment.
Project Rationale. A number of bottlenecks continue to impact on the growth of the aquaculture value chain in
Mozambique, including poor access to inputs, technical assistance, financial services and markets, together with adverse
weather conditions. PRODAPE's proposed design aims to address these challenges to enable the engagement of
commercial and smallholder producers, entrepreneurs and businesses to prove that freshwater aquaculture can be viable
and sustainable. PRODAPE design has benefitted from the lessons and experiences of PROPESCA and PROAQUA and
aquaculture projects in other countries, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa. The project will support comprehensive value
chain development, promoting aquaculture production as a business, as well as the development of the aquaculture policy
framework. The development of the aquaculture industry is expected to provide consumers with a cheaper, locally-farmed
protein source and improve the local economy. A well-organised and regulated industry will improve disease control and
environmental risk management. The project is expected to prove the viability of smallholder involvement in aquaculture
production through two production models, clusters and aquaparks, with the use of earthen ponds and cages. It is
important to note that PRODAPE is a five year investment within a long-term (15-year) IFAD and GoM partnership in
aquaculture in Mozambique. This is in line with recommendations of the Independent Office of Evaluation of 2016 that
future IFAD investments in Mozambique should take a longer term perspective.
Project Goal and Development Objective. The Project Goal is to contribute to poverty reduction and enhancement of
food security and nutrition among rural households in the project area. The specific Project Development Objective (PDO)
is to increase production, consumption, sales and income levels of rural households and other actors involved in the
aquaculture value chain in the target area.
Project Area. PRODAPE will target 23 districts in seven provinces of the country, namely:
Niassa Province: Lago, Lichinga and Mecanhelas Districts.
Cabo Delgado Province: Metuge, Mueda and Balama Districts.
Nampula Province: Mossuril, Ribáue and Larde Districts.
Zambézia Province: Milange, Nicoadala and Mocubela Districts.
Tete Province: Cahora Bassa, Magoé and Marávia Districts.
Manica Province: Sussundenga, Vanduzi, Gondola and Mossurize Districts.
Sofala Province: Beira, Dondo, Gorongosa and Buzi Districts.
Activities will be implemented only in locations with adequate conditions for aquaculture in each target district. The project
will be implemented through a sequenced approach, starting with Lago, Baloma, Ribaue, Milange, Cahora Bassa,
Sussundenga and Beira. Interventions in six of the seven initial districts (all except Beira, will include a fish production
component). Expansion into other districts listed herein will occur once the aquaculture value chain in these districts is
operational. Lessons drawn in these districts will inform expansion on the basis of local demand.
2/28
Once the results of the final assessments of the damage caused by cyclones Idai and Kenneth to aquaculture
infrastructure are available, target areas of intervention could be adjusted.
Target Groups. The project aims to reach 88,900 people (17,800 households), of which 87,500 (17,500 households) are
producers at the various levels of the aquaculture value chain. PRODAPE will employ a comprehensive and inclusive
targeting approach reaching communities and sector institutions. Community level beneficiaries include:
smallholder aquaculture farmers. Comprised of poor/subsistence smallholders and economically
active/entrepreneurial smallholders requiring support to engage in the aquaculture value chain. These
beneficiaries will be expected to be members of Community Level Savings and Credit Groups (PCRs) and will
receive technical assistance, and access to aquaculture feed, fingerlings and access to specific financial products
for the aquaculture value chain. The poor/subsistence farmers will receive an aquaculture pond, and if they are not
labour constrained, they will participate in the construction of the pond. PRODAPE will reach a total of 7,000
people to engage in smallholder aquaculture production over the course of five years, through earthen ponds
(60%) and cage culture (40%). Other beneficiaries will also include rural HHs already engaged in aquaculture
production as they will benefit from improvements at other levels of the aquaculture value chain generated by the
project. It is expected that at least 40% of smallholders owning/managing aquaculture ponds in the target areas
will progressively expand from 1 to 2-3 ponds over the project lifetime.
Rural aquaculture entrepreneurs. Comprised of individuals wishing to engage in levels of the aquaculture value
chain other than production but require external support to do so. Fifty per cent (50%) of financial products
targeting the value chain will be attributed to women. Specific opportunities and products will also be developed to
meet the interests and capacities of youth of different ages. This beneficiary group will also include existing private
sector entrepreneurs.
Youth. A portion of youth in rural communities , fish producers or entrepreneurs will benefit from participating in a
youth champion led intervention widely used by the International Labour Organization (ILO, Start Your Own
Business). PRODAPE will also target new graduates with aquaculture degrees to engage in the value chain as
extensionists, and will strive to attain a gender balance in the selection of candidates. In addition to being offered
the support packages offered to any beneficiary, they will benefit from coaching and mentoring activities from
specialized institutions to undertake innovative businesses such as aquaponics and provision of services to
farmers. Efforts will be made to attain a gender balance.
Broader communities and individuals working in markets targeted by PRODAPE. The following activities are
expected to reach and benefit the wider communities and markets targeted by the project: (i) The promotion of
PCRs; (ii) Nutritional activities; and (iii) Water and sanitation improvements in markets and training of traders in
fish handling techniques and business development.
Institutional level beneficiaries. Staff of all institutions involved in the project will benefit from capacity building
interventions including exposure visits to locations of successful aquaculture activities. Extensionists will be provided with
opportunities to engage in aquaculture activity. A total of 250 extensionists will receive PRODAPE support. The measure
is intended to enable these players to participate in commercial activity within the aquaculture value chain. The approach
replicates similar positive experiences used in the agriculture sector in the country
Targeting Strategy. The project developed a comprehensive approach to ensure that those who effectively need project
support to engage at different levels of the value chain and can thereafter sustain their engagement in the activity, are in
fact targeted. The project will implement a transformative and comprehensive social inclusion strategy to ensure that HHs
of different socio-economic groups, women, gender dynamics, youth and other vulnerable groups are provided with
opportunities to participate. The main elements of the strategy include i) establishing quotas for poorer community
members who would likely otherwise not be reached, ii) identification and provision of specific support packages that cater
to the needs of each social group at different levels of the aquaculture value chain, iii) ensuring local participation in
relevant decision making proceses during planning and implementation, and iv) integration of a Social Mentoring
intervention to address pressing social risks and barriers constraining sustainable engagement of youth and women and
enjoyment of benefits to be generated by the project. Enabling and empowering measures outlined in IFAD guidelines
have been integrated in project design.
Project Outcomes, Components and Sub-components. The logical framework presents the hierarchy of objectives and
results of this five-year project, summarised as follows:
Outcomes. The following are expected to be the main outcomes from PRODAPE:
Production and productivity of smallholder farmers in aquaculture are sustainably increased
Efficiency of aquaculture production and market systems is improved
Policy and institutional frameworks for sustainable aquaculture development and nutrition are improved
Components. The PDO will be achieved through two interlinked investment components and a third component dedicated
to project management together with institutional and policy development. Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) will be
promoted, as required, to propel the development of different aspects across the aquaculture value chain. A “Component
0” has been integrated to address the vulnerability of the country to climatic hazards; the component does not include any
budgetary allocations at design.
3/28
Component 0: Disaster risk reduction and response. The component will aim to reduce project and beneficiary
vulnerability to future climatic hazards. The Component recognises that different PRODAPE target areas are – as is much
of the country – prone to the advent of cyclones, floods and droughts. Also, temperatures are expected to continue rising.
The component constitutes a programmatic window for the integration of preventive and response measures, yet to be
defined and corresponding allocation of additional dedicated funding. Component Zero aims to reduce project and
beneficiary vulnerability to future climatic hazards; it constitutes a programmatic window for the integration of preventive
and response measures and corresponding allocation of additional dedicated funding (to facilitate easier and quick
implementation of level 2 restructuring of the project in the event of an emergency or disaster and in line with the IFAD's
2018 Policy on Project Restructuring and in line with IFAD's 2011 Guidelines for Early Disaster Recovery).
Component 1: Small-scale aquaculture productivity. Aims to sustainably increase small-scale aquaculture production and
productivity using climate smart technologies, best practices and environmentally sustainable forms of production.
Particular attention will be given to water needs and quality, as well as to the suitability of different agro-ecological zones
for different aquaculture technologies. The component is served by four sub-components:
Subcomponent 1.1: Agribusiness for input supply. This sub-component will focus on the development of aquaculture seed
(fingerling) and feed supply systems using matching grants to incentivise private sector and small scale participation. On
seed supply, the project will upgrade and establish hatcheries by targeting medium-level private enterprises. On fish feed
production, the project will facilitate the participation of private sector (industrial production lines) and small scale farmers
(cottage industries) in the formulation of feed, based on demand from smallholders.
Sub-component 1.2: Develop smallholder aquaculture production capacity. Aims to improve smallholder production and
productivity using climate smart aquaculture technologies and practices: earthen ponds, ponds integrated with livestock
and crops, and cage culture in large inland water bodies. Small-scale producers will be organized in clusters or integrated
into aquaparks. Comprehensive support will be provided to smallholder beneficiaries meeting pre-established criteria in
line with their needs.
Component 2: Development of aquaculture as a business. Aims to nurture the entrepreneurial capacity of farmers and
promote a conducive environment for the development of aquaculture as a business. The component is served by two
sub-components:
Sub-component 2.1: Support to the development of aquaparks: Aims to support the Government's new Aquaculture
Development Strategy focused on the 'consolidation and centralization' of service provision for aquaculture development
through aquaparks. The main investments will be towards the development of key infrastructure e.g. "last mile" feeder
roads, small water canals, electricity supply (off-grid or connection to the main grid, whichever is cost-effective) and cold
chain facilities. Linkages will be established with the Brazilian Aquaculture Parks system to learn from their long
experience with establishment and management of environmentally sustainable aquaculture parks.
Sub-component 2.2: Develop market linkages and business partnerships. Sub-component will be informed by a market
study to assess current and future demand. Investments will promote the development of market linkages through
improved handling, collection, marketing and distribution of cultured fish and associated products (spinoffs of some
interventions are expected to benefit retailers of non-cultured fish). A second focus is the creation of a conducive
environment for aquaculture business to thrive, by linking smallholders organized in clusters or engaged in aquaparks in
business partnerships with private entrepreneurs. The sub-component will facilitate the development of frameworks for
effective partnerships and the establishment of business partnerships between smallholders and private entrepreneurs to
improve smallholder access to inputs, markets and other services including hire purchased arrangements.
This sub-component will pay particular attention to the youth through support to youth aquapreneurship. Innovative
opportunities for youth employment and entrepreneurship will be explored, with a focus on investments in innovative
business-oriented activities such as aquaponics, and youth engagement in post-production activities and as service
providers. It will support vocational training of youth, preparation of business plans and linking them with the REFP for
tailored financing.
Sub-component 2.3: Access to financial services. Aims to facilitate access to financial services in unserved target
communities and to players across all levels of the aquaculture value chain, through the ongoing Rural Enterprise Finance
Project (REFP). This includes promotion of (Community Level Savings and Credit Groups) PCRs to raise smallholder
capacity to invest in aquaculture, a Crowding in Fund (CiF) with co-participation from beneficiaries, a Line of Credit (LoC)
and also produce, fund and deliver differentiated business development packages to PRODAPE beneficiaries across the
value chain.
Component 3: Project management, policy and institutional development. Aims to establish appropriate arrangements and
support mechanisms for PRODAPE management, support sector institutions in the assumption of their mandates,
together with the development of sector policies and associated regulatory framework, to create the foundations for the
aquaculture value chain in Mozambique. Nutrition and gender will be mainstreamed through the project to enhance
nutrition through consumption of fish and fish-based products to improve and diversify household diet, and address
pressing social risks at HH level, e.g. gender inequality and HIV and AIDS. Social mentoring will be key.The component is
served by two sub-components:
4/28
Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional development. Aims to strengthen the policy and regulatory framework for the
aquaculture sector, including aspects related to environmental and social safeguards. Specific activities include the
production and adoption of operating guidelines for pond and cage culture as well as PPPs and the establishment of an
appropriate aquaculture data system and management, among others. Strengthen the institutional and technical capacity
of sector institutions (the National Institute for the Development of Fisheries and Aquaculture (IDEPA), and others) as well
as staff involved in planning, implementation and monitoring of small-scale aquaculture in the assumption of their roles,
including issues related to adequate environmental & climate adaptation and mitigation practices, biosafety and
biosecurity. The project will engage on the country’s aquaculture development strategy, and elaborate what markets
aquaculture products are likely to target, and what fish trade and tariff strategies may be pursued nationally in the near
future to satisfy nutrition requirements of the poorest sections of the population. For example in West Africa this issue has
been addressed by importing substantial quantities of cheap frozen fish, while developing aquaculture production from a
low base. The project will include a study to explore the political and financial feasibility of a similar approach.
Subcomponent 3.2. Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social risks. Aims to mainstream nutrition in the aquaculture
value chain and address social risks faced by targeted aquaculture producing households. Mainstreaming nutrition in
PRODEPA will be guided by the extensive experience from PROPESCA and PROAQUA and will encompass the
integration of interventions at two levels: (i) at community level, i.e. in the production pathway (farmers as producers and
consumers); and (ii) in the market pathway, developing an enabling and safe environment for increased demand of locally
produced fish and value-addition to fish products. Specific social risks facing smallholder farmers, due to their socio-
economic vulnerability, will be addressed through the social mentoring intervention. This intervention will be implemented
with the aim to instil joint planning and collaboration within fish farmers groups and strengthen individual farmer's ability to
sustain their engagement and take adavantage of emerging opportunities in the aquaculture value chain.
Sub-component 3.3: Project management and coordination. Aims to establish appropriate project management structures,
systems and procedures for the effective development of the aquaculture value chain in line with project targets.
Social and Environmental Impacts. PRODAPE is expected to ensure manageable and/or reversible social and
environmental impacts. As such, the project is classified as Category “B” both by the GoM and IFAD´s Social,
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). Activities will be limited to freshwater and will exclude
operations on sensitive ecosystem areas (i.e. special reserves, conservation areas, wetlands, reserves and/or their buffer
zones). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, which sets out relevant
criteria to be used during implementation. The Project will also ensure the timely elaboration of site-specific Environmental
Impact Assessments (EIAs) thus adopting a precautionary approach for activities requiring attention (i.e. cage culture). In
addition, adequate resources will be available to: i) develop / strengthen national regulations and guidelines to reduce
potential negative impacts of aquaculture activity (particularly cage culture); ii) elaborate site specific studies required to
comply with national environmental regulation and IFAD’s SECAP; and iii) monitor the implementation of the latter. The
SECAP review note integrated in this Project design identifies several potential risks and proposes corresponding
mitigation measures.
Organizational Framework. PRODAPE will be integrated into the Ministry of Sea, Inland Waters and Fisheries (MIMAIP)
with a dedicated Project Coordination Unit (PCU). The Ministry´s Provincial Directorates (DPMAIPs) will coordinate,
implement and monitor PRODAPE activities in close collaboration with the district services for the promotion of economic
activities (SDAEs) and relevant service providers.
Financial Management. Financial management arrangements will, to the extent feasible, be mainstreamed within GoM
systems providing adequate controls and ensuring proper management of funds. The PRODAPE will capitalize on
significant progress made in recent years in the development and rollout of sub-systems within the integrated State
Financial Management Information System (e-SISTAFE).
Procurement. Robust procurement systems and procedures will be put in place and used at all times during project
implementation. Public, open and competitive procurement processes will be used, as relevant, to warrant transparency
and safeguard project resources.
Project Financing. PRODAPE will be financed by: an IFAD loan on higly concessional terms (USD 8.6 million, 17.5% of
total project costs), an IFAD grant (USD 34.4 million, 70.2% of total project costs) under the 2018-2021 PBAS cycle, the
Government of Mozambique (USD 3.1 million, 6.4% of total project costs), and the project beneficiaries (USD 2.9 million,
5.9% of total project costs). It is to be noted that the total amount of IFAD climate finance for this project is preliminarily
calculated as USD 13.4 million, representing 31.2% of IFAD's investment. This amount is drawn from IFAD financing of
sub-components 1.2 and 2.1. If a climate event triggers Component 0 in the future, the amount of climate financing in this
project will increase, likely substantially.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
5/28
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Political, economic and social context. Mozambique’s political landscape bears the scars from the 15-year civil
war that followed independence from Portugal, leaving the country and its economy in distress[1]. The Front for the
Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo) has won five successive presidential and parliamentary elections since the first
elections after the formal peace agreement in October 1992. Presidential, legislative, and provincial elections are
scheduled for October 2019. It is expected that for the first time, provincial governors will be elected though the
general elections system.
Mozambique enjoyed stable economic growth in the range of 7%-8% per year for over two decades, underpinned by
macroeconomic liberalization, market reforms, massive public investment in infrastructure, large flows of Foreign
Direct Investment in mega projects and a rapidly growing extractive industry. Between 2005-15 the Gross National
Income (GNI) per capita increased from USD 296 to USD 590 and the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita
from USD 313 to USD 529. In 2015, the main contributors to the economy were services (53.2%), agriculture -
including aquaculture (25.2%), and industry (21.5%)[2].
Since 2015, economic performance has been affected by a debt burden of USD 9.89 billion, triggering inflation,
currency depreciation, reduction of donor contributions and drops in commodity prices and exports. Measures to
reduce liquidity and adjust trade balances have begun to take effect.
The recent amendements to the 2004 Constitution have paved the way for the on-going decentralization process,
which is expected to bring new governance modalities. Principally, the transfer of decision-making (and financial
resources) from the central government to subnational authorities would enable the participation of local residents
and rural communities in decision making proceses.
Stage in transition and presence of fragility. Continued insecurity (e.g. terrorist attacks) in Cabo Delgado Province
can affect investment in areas of that Province. The country's climatic and environmental vulnerability has been
brought to global attention by two devastating cyclones Idai and Kenneth in March/April 2019.
Poverty (SDG1), food security and nutrition (SDG2), smallholder agricultural and rural development context.
Mozambique is home to 28.9 million people[3]. Poverty was estimated at 46% in 2014, with the northern region still
lagging behind regional (55.1%, 46.2% and 32.8% poverty rates in the northern, central and southern regions,
respectively). Poverty is higher in rural areas (50.1%)[4], where approximately 70% of the population lives[5], and
higher in isolated areas limiting household (HH) capacity to generate returns on assets[6]. Mozambicans also suffer
from poor living standards and poor access to social services[7]. Mozambique ranks 181 out of 188 in the Human
Development Index[8]. Poorer HHs, women, youth and other vulnerable groups require specific attention. In 2013,
24% of HHs were food insecure and stunting affected 43% of children <5. Mozambique loses 10.9% of its annual
GDP to chronic malnutrition (USD 1.6 billion per annum)[9].
Small-scale agriculture and fisheries play a leading role in the HH economy. But poor access to inputs, technical
assistance, financial services and markets together with adverse weather conditions limit production, productivity and
profitability and lock people in poverty[10]. Diversification is key to spread risk and increase HH income and
resilience; aquaculture offers unlocked potential.
National strategies, policies and/or programmes relevant for smallholder agriculture, rural poverty reduction
and enhanced food security. Mozambique´s National Development Strategy for 2015-35 outlines the vision for the
country´s development. The GoM Five-Year Plan 2015-19 lays out priority areas of intervention. For the growth of the
aquaculture sector, the Five Year Plan identifies the following priorities: environmental protection, use of appropriate
technologies for small-scale farmers, development of aquaparks, construction of support infrastructure, safeguarding
community rights and gender mainstreaming, among others. Aquaparks are envisaged as models for 'concentration
and centralization' of service provision at different stages of the aquaculture value chain, though not necessarily
confined to the same geographic space but within reasonable distance.
Small-scale aquaculture constitutes a major contribution to Mozambique´s Fisheries Master Plan 2010-19. The
Aquaculture Development Strategy 2008-17, currently under review as part of the implementation of the five-year
Aquaculture Development Action Plan (PADA), aims to transform aquaculture production from subsistence to
commercial level by injecting a business approach into the sector. National aquaculture production is expected to
increase from 1,835 tons in 2017 to 30,000 tons in 2023[11].
10.
Key actors and institutional arrangements. The fisheries sector has gradually developed a range of institutional
capacities assumed by different government players, including the Ministry of Sea, Inland Waters and Fisheries
(MIMAIP) with overall policy, regulatory, coordination and sector oversight responsibilities; the National Institute for
the Development of Fisheries and Aquaculture (IDEPA) currently responsible for aquaculture development in
Mozambique - including the provision of extension support; the Institute for Fisheries Research (IIP) has traditionally
played a leading role in fisheries research; the Aquaculture Research Centre in Chókwè (CEPAQ), has enormous
potential to play a leading role in research and broodstock production for the country. In addition, a range of small and
medium private sector players have engaged in feed, fingerling and fish production in different parts of the country.
The potential for private sector investment remains untapped and plays a major role in creating an enabling
environment that smallholder farmers can tap into.
6/28
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
11.
The proposed project is in line with IFAD’s corporate priorities and Mozambique´s COSOP 2018-2022. Systematic
engagement of smallholders living under the poverty line, especially women and youth, has proved to be challenging
in previous aquaculture projects, due to limitations in capacity and resources. Changing this trend requires a robust
socially inclusive targeting approach. Without special efforts, people with disabilities are left out of development
processes.
Nutrition. Mozambique has a three-fold nutritional burden (chronic undernutrition, micronutrient deficiency and
emerging issues with overweight and obesity in urban areas). Nationally, 43% of children under the age of five are
stunted, 6% are wasted and 15% are underweight. Prevalence of low birth weight in Mozambican children is
estimated at 14%. Fish is the main source of animal protein for the coastal areas, providing vitamins and minerals,
especially omega-3. Freshwater aquaculture fish, mainly tilapia, is not widely eaten in comparison to marine fish.
The main barrier to fish consumption is accessibility, affordability and preference to other food, especially in rural
areas located far from the sea and dependent on agricultural crops. According to the 2018 Fill the Nutrient Gap
Mozambique studies and the in-depth review of the 2018 Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of Chronic
Malnutrition in Mozambique (PARMDC), there is a pressing need to ensure appropriate nutrition interventions are
in place for vulnerable populations including quality health and nutrition services.
The Focus on Tilapia is hinged on three key aspects: (i) taste and demand for tilapia is well developed within
Africa and in Mozambique and does not need additional effort on introduction (ii) hatchery and feed system and
aquaculture technology of tilapia is well established and significant capacities already in place in the neighbouring
countries (e.g. Zambia, Malawi etc.). (iii) tilapia is highly tolerant to a wide range of conditions in the African
context and is the leading aquaculture species in the continent.
Private public (smallholder) partnerships will have to be monitored very closely to ensure that beneficiary
investments in aquaculture remain viable over the long term
Women. Gender inequality and HIV/AIDS constitute social risks that unaddressed compromise socio-economic
progression. Women in Mozambique play a leading role in managing their homes, rearing their children and
feeding their families. However, gender roles abscrived to women result in them facing multiple barriers towards
gender equality, including lower education, access to opportunities and income than men. Illiteracy among women
is much higher than among men (54% vs. 27%)[12]. Women have limited ownership and control of productive
resources, have smaller plots of farmed land and tend to own animals of low economic value. Women´s role in
aquaculture can involve feeding, selling and processing fish; while aquaculture ponds “belong” to a woman´s
husband.
Climate change. Mozambique´s vulnerability to climate change has been witnessed through recent climatic
hazards. Localized floods occur almost every year, causing multiple casualties and loss of economic assets.
Droughts, “late rains” also lead to loss of crops, seeds and animals, and generate pockets of food insecurity
throughout the country. Cyclones are common and have the same effects along coastal districts of the country.
Because of the already low resource base, those endowed with more assets in rural areas resort to selling assets
to smooth consumption. PRODAPE integrates resilience to climate change and environmental sustainability
through the promotion of context specific climate smart solutions. The total amount of IFAD climate financing for
PRODAPE is preliminarily calculated as USD 13.4 million (about 31.2% of IFAD's investment).
Youth. The country´s youth policy considers youth as being people aged 15-35. Enrolment in primary education
has increased substantially in Mozambique but quality of education and completion rates are lower than desired.
Vocational training opportunities for youth have grown in the past few decades but are still inadequate to provide
youth with the skills required by the labour market (especially those without secondary eductation). Youth lack
some forms of capital, such as financing, and social capital to access the few opportunities available in rural areas.
Approximately 37% remain unemployed. The situation of young women deserves special attention, as they are
seldomly targeted by development interventions Entrepreneurship constitutes the driving strategy promoted by the
GoM towards youth employment.
Loss of labour force at HH level. The temporary or permanent loss of labour force at HH level constitutes the
prime internal shock faced by smallholder households in Mozambique. Mozambique´s generalized HIV epidemic
constitutes one of the major threats in this respect; approximately 1.9 million people are HIV positive in the
country.
The PRODAPE design addresses pressing country and IFAD corporate social and environmental priorities.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
7/28
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
The potential for aquaculture development in Mozambique is enormous, also given its generally favourable climatic
conditions (tropical and sub-tropical climate, low population pressure) and important role in the socio-economic
development of the country. The majority of farmers in Mozambique are reliant on diverse forms of crops and/or
livestock agriculture as well as fishing (mainly in the coastal zones) and other forms of natural resource-based
livelihoods.
Aquaculture farming is a relatively new subsector and the GoM has recognised that the sector has a high-untapped
potential for growth in production, value addition and export[13]. Access to financial services has been identified as
one of the critical pillars for the development of smallholder aquaculture farming and related value chain
enterprises[14]. However, access to financial sector by smallholder aquaculture producers is constrained by both
supply and demand side factors.
Aquaculture is practiced at a small-scale level with few exceptions, and the sector potential is not fully exploited, due
to the existence of bottlenecks across the entire value chain mostly due to the inadequate supply of quality products
and services to smallholder fish producers. This is partly due to the vastness of the country and the fact that the
'centrality and concentration' of service provision approaches have only recently been integrated in the sector´s
investment strategy for aquaculture development. The sector is also characterised by smallholder fish production
levels that are below the desired quantity and quality levels. In fact, the little cultured fish that reaches the market, is
largely sold locally and does not appear to meet demand.
Climate trends and projections for Mozambique indicate increasing frequency and intensity of such adverse climatic
events, which, coupled with other factors such as sea level rise will continue to undermine the sustainability of
development interventions in the country. The coastal zones of Mozambique are expected to increasingly be affected
by intense tropical cyclones, namely, Cabo Delgado, Nampula and Sofala. The intensity and frequency of floods,
including flash floods, are also projected to be high in two of the provinces targeted by PRODAPE: Zambézia and
Nampula. Similarly, more frequent and intense droughts, heatwaves, coupled with higher levels of evaporation rates
are expected in another of the project´s target province: Tete.
Existing constraints along the aquaculture value chain require concerted and structured investments. IFAD has
supported the fisheries and aquaculture sector of Mozambique since 1993 through six operations (loans or
grants)[15], which provide a basis for scaled up investments in the aquaculture sector. PROAQUA and PROPESCA
supported the development of pilot models that promoted innovative approaches to extension, capacity building and
input support for a complete fish production cycle. Indeed, some of the knowledge, good practices, results and
technologies from PROAQUA and PROPESCA will be used for implementation in PRODAPE's s 23 target districts,
including building on knowledge from studies conducted under PROAQUA, particularly on feed, seed and economic
analysis of alternative models.
PRODAPE is therefore designed to address pressing challenges along the aquaculture value chain and promotes
investments to render aquaculture a viable, resilient and profitable business in Mozambique. By intervening in
strategic areas, it is expected that project investments will contribute towards the overall development of aquaculture
in the country. PRODAPE design will therefore integrate a number of strategies, which align with key Government of
Mozambique (GoM) and sector plans, strategies and policies, including: the concept of centralities for focused
aquaculture related investments and associated activities, the establishment of aquaparks (locations in which
aggregated production units, required inputs and markets are located in proximity and linked). Also, the project
integrates a robust social inclusion approach to ensure the participation of beneficiaries targeted in rural
communities, and not only those easiest to reach. Investments on climate change adaptation practices and
technologies for aquaculture tailored to the context specific challenges will be done and guided by the CRA. Improved
of monitoring and early warning systems (farm, watershed and region) and construction of elevated flood/storm
resistant facilities will be promoted.
18.
In addressing the challenges of the aquaculture sub-sector, it is important to take a long term view in order to ensure
sustainability of this investment. The Independent Office of Evaluation (IOE) evaluation of 2016 recommended that
future IFAD investements in this sub-sector in Mozambique take a longer term perspective. PRODAPE is one such
response to this longer term vision for sustainability. PRODAPE is therefore a five year investment within a long-term
(15-year) IFAD and GoM partnership in aquaculture in Mozambique.
B. Lessons learned
19.
The PRODAPE design has been informed by lessons from IFAD's long experience in Mozambique and from other
countries in the region, including two of the most recent IFAD-funded projects (PROAQUA and PROPESCA) and the
Norwegian funded programme Support to the Fisheries Sector of Mozambique (2013-2017). It is also informed by
lessons and recommendations from IFAD's IOE[16]. Key among these lessons and recommendations are the
following:
1.  Focus on rural poor and on more vulnerable groups, including women, youth and People Living With HIV.
A bottom-up approach to reduce food insecurity, malnutrition, poverty and vulnerability is compatible with value-
chain development; integration into markets is proven to be more effective and efficient in the medium term
compared to trickle-down strategies. Project design should include due attention to gender mainstreaming, and
specific activities should be carried out to empower women and youth to ensure they can be more prominently
involved in productive activities.
8/28
2.  Comprehensive approach to farmers "capacity building". The constraints presented by aquaculture are multi-
dimensional; projects in Mozambique highlight that capacities need to be strengthened at individual, community,
and institutional levels. Experience from PROAQUA and PROPESCA shows that there is inadequate aquaculture
technical capacity at sub-national level (provincial and district level) to meet farmers' training needs.
3.  Private sector engagement. The private sector has an increasing role in general in Mozambique, and its
contribution is fundamental for promoting prosperity among fish farmers. IFAD and the Government should ensure
that the role of the private sector is clearly articulated as key partners in aquaculture development.
4.  Duration to have an impact. Aquaculture is relatively new in IFAD programmes. Experience shows that it may
take at least three years of continuous capacity building, mentoring and extension support for aquaculture to take
root, especially among smallholders.
5.  Working with farmer organizations. Lessons from IFAD-supported projects in the country demonstrate that it is
more cost-effective to promote capacity building and access to inputs and services through farmer organizations.
Groups have been used in on-going aquaculture projects in Mozambique as an entry point to initiate savings and
credit activities and to address nutrition mainstreaming, with very positive outcomes.
6.  Mainstreaming Business approach to aquaculture. Lessons from other IFAD programmes (e.g. ABDP in
Kenya) underline the importance of a business approach to aquaculture and linking smallholder producers with
good productivity levels with larger commercial players, input suppliers, technical assistance and other services.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
20.
21.
22.
PRODAPE's Project Goal is to contribute to poverty reduction and enhancing food security and nutrition among rural
HHs. The specific Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase production, consumption and income of rural
HHs and other actors in the aquaculture value chain.
PRODAPE is well aligned with the COSOP and contributes to IFAD strategic objectives: SO1 (increased production),
SO2 (increased market participation) and/or SO3 (greater resilience) and mainstreaming priorities (climate and
environment, gender, youth and nutrition).
Project Area. PRODAPE will target 23 districts in seven provinces of the country (see table 1. below). The PRODAPE
target districts were selected in line with criteria agreed upon with IDEPA, namely:(i) favourable environmental,
climate and natural resource conditions for aquaculture (including aspects related to the environmental categorization
of the selected sites; (ii) the existence of water bodies capable of providing sufficient water quantity and quality for
aquaculture activity; (iii) the existence of potential markets; (iv) high poverty levels, food and nutrition insecurity; and
(v) the existence of access roads, which could be subject to improvements to warrant access throughout the year
(less than 10 km).
Table 1. PRODAPE Project Area
Province
Districts
Niassa Province
Lago, Lichinga and Mecanhelas Districts
Cabo Delgado Province
Metuge, Mueda and Balama Districts.
Nampula Province
Mossuril, Ribáue and Larde Districts
Zambézia Province
Milange, Nicoadala and Mocubela Districts
Tete Province
Cahora Bassa, Magoé and Marávia Districts
9/28
Manica Province
Sussundenga, Vanduzi, Gondola and Mossurize Districts
Sofala Province
Beira, Dondo, Gorongosa and Buzi Districts.
23.
Activities will be implemented only in locations with the adequate conditions for aquaculture in each target district.
The project will be implemented through a sequenced approach, starting with Lago, Baloma, Ribaue, Milange,
Cahora Bassa, Sussundenga with a comprehensive value chain approach except Beira where the emphasis will be
placed on the development of feed production. Interventions in six of the seven initial districts (all except Beira) will
include a fish production component. Expansion into other districts, listed herein, will occur once the aquaculture
value chain in these districts is operational. Lessons drawn in these districts will inform expansion on the basis of
local demand.
24.
Once the results of the final assessments of the damage caused by cyclones Idai and Kenneth to aquaculture
infrastructure are available, target areas of intervention could be adjusted.
25.
The selection of specific communities and target sites within these districts will be based on a set of criteria to include
soil suitability, the availability of good quality water in sufficient quantity throughout the year, availability of adequate
land for future expansion, suitable slope and soil texture for the construction of earthen ponds that can also sustain
the growth of crops or vegetation that can be used as fish food. Exclusion criteria associated to the environmental
categorisation of the project will also be applied, as relevant, such as avoiding locations with saline water, sensitive
ecosystems such as marshlands etc. These criteria will also be integrated in the overall set of criteria for the selection
of beneficiaries wishing to engage in pond-based aquaculture.
26.
Communities affected by large scale economic activities, including extractive industry projects, whose livelihood
strategies have largely deteriorated as a result of these projects and comply with all technical criteria stipulated above
will be given priority.
Targeting Strategy
27.
The project will implement a transformative and comprehensive social inclusion strategy to ensure that HHs of
different socio-economic groups, women, gender dynamics, youth and other vulnerable groups are provided with
opportunities to participate. The main elements of the strategy include: i) establishing quotas for poorer community
members who would likely otherwise not be reached, ii) identification and provision of specific support packages that
cater to the needs of each social group at different levels of the aquaculture value chain, iii) ensuring local
participation in relevant decision making proceses during planning and implementation through Community
Committees, and iv) integration of a Social Mentoring intervention to address pressing social risks and barriers
constraining sustainable engagement of youth and women and enjoyment of benefits to be generated by the project
(HIV/AIDS, disability). Enabling and empowering measures outlined in IFAD guidelines have been integrated in
project design.
Target Groups
The project aims to reach 88,900 people (17,800 households), of which 40% will be women across all project
activities. Out of the total beneficiaries, 87,500 (17,500 households) are producers at the various levels of the
aquaculture value chain. The following quotas will be observed to ensure that the project is socially inclusive: across
each socio-economic strata 20% will be women headed HHs, 10% youth aged 18-24 and 30% youth aged 25-35. It is
to be noted that Fifty per cent (50%) of financial products targeting the value chain will be attributed to women.
28.
Community level beneficiaries include:
29.
smallholder aquaculture farmers. Comprised of poor/subsistence smallholders and economically
active/entrepreneurial smallholders requiring support to engage in the aquaculture value chain. These beneficiaries
will be expected to be members of Community Level Savings and Credit Groups (PCRs) and will receive technical
assistance, and access to aquaculture feed, fingerlings and access to specific financial products for the aquaculture
value chain. PRODAPE will reach a total of 7,000 people engaged in smallholder aquaculture production over the
course of five years, through earthen ponds (60%) and cage culture (40%).
30.
Table 2. Targeting quotas for smallscale farmer
10/28
poor / subsistence smallholders
economically active / entrepreneurial smallholders
Earthen ponds
40%
60%
Cage production
-
All if they are able to meet the 20% matching contribution
Other beneficiaries will include rural households already engaged in aquaculture production as they will benefit
from improvements in the aquaculture value chain generated by the project. It is expected that at least 40% of
smallholders owning / managing aquaculture ponds in the target areas will progressively expand from 1 to 2-3
ponds over the project lifetime.
Rural aquaculture entrepreneurs. Comprise individuals wishing to engage in different levels of the aquaculture
value chain other than production. Specific opportunities and products will also be developed to meet the interests
and capacities of youth of different ages. This beneficiary group will also include existing private sector
entrepreneurs.
Youth. A portion of the youth reached at community level as fish producers or entrepreneurs will benefit from
participating in a youth champion led intervention widely used by the International Labour Organization (ILO, Start
Your Own Business). PRODAPE will also target between 5-10 new graduates with aquaculture degrees to engage
in the value chain, striving to attain a gender balance. In addition to being offered the support packages offered to
any beneficiary, they will benefit from coaching and mentoring activities from specialized institutions. Efforts will be
made to attain gender balance.
Broader communities and individuals working in markets targeted by PRODAPE. The following activities are
expected to reach and benefit the wider communities and markets targeted by the project: (i) The promotion of
PCRs; (ii) Nutritional activities; and (iii) Water and sanitation improvements in markets and training of traders in
fish handling techniques and business development.
31.
Institutional level beneficiaries. Staff of all institutions involved in the project will benefit from capacity building
interventions including exposure visits to locations of successful aquaculture activities. Extensionists will be provided
with opportunities to engage in aquaculture activity. A total of 250 extensionists will receive PRODAPE support. The
measure is intended to enable these players to participate in commercial activity within the aquaculture value chain.
The approach replicates similar positive experiences used in the agriculture sector in the country.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
32.
Outcomes. The following are expected to be the main outcomes from PRODAPE[17]:
Production and productivity of smallholder farmers in aquaculture are sustainably increased;
Efficiency of aquaculture production and market systems is improved;
Policy and institutional frameworks for aquaculture development and nutrition are improved.
33.
34.
35.
36.
Components. PRODAPE will seek to address key constraints identified in the aquaculture value chain with the aim
of generating positive impacts among rural dwellers. The project will support the development of freshwater pond and
cage-based aquaculture both through cluster and aquapark models. The PDO will be achieved through two
interlinked investment components and a third one on project management and institutional and policy development.
A “Component 0” has been integrated in response to the vulnerability of the country to climatic hazards; the
component does not include any budgetary allocations at design.
A common theme through Components 1 and 2, will be engaging in due diligence of any and all potential private
sector players in the project as service providers or beneficiaries of grants, loans, technical assistance or other.
Secondly, support offered to private sector entities participating as beneficiaries in PRODAPE / REFP will include
technical support to ensure that financial investments result in high quality products / services eligible for certification,
as relevant.  
Component 0: Disaster risk reduction and response. In mid-March tropical cyclones Idai and Kenneth hit central
and northern Mozambique causing severe flooding. The immediate effects included an elevated number of
casualties, destruction of hundreds of thousands of hectares of crop land and of public and economic infrastructure.
The projected increases in intensity and frequency of adverse weather patterns calls for adequate preparedness to
ensure not only sufficient investments in climate change resilience and early warning systems are made available but
also that adequate resources and on-time response is put in place when such adverse conditions make themselves
manifest. Component 0 allows PRODAPE to promptly react if/when these recurrent weather extremes occur
facilitating the quick adoption of remedial actions. Interventions will include trainings, elevated flood/storm resistant
facilities, equipment to allow farmers to evacuate the fish rapidly and store them in storm-proof tanks to avoid
complete loss from wash-outs and climate proofed cyclone shelters to reduce risks associated with these extreme
events. Component 0 is therefore a smart mechanism that will facilitate and allow faster processing of Level 2
Restructuring of the project in line with IFAD's Policy on Project Restructuring of December 2018 as well as IFAD's
2011 Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery.
11/28
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
Component 1: Smallscale aquaculture productivity. The component will support the establishment and
consolidation of local commercial input supply networks of fish feed and fingerlings at competitive and affordable
prices; and promote fish productivity through climate smart technologies and environmentally sustainable production
techniques suited to the different agro-ecological zones. Matching grants will be used to develop a network of existing
and emerging operators, including private sector operatoes and smallscale fish producer groups.
Quality seed development from proven strains, produced under proper biosecurity conditions, will include traditional
fish species such as: a) Mossambicus tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus); b) Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus); c)
Tilapia rendalli (Tilapia rendalli); d) Tilapia shiranus (Oreochromis shiranus); e) Chambo (Oreochromis karongaee);
and f)African catfish (Clarias gariepinus). The introduction of exotic species into new areas will be avoided[18].
Sub-component 1.1: Agribusiness for input supply. The sub-component will support the development of fish seed
(fingerlings) and fish feed systems using matching grants to stimulate private sector and community participation in
the production of inputs. This will be supported directly by the REFP project that has just started under the Ministry of
Finance.
Fish seed production. Private hatchery operators will be supported as follows: i) construction/rehabilitation of
hatcheries and civil works, ii) provision of equipment/material for hatcheries, iii technical assistance to strengthen
operational capacity of hatchery owners/ staff; iv) certification costs, v) establishment of linkages between fish seed
producers existing and emerging clients; and vi) establishment of simple and viable logistical distribution systems.
Criteria for the selection of private sector players will be based on existing operations for fish seed production, the
selection of suitable species and the use of production processes that ensure safety, environmental safeguards and
capacity to provide matching funds. Private sector operators qualifying for this support would be expected to provide
at least 40% of the costs of establishing the hatcheries as cost share or matching grants. Community producers
(producer groups) will receive a full grant towards the establishment of small-scale fish seed production enterprises.
In line with sector vision, fish seed will strive to follow quality standards for certification. Existing microfinance
institutions will be used to administer the delivery of suitable credit and grants products to private hatchery operators.
PRODAPE / IDEPA will develop both guidelines and standard operating procedures for all private hatcheries.
Fish feed production. The development of fish feed will engage combined strategies to meet the clients needs namely
i) on-farm production of high-nutrient fish supplementary feed for smallholder farmers with 1-3 ponds to close quality
gaps in conventional fish feed, (ii) entrepreneurial start-upfish feed production among micro, small and medium scale
producers and (iii) large commercial fish feed production through PPPs to achieve economies of scale and lower
production costs.
Private sector feed producers. Private feed producers will be supported by matching grants and credit lines based on
their existing capacity, sound business plans and their ability to supply a given number of farmers in specified areas.
The main investments include machinery (feed processing mills), raw materials for fish feed, packaging materials,
storage equipment and labour.
Community based feed producers (smallholder producer groups) will be supported in areas not reached by the
private sector. These producers will receive a full grant towards the establishment of small-scale community level
production, and will be provided with technical support to meet target production volumes and established quality
standards. It is recognised that the feed produced by these local players is likely to be inferior to the one produced by
medium / industrial ones, however, both are expected to feed the local market and its diverse clientele with different
economic capacity.
Capacity building. Even though Inhambane and Gaza Provinces are not covered by the project, PRODAPE will take
advantage of the knowledge and experience in these provinces to enhance the technical capacity of operators in
other provinces, and possibly, improve their capacities. The role of the Aquaculture Research Centre (CEPAQ), a
government facility constructed with Norwegian assistance in Chókwè, Gaza Province, will be important for research
on the production of quality breeders and fingerlings for the aquaculture industry nationwide and maintaining the gene
pool. CEPAQ will be supported to establish zoning of suitable species in the project target area through field trials
and demonstrations in collaboration with public and private sector players. Inventories of existing fingerling producers
will be produced and regularly updated to fine tune project strategies to meet demand for quality fingerlings in the
country.
46.
Sub-component 1.2: Develop smallholder aquaculture production capacity. The project will promote a range of
sustainable fish production technologies, namely, earthen ponds, integrated fish ponds,livestock and crops, cage
culture in large inland water bodies and modern aquaponic systems. Beneficiaries will receive support in the form of
matching grants towards capital costs, training, access to inputs and markets in line with their capacity and
production potential (for further information also refer to section C above on target groups). The sub-component also
includes the organization of beneficiaries into groups.
12/28
47.
The project will support the provision of aquaphonic kits, the construction of the ponds and cages, and the provision
of part of the inputs needed for the first complete production cycle. It is important to note that investments in cage
farming will be contingent on the development and approval of regulatory guidelines, determination of the water body
´s carrying capacity and other water management factors and the production of Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs).
48.
In all cases, the following measures will be considered to support smallholder beneficiaries:
1.  Organization of beneficiaries in business-oriented groups: PRODAPE will facilitate the formation and
strengthening of smallholder fish farming groups, under two models to facilitate joint access to extension and
training, inputs and markets: Aquaparks. Smallholders and medium/ large-scale producers will be linked to private-
sector entrepreneurs (MSMEs) for input, technical assistance and logistic services for market access. Clusters.
Where aquaparks do not exist, or where opportunities are seen to complement local fish production capacity,
smallholder fish farmers will be organised into smaller production clusters of 20-25 people. Clusters will be located
in pre-selected zones.
2.  Land and water security: PRODAPE will collaborate both at central and provincial level with DINAT and relevant
water authorities (such as ARAs) to ensure regularization of land and water rights for its beneficiaries with special
attention to poor and vulnerable groups including women and youth. The Project will assist small fish-farmers to
obtain land use titles (DUATs) for both individuals and associations as necessary. Investments in multi-functional
boreholes and light irrigation canals to improve water flow to fish farming clusters, that will serve vegetable farmers
downstream, facilitating intergration of fish-crop-livestock/ poultry production systems.  
3.  Training: Farmers will receive technical training on sound aquaculture practices to respond to identified market
needs. Training topics will include improved pond fertilization, feeding practices and the use of local ingredients to
minimize feed costs, fish handling, etc. Training will facilitate effective group learning, including (a) on-field
demonstrations with Reference Farmers; (b) formal extension services; (c) exchange visits; (d) workshops, etc. A
focus will be placed on practical and environmentally sustainable aspects related to production, monitoring of farm
inputs, outputs and margins and record keeping. Information on climate and weather forecast will also be made
available to fish farmers. Early warning systems will also be established or strengthened by supporting / creating
local committees for disaster risk management (CLGRCs).
4.  Access to inputs: Producer groupsreceiving matching grants for the establishment of ponds / cages will receive
inputs for the first cycle of production (fingerlings and fish feed).
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
Component 2: Development of aquaculture business. The component will address challenges related to weak
institutions, missing and incomplete markets and inaccessibile services faced by aquaculture value chain actors –
including smallholders. The component will work on: (i) supporting the development of aquaparks; (ii) improving
practices for aquaculture products to maintain their value in markets and supporting an environment that facilitates
business partnerships, especially PPPs; (iii) promoting financial inclusion; and (iv) supporting youth aquapreneurship.
Some of the key activities to be implemented include market surveys, training, technical assistance, demonstrations,
exchange visits, the provision of equipment, the improvement of market facilities and access to financial services.
Sub-component 2.1: Support to development of aquaparks. PRODAPE will support the development of aquaparks as
a vehicle to integrate smallholder farmers in rural communities into the aquaculture value chain. The aquaparks
model will promote common public services such as water, electricity, roads network, marketing infrastructure and
extension services, to contribute towards increased production and productivity of small-scale agricultural and
aquaculture farmers in the surrounding areas.
PRODAPE will support the development of aquaparks by: (i) making the business case for aquaculture to investors
and entrepreneurs, through investment fora advocacy and to mobilize public and private sector resources; (ii)
provision of technical assistance (assessment of sites suitability for aquaculture, development of site specific
ESMP/ESIAs, carrying capacity, biosecurity planning and disease control, business plans, etc., as required); (iii)
facilitate the identification of sources of finance and the arrangements for equitable PPPs; and (iv) provision of
enabling and critical key infrastructure, including feeder roads, water canals, hatcheries/nurseries canals,
electricity/rural energy systems and markets, warehouse with cold storage and ice production at key marketing points.
PRODAPE will not engage in the development of large-scale industrial aquaparks, but plan investments in support of
smaller aquaparks in the targeted districts. PRODAPE's main purpose of supporting aquaparks is to ensure the
integration of IFAD-supported beneficiaries, especially smallholder farmers, in this arrangement.
Sub-component 2.2: Develop market linkages and business partnerships. The sub-component aims to develop
practices to improve cultured fish handling, collection as well as marketing and distribution. It will provide support to
the establishment of business partnerships between small and commercial fish producers.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
Under PRODAPE, a detailed market and product development study[19] will be carried out to determine the current
and future demand for aqucualture produce. On this basis, the project will provide training/technical assistance on
fish handling/ processing preservation/ marketing practise and facilitate access to equipment. It will also support
product development for niche markets linked to financial services; training on business development and promote
group enterprises for fish farmers, processors and traders. In remote locations, domestic-size freezers running on
solar power could possibly be useful for producers and traders to bring ice higher up into the fresh fish value chain.
However, provision of such equipment would only be considered for areas with high concentration of fish farmers
organized in clusters, with a significant joint production capacity. The same applies for minor improvement to access
roads.
13/28
PRODAPE will also support phytosanitary and food safety measures including: (i) setting up basic hygiene
requirements (tap water and toilets) and promote rainwater harvesting and appropriate waste management practices;
(ii) sensitization to sellers and buyers / consumers on hygiene and nutrition; and (iii) facilitate access to fish
preservation equipment for market traders.
Business partnership, including PPPs and outgrower schemes between commercial fish farms and small-scale fish
producers, will be enhanced through: i) the provision by the former of quality inputs (fingerlings and feed) and
technical assistance (pond / cage/aquaphonic installation and management); and ii) the purchase by the former of
fish produced by small-scale farmers. Smallholder producers would benefit from such arrangements through access
to relevant aquaculture technologies, procurement of and facilitating access to fish feed and fingerlings of appropriate
quality and quantity, and marketing of fish. In return, the small-scale producers commit to supplying a given volume of
fish and to adopt the promoted technologies. In PRODAPE target districts, possible linkages will be explored for fish
farmers and value chain entrepreneurs to: (i) access markets for aquaculture fish as part of the World Food
Programme (WFP) diversified diets food baskets e-voucher scheme used in the organization´s emergency response
and school feeding programs; and (ii) access technical assistance in the context of nutrition marketing and demand
generation through market place support activities offered by the Mozambique Scaling-Up Nutrition Business
Network platform. Hire purchase arrangements will also be considered under this sub-component
This sub-component will pay particular attention to the development of youth aquapreneurs, providing tailored support
package to youth, to facilitate their engagement in small businesses in or linked to the aquaculture value chain in
production (aquaponics), trade, agro-processing/value addition, input supply and service provision. PRODAPE will
implement a youth champion-led enterprise development initiative applying a methodology promoted successfully by
ILO, namely, Start and Improve Your Business (SIYB), a global business management coaching programme. Youth
will receive technical support from the specialised service providers (contracted under sub-component 2.3) to design
a technically sound and financially viable aquaculture business plan, and they will be linked to relevant micro-finance
institution supported under REFP, the Government financed Aquaculture Development Fund or other funding
channels available for youth.
Sub-component 2.3 Access to financial services. To address access to finance constraints across the aquaculture
value chain, PRODAPE will facilitate the provision of appropriate, affordable and sustainable financial and business
support services. Financial services for beneficiaries will be provided through the ongoing REFP, which will be
implemented by the National Investment Bank (BNI) in partnership with participating micro-finance institutions. In
addition to supporting the development of PCRs, PRODAPE beneficiaries will be offered financial products such as
Crowding-In Fund (CIF), Line of Credit (LoC).
Financial institutions willing to work in the aquaculture sector will be supported to develop appropriate financial
products (including digital finance solutions) as well as support to expand to the underserved project areas. To
achieve this, REFP, in collaboration with PRODAPE will support the development of skills and knowledge within
financial institutions, to assist them in designing policies and tools / products on the basis of best international
practices.
Smallholder fish producers may also be offered climate / weather index-based insurance. The Project will ensure that
there is a specific “line of credit” for natural calamities. In addition, PRODAPE will be open to explore synergies with
other private sector financing models, inspired by experiences such as that of the International Finance Corporation
(IFC).
Component 3: Project management, policy and institutional development. The component will support the
development of policy framework and the strengthening of institutions responsible for small-scale aquaculture to fulfil
their roles in project implementation and beyond. The component also supports the mainstreaming of nutrition and
addresses the main social risks that could hinder beneficiaries´ ability to sustain their engagement and limit their
socio-economic progression.
Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional capacity building. The sub-component aims to strengthen the institutional
and technical capacities related to policy, legislation, planning, implementation and monitoring of small-scale
aquaculture warranting adequate environmental & climate adaptation and mitigation practices, biosafety and
biosecurity. This will include: (i) Technical Assistance (TA); (ii) strengthening skills through training, and; (iii) provision
of equiptment and logistical support.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
Policy development. PRODAPE will support and provide technical advice to sector authorities to develop strategies,
frameworks and policies for climate smart aquaculture. Specific activities could include reviews, workshops and other
discussions for policy development purposes. Key issues to be addressed include: (i) enabling environment for viable
trading of fish-feed and fish to allow growth of local fish production of both feed and fish, ii) the right incentives to
attract private sector investments and ensuring inclusive and iii) equitable access by smallholder producers to
aquaparks under the new strategy of concentrated and consolidated production.
14/28
The project will engage on the country’s aquaculture development strategy, and elaborate what markets aquaculture
products are likely to target, and what fish trade and tariff strategies may be pursued nationally in the near future to
satisfy nutrition requirements of the poorest sections of the population. For example in West Africa this issue has
been addressed by importing substantial quantities of cheap frozen fish, while developing aquaculture production
from a low base. The project will include a study to explore the political and financial feasibility of a similar approach.
Institutional strengthening. PRODAPE will support the setup of district administration for small-scale aquaculture on
licensing, enforcement and extension services. The project will also develop a aquaculture e-knowledge platform in
partnership with ICT provider(s) to facilitate access to market information, technology, service providers, input
providers, weather information, environmental and social guidelines, phytosanitary and food safety standards etc.
Sub-component 3.2: Mainstreaming Nutrition and Adressing Social Risks. The sub-component aims at
mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social risks facing vulnerable smallholder fish farmers. Specific nutrition
content will be developed in collaboration with relevant institutions and included in the aquaculture extension training
curriculum. Main activities include social mentoring to increase consumption of cultured fish and locally produced
foods, engaging community health workers and promote fish processing and value addition. The project will use
IDEPA fish fair and marketplace multimedia platforms, as relevant. All activities at community level will be planned
and monitored within the provincial and district steering committees for food and nutrition security (CODSAN and
COPSAN). Experience generated from PROPESCA and PROAQUA will guide interventions in this sub-component.
Gender, Gender Based Violence and HIV-AIDs. Addressing social risks among aquaculture producing HHs is an
important part of enabling equity amongst smallholder farmers. The Social Mentoring approach addresses common
social risks encountered by smallholders at individual, HH and group level. The proposed Social Mentoring
intervention is based on the integration of: (i) The Gender Action Learning System (GALS) ; and (ii) Stepping Stones,
to enable participants to develop realistic plans, better take advantage of existing opportunities and make decisions
on how to avoid social risks. The project will enforce the IFAD Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) gender based-
violence provisions in the project.
Sub-component 3.3: Project Management and Coordination. To fulfil core management responsibilities, PRODAPE
will establish a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) comprised of: a Project Coordinator, a Financial / Manager,
Accountants, a Procurement Officer, a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, a Knowledge Management (KM)
and Communications Specialist. In addition, the project will recruit technical specialists in key areas who will be
integrated into the MIMAIP / IDEPA departments. The technical staff will require high technical standards in the
implementation of project activities; this will include support in the areas of aquaculture, climate change, ENRM and
safeguards, nutrition, social issues and linkages with REFP. When needed, the PMU will also engage suitably
qualified experts and/or advisory panel not affiliated with the project to complement the ENRM, Safeguards and
Climate change adaptation activities to be implemented by the project.
Based on the recent experience of PROPESCA, a Focal Point for PROPADE will be identified in each target
DPMAIP. The PRODAPE Focal Point will be directly subordinated to the Provincial Director and will be responsible
for overall project planning, coordination, implementation and monitoring with provincial and district players and
streamlining communications with the Maputo-based PCU.
Based on previous experience and to support project success, PRODAPE will integrate a modest incentive system
benefiting everyone involved in the implementation of the project at MIMAIP/IDEPA, as well as relevant DPMAIPs
and SDAEs, representing an across-the-board salary increase of around 30% for these staff.
The project shall establish a National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) to serve as the governing body of the
project. It shall be chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the MIMAIP and made up of representatives from: (i) sector
departments / units related to administration, fisheries planning, research, infrastructure, funding, inspection,
maritime and fisheries policy functions, together with representatives from fisheries schools and fisheries
organizations; (ii) other relevant ministries, including agriculture and industry and trade; and (iii) civil society
organizations. The NPSC will provide strategic guidance towards the achievement of project objectives and
contribute to the higher-level sector policy and strategic goals, review and approve Annual Workplans and Budgets
(AWPBs), as well as annual reports. Steering committee sessions could eventually constitute a point of the agenda of
the MIMAIP Coordinating Councils chaired by the Minister.
72.
Steering Committees will also be established at provincial and district levels and focus on strategic operational
issues, the review of local AWPBs and overall project progress and effectiveness monitoring. Meetings could be
integrated in provincial and district government meetings chaired by Provincial Governors/ Provincial Permanent
Secretaries and District Administrators with the participation of DPMAIPs, SDAEs, IDEPA/ PCU, as relevant.
E. Theory of Change
15/28
73.
74.
75.
PRODAPE aims to support the development of the aquaculture value chain with the view to reduce poverty and
improve food security and nutrition in target project areas. This would be possible through the increase of
smallholder fish farmer production, productivity and profitability. The project will seek to address the supply and
demand constraints encountered in Mozambique´s young aquaculture value chain. Please refer to Annex 1 for the
PRODAPE Logical Framework and Annex 2 for a graphic illustration of the Theory of Change.
The main assumptions for PRODAPE are as follows: (i) by strengthening the capacity of all stakeholders, including
fish inputs producers (feed and seed), fish producers, Governmement staff and service providers, the aquaculture
fish value chain will work more efficiently and effectively; ii) the integration of social mentoring approaches will help to
address social risks (malnutrition, hiv/aids) encountered by smallholders which can potentially compromise their
participation and/or sustainable engagement and socio-economic progression, iii) addressing policy, institutional,
infrastructural and production gaps, will help to facilitate the development of sustainable PPPs that integrate small-
scale aquaculture farmers.
The integration of PPPs is a cornerstone to the successful development of a commercially oriented aquaculture value
chain in Mozambique. The vision of the PPPs will be achieved mainly through the development of sustainable and
business oriented small and medium scale aquaparks, which aim to consolidate and centralize aquaculture
production, and integrate smallscale fish producers into a viable and profitable business partnerships with the private
sector. PRODAPE places small aquaparks at the centre of service provision throughout the entire aquaculture value
chain.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
76.
77.
78.
79.
Project design aligns with national priorities on strengthening the aquaculture sector towards a commercial
orientation, underpinned by the strong involvement of smallholder farmers. The project also supports GoM interests in
reaching out to women, poor and vulnerable HHs and youth of different ages. In addition, the project is congruous
with Mozambique’s National Determined Contributions (2015) and the National Adaptation Programme of Action
(2007), which is already factored in the NCCAMS and the NDC, which in turn sets the basis for the National
Adaptation Plan.
PRODAPE design and implementation arrangements comply with the key IFAD corporate policies, frameworks,
strategies and plans. The project will contribute to the three core objectives of IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-
2025 by; increasing rural people’s productive capacities, market participation and strengthening sustainability and
climate resilience of their economic activities. The project contributes to key IFAD11 Commitments (e.g. no. 2.2 no.
3.3 and no. 3.5) and complies with IFAD Rural Finance Policy. PRODAPE adheres to IFAD Policies on Natural
Resources Management and the Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (2017), ensuring that
environmental considerations and climate change adaptation measures are integrated into project activities to
address inherent risks.
The project contributes to some of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) linked to IFAD results (e.g. SDG1 on
poverty, SDG2 on hunger and food, SDG5 on gender inequality and SDG14 to conserve and sustainably use aquatic
resources). PRODAPE complies with IFAD's Targeting Policy – Reaching the Poor (2010) and with IFAD's Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy (2012). Moreover, IFAD's Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) Policy
will be taken into account during project implementation. The project is also aligned with IFAD’s corporate
commitment to nutrition-sensitive programming.
IFAD is signatory to the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2017-20. Concrete synergies
between the Rome-Based Agencies (RBAs) in-country started in 2008 with implementation of a joint programme -
Building Commodity Value Chains and Market Linkages for Farmers´ Associations (2008 -2009). The implementation
of the joint programme was key for the formulation of the current on-going joint programme - Support to Accelerate
Progress towards Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 1c in Mozambique - aiming at improving agricultural and
fisheries production and increasing access to food for vulnerable groups, women and children. To further harmonize
interventions in the field, arrangements could be put in place through technical assistance arrangements, that will
allow FAO expertise to support PRODAPE implementation during supervision and implementation support missions
to the project.
80.
PRODAPE draws on the experiences, capacities and systems developed by PROAQUA and PROPESCA. Specific
linkages include: (i) IDEPA, which implemented both projects, has been retained as PRODAPE implementation
agency, ensuring a rich institutional memory, experience and networks; (ii) PRODAPE has included all PROAQUA
districts among its target areas, ensuring continuity of support for aquaculture to take root; (iii) PRODAPE will build on
and scale up models developed by PROAQUA and PROPESCA e.g. extension and farmer input support models.
Through the Rural Enterprise Finance Project (REFP) implemented by the Banco Nacional de Investimento (BNI),
PRODAPE beneficiaries will have access to four financing windows and one business development support window,
as follows: (i) graduation fund; (ii) establishment and/or strengthening of community based credit and savings groups
(PCRs); (iii) Crowding-In Fund (CIF); (iv) Line of Credit (LoC); and (v) business development support services.
16/28
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
81.
82.
83.
Total project costs including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes are estimated at USD 49.0 million. Of
this amount, USD 21.3 million is foreign exchange content, and around USD 3.7 million corresponds to duties and
taxes.
Project components are: (i) Component 1: Small-scale aquaculture productivity, totaling USD 19.3 million; (ii)
Component 2: Development of aquaculture business, totaling USD 17.9 million and iii) Component 3: Project
management, institutional development and policy, totaling USD 11.8 million. Furthermore, the project includes a
Component 0: Disaster Risk Reduction and Response, to which no resources have currently been allocated.
Climate finance. The total amount of IFAD climate finance for this project is preliminarily calculated as USD 13.4
million, representing 31.2% of IFAD's investment. This amount is drawn from IFAD financing of sub-components 1.2
and 2.1. If a climate event triggers Component 0 in the future, the amount of climate financing in this project will
increase, likely substantially.
Table 3. Project costs by component (and sub-components) and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Components
IFAD Loan
IFAD Grant
Beneficiaries
GoM
Total
Amount %
Amount %
Amount %
Amount %
Amount %
0. Disaster Risk Reduction and
Response
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1. Small-scale aquaculture productivity
1. Agribusiness for input supply
1,598
15.2 6,391
60.9
262
2.5
2,250
21.4
10,501
21.4
2. Develop smallholder
aquaculture production capacity
1,158
13.2 4,630
52.9
2,459
28.1
505
5.8
8,751
17.9
Subtotal
2,755
14.3 11,022
57.2
2,721
14.1
2,754
14.3
19,252
39.3
2. Development of aquaculture business
1. Support to development of
Aquaparks
218
20.0 872
80.0
2. Develop market linkages and
business partnerships
3,325
19.9 13,300
79.8
3. Access to financial services
36
20.0 146
80.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
1,091
2.2
51
0.3
16,676
34.0
0
-
182
0.4
Subtotal
3,579
19.9 14,318
17/28
79.8
-
3. Project management, institutional development and policy
1. Policy and institutional
development
158
20.0 632
80.0
-
-
-
51
0.3
17,949
36.6
0
-
790
1.6
2. Mainstreaming nutrition and
addressing social risks
3. Project management and
Coordination
756
17.7 3,025
70.9
168
3.9
315
7.4
4,264
8.7
1,3526
20.0 5,410
80.0
-
-
0
-
6,763
13.8
Subtotal
2,267
19.2 9,067
76.7
168
1.4
315
2.7
11,816
24.1
Total Project Costs
8,602
17.5 34,406
70.2
2,889
5.9
3,121
6.4
49,017
100
84.
Table 4. Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Categories
IFAD Loan
IFAD Grant
Beneficiaries
GoM
Total
Amount %
Amount %
Amount %
Amount %
Amount %
Equipment & Materials
278
6.4
1,113
25.6
2,459
56.5 505
11.6 4,355
8.9
Works
4,952
20.0
19,810
80.0
Vehicles
53
20.0
213
80.0
Consultancies
1,076
18.9
4,305
75.6
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
-
-
24,762
50.5
267
0.5
315
5.5
5,696
11.6
Credit, Guarantee Funds
210
16.0
839
64.0
262
20.0 0
Training
988
19.3
3,954
77.4
168
3.3
0
-
-
-
1,311
2.7
5,110
10.4
1,871
3.8
Workshop
374
20.0
1,497
80.0
Salaries & Allowances
552
10.9
2,206
43.6
Operating Costs
118
20.0
470
80.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
2,300.9
45.5 5,059
10.3
0
-
588
1.2
Total Project Costs
8,602
17.5
34,406
18/28
70.2
2,889
5.9
3,121
6.4
49,017
100.0
85.
Table 5. Project costs by component and year
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Components
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
-
-
-
-
-
-
0. Disaster Risk Reduction and
Response
1. Small-scale aquaculture
productivity
1. Agribusiness for input supply
3,779
36.0 3,680
35.0 1,988
18.9 626
6.0
429
4.1
10,501
2. Develop smallholder aquaculture
production capacity
1,311
15.0 2,152
24.6 2,583
29.5 1,773
20.3 933
10.7 8,751
Subtotal
5,089
26.4 5,831
30.3 4,571
23.7 2,399
12.5 1,362
7.1
19,252
2. Development of aquaculture
business
1. Support to development of
Aquaparks
2. Develop market linkages and
business partnerships
346
31.7 -
-
359
32.9 -
-
386
35.3 1,091
1,733
10.4 3,924
23.5 4,777
28.6 3,470
20.8 2,771
16.6 16,676
3. Access to financial services
21
11.5 45
24.6 46
25.2 47
25.7 24
13.0 182
Subtotal
2,101
11.7 3,969
22.1 5,182
28.9 3,517
19.6 3,180
17.7 17,949
3. Project management,
institutional development and
policy
1. Policy and institutional
development
2. Mainstreaming nutrition and
addressing social risks
291
36.8 148
18.7 165
20.9 89
11.3 97
12.2 790
590
13.8 1,405
32.9 656
15.4 1,015
23.8 599
14.1 4,264
3. Project management and
Coordination
2,426
19/28
35.9 1,106
16.4 1,046
15.5 1,176
17.4 1,008
14.9 6,763
Subtotal
3,307
28.0 2,658
22.5 1,867
15.8 2,280
19.3 1,704
14.4 11,816
Total Project Costs
10,497 21.4 12,459 25.4 11,620 23.7 8,196
16.7 6,246
12.7 49,017
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
86.
PRODAPE will be financed by: an IFAD loan on higly concessionary terms (USD 8.6 million, 17.5% of total project
costs), an IFAD grant (USD 34.4 million, 70.2% of total project costs) under the 2018-2021 PBAS cycle, the
Government of Mozambique (USD 3.1 million, 6.4% of total project costs), and the project beneficiaries (USD 2.9
million, 5.9% of total project costs). The IFAD financing may be provided either in USD or in Euros, subject to IFAD’s
acceptance of a formal request by Government of Mozambique. Finally, the IFAD loan and grant will finance taxes.
87.
The Government of Mozambique (GoM) will finance the salaries of its own staff who will support the implementation
of the project on a pro-rata basis, as well as the costs of the PMU office in Maputo.
c. Disbursement
88.
89.
IFAD funds will be channeled into a USD designated account maintained at the Bank of Mozambique. The funds will
be transfer into the   Single Treasury Account (CUT) managed  by the MoF  The funds in CUT are managed through
coded designated ledger accounts that ensure traceability of each project’s available funds. Each provincial
directorate and implementing agency shall maintain a separate account in CUT to receive the project funds from the
PCU.  .
The PCU will have the responsibility of coordinating and ensuring the smooth flow of funds so that funds are
available as and when necessary to meet programme financial obligations towards suppliers, service providers and
contractors. This will involve: (i) establishing the liquidity requirements of each implementing agency based on the
approved AWPB; (ii) preparing and dispatching bank transfer instructions to the Bank of Mozambique to ensure that
there is sufficient liquidity in the operational account at all times; (iii) following up on any funds advanced to
implementing agencies and ensuring the timely justification thereof; (iv) maintaining the supporting documentation
underlying expenditures incurred by the programme in order to prepare Withdrawal Applications for submission to
IFAD; and (v) ensuring that the IFAD Authorized Allocation is fully accounted for at all times through regular
preparation of periodic reconciliation statements for the designated accounts. All movements from the Designated
Accounts will require countersignature by the Authorized Representative of the GoM.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
90.
91.
92.
Project profitability indicators. The overall Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of the Project is estimated at
26%. The Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) is MZN 4.4 billion, or USD 73.3 million at 10% social discount rate.
As ENPV is positive and EIRR is above the Social Discount Rate the project is deemed economically viable and
acceptable for investment.
Benefits. Financial benefits will be in the form of increased productivity of the farmers engaging in the aquaculture
value chain, as well as increased financial returns of the HHs targeted by PRODAPE. Social benefits will include a
reduction in poverty rates in the areas targeted by the Project, with special measures taken to ensure inclusion of
disadvantaged groups. This will be the effect of the increased financial returns for HHs consequent to Project
interventions.
Sensitivity Analysis. The sensitivity analysis evaluated the robustness of the proposed interventions. Proxies
analyzed were: reduction of project benefits (due, for example, to failure of the capacity building initiatives of the
project), increase in project costs. The results of the analysis show that the reduction of project benefits of up to 30%
do not endanger the economic suitability of the project, as ENPV remains positive, and IRR is still above the SDR.
93.
An increase of project costs of a maximum of 30% would also not seriously imperil the project as ENPV would remain
positive and EIRR well above the SDR. Finally, a delay in accrual of project benefits of 2 years would still not drop
ENPV below zero (and IRR below the SDR), hence the project would remain profitable.
94.
However, the sensitivity analysis showed that the project is particularly sensitive to decreases in the selling price of
fish and increases in fish feed prices: a 10% decrease in fish price would make the project marginally profitable, with
EIRR at 10.3%, barely 0.3% above the SDR. A 20% increase in feed price would bring EIRR below the SDR, and the
ENPV below zero, rendering the project no longer profitable.
20/28
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
95.
96.
97.
The last year of operations will not involve the implementation of core investment activities, but rather ensure that the
results of capacity building needs have been attained, establishing/strengthening linkages between players, updating
databases and organizing sector documentation. The permanence of dedicated technical staff within the sector will
have contributed, importantly to sector skills development. A specific exit plan (see Annex 15 for further reference)
will guide the implementation of activities in year five to ensure that all PRODAPE “exit requirements” have been met.
The economic sustainability of aquaculture after PRODAPE closure will depend on the established enterprise
budgets and their implementation. It is also assumed that both the input supply system, extension, marketing and
distribution channels will be adequately established during the lifespan of the programme. Profit margins predicted by
the project indicate that important benefits would be accrued by beneficiaries engaged at all levels of production in so
far as supply and demand requirements are met. Additional issues supporting economic sustainability include the
profitability and scalability of integrated small-scale aquaculture for small-scale fish farmers to be targeted by
PRODAPE.
PRODAPE design was produced to ensure that environmental sustainability is warranted by: a) ensuring that
aquaculture activities respect the ecosystem services and biodiversity, avoid any adverse environmental impacts and
contribute to environmental improvements; b) contributing to the elaboration, establishment and use of adequate
aquaculture sector regulations, standards and guidelines; and c) increasing environment and natural resource
management capacity of the extension service and project beneficiaries. The integration of pond fish-culture with crop
production systems is expected to contribute to the reduction of effluent disposal in lakes / rivers and provide both
plant / animal-based nutrition to reduce fertilizer costs.
98.
In terms of institutional sustainability, as with projects previously financed by IFAD in the small-scale fisheries sector,
PRODAPE will be integrated into MIMAIP institutions, which are responsible for implementing project activities. The
PRODAPE integrates institutional strengthening measures across all government agencies involved at all levels and
constitute a fundamental pillar for the sector´s technical sustainability.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
99.
The PRODAPE design identified institutional, economic, social and environmental risks and relevant mitigation
measures, outlined below in Table 6:
Table 6. Key PRODAPE Risks and Mitigation Measures
Activity
Risk
Risk rating
Mitigation
Human resource
requirements for
extension
The Government may not be
able to allocate adequate
funds in a timely manner, as
required for the recruitment
of the additional field agents
and provide the logistical
means required.
High
-   Include salaries and living
expenses as well as transport for the
extension staff in PRODAPE budget.
Aquaculture
production and
water needs
21/28
There is a possibility that the
expansion of aquaculture
production goes beyond a
level that is sustainable.  
While in the beginning the
risk would be low, a
continued expansion would
represent an increased risk.
Medium-to-High
Demand for tilapia in
local market
Actual demand for tilapia in
national markets needs to
be ascertained to ensure
that production matches
demand.
Low-to-Medium
-   The project will undertake surveys
on water demand and availability as
required for the expansion of
production activities in target areas
and ensure water management
measures are in place under the
supervision of local administrations.
Water quality parameters will be
regularly monitored for quality
assurance.
-   Demand will be assessed through
the market survey to be carried out
at the start of the Project. Promotion
activities (e.g. fairs, high-value
product development) will be carried
out through the project to promote
tilapia.
Laboratory and
quarantine services
No framework for laboratory
and quarantine services; low
capacity to guarantee
biosecurity for live fish.
Medium
-   Strengthen CEPAQ.
Depletion of local
biodiversity
Local biodiversity could be
affected by overpopulation
and not following safety
measures.
Medium
Climate change
related risks
Floods, cyclones, high
temperatures and drought
may affect water availability
and infrastructures
High
Low uptake of
financial services
Low uptake of project
services by both financial
service providers and project
beneficiaries.
Medium
Social issues being
put aside during
implementation
Targeting strategy may be
simplified and thus not be
inclusive.   Addressing social
risks may not be regarded
as important.
High
-   Facilitate the production of
adequate regulations and
implementation / monitoring thereof.
-   The CRA identifies specific
mitigation measures including
improvement on the design of
aquaculture facilities to avoid mass
scale fish escape.
-   Conduct intensive sensitization
campaigns to stimulate interest and
demand for project services.
-   Implement capacity building and
technical assistance to enable
financial service providers to develop
appropriate products and delivery
channels.
-   Conduct training and mentoring of
farmers and related value chain
actors to enhance the commercial
viability.
-   Integration of a sociologist in the
PCU.
-   Production of manuals on social
inclusion and social risks and
training staff at all levels on these
issues.
Payment delays
22/28
Delays in processing
payments at sub-national
level as a result of   GoM
decentralization following
proposed constitutional
amendment in 2018.
High
-   Centralizing     large payments
through the PCU account for the first
two years of programme
implementation   and the provinces
execute only operational payments
until payment systems at the
provincial levels are fully functional.  
Preparation of
AWPBs
Delays in preparation and
approval of PRODAPE
AWPBs.
Low
-   Provision of technical assistance
to build capacity to management
team
Project M&E
Limited capacity of
DPMAIPs to assume M&E
responsibilities.
Low-to-Medium
Staff capacity on
procurement
planning
Poor procurement planning
and monitoring capacity
could lead to significant
delays in executing
procurement actions.
High
Contract and records
management
Delays, cost overruns and
lack of appropriate records.
High
Country debt
distress levels
The Government is not able
to meet its financial
obligations under the
project.
High
100.
.
I. Environment and Social category
-   Appointment of a fully dedicated
Focal Point at DPMIAP and provision
of training and technical assistance
on M&E and KM approach adopted
by the project
- Training to be conducted jointly by
IFAD, UFSA and Administrative
Tribunal on IFAD procurement
guidelines and the GoM Public
Procurement Decree N. 5/2016.
- The use of the Procurement Plan
as a monitoring tool.
-    Provision of checklists of records
that must be on each procurement
file.
-    Required use of the electronic
filing system (e-archive).
-    Provision of training on contract /
project management.
-    Regular update of the contract
register as a management and
tracking tool.
-    Counterpart financing obligations
by the Government which will be in-
kind to be indicated in the financing
agreement and enforce compliance
during implementation
101.
PRODAPE will use technologies and production methods adapted to local conditions and avoid operations located in
fragile or environmentally sensitive areas, such as conservation areas and their buffer zones. PRODAPE will focus
on the production of indigenous fish species, using locally adapted technologies where fish farming can be practised
without significantly altering local ecosystems. Resilience-building measures will also be integrated into the
programme (i.e., integrated farming, water harvesting and storage). As such, PRODAPE´s potential social and
environmental impacts are considered manageable and/or reversible leading to being considered a Category “B”
project.
102.
23/28
The ESMF confirmed the above categorization and established clear principles, rules and guidelines for specific site
selection: activities must not take place in sensitive ecosystems and be limited to freshwater aquaculture. In addition,
each “sub-project” must keep to a maximum of 74 ponds and two production cycles per year to generate not more
than 100 tons of fish.[20] Higher production levels would imply becoming a Category A project. Cage production also
must not exceed this limit, additionally they will be subject to the maximum carrying capacity of the particular water
body which will be determined in each case. During implementation a number of assessments/studies and
stakeholder engagement will be undertaken during implementation to provide recommended mitigation/monitoring
measures to IFAD for no-objection, as appropriate and in accordance with the findings of such assessments/studies
and consultation. These include strategic environmental and social impact assessment, and cumulative impact
assessment.
103.
ESMF constitute the basis for the development of site-specific ESMPs. When established, Water Resource Users’
Associations and other relevant entities should be engaged in the negotiation of access and use of water sources
before new production technologies are constructed. For this project to remain a Category B, engagement in pond or
cage culture in large dams/reservoirs is limited to the compliance with the criteria set out within the ESMF as well as
to the development of guidelines for sustainable production and demonstration of best practices (especially in cage
farming).
J. Climate Risk classification
104.
The project’s climate risk classification is “High” requiring a detailed Climate Risk Analysis (CRA). Project
investments will focus on aquaculture systems sensitive to climate change and will require measures to reduce
vulnerability. More frequent and extreme weather events, combined with a slow onset sea level rise and increasing
salinity, threaten aquaculture installations along coastal shorelines. Changing rainfall patterns and water scarcity may
impact on river and water bodies where aquaculture is practiced. In addition, more erratic rainfall and extreme
weather events may cause droughts and floods, modifying soil erosion and siltation processes, thus causing major
negative changes in rivers and water bodies.
105.
The project will promote locally suited climate smart aquaculture and adaptation practices as identified in the relevant
CRA. It will, also take into consideration, when available, the Local Adaptation Plans (LAPs) elaborated within
Mozambique´s National Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation Strategy (NCCAMS) framework in order to align
with national efforts, reduce vulnerability and increase the coping capacities of beneficiaries. The promotion of
sustainable land and water management practices as well as capacity building at farm and institutional levels, will
further reduce vulnerability.
106.
Strong collaboration between relevant institutions such as IDEPA, IIP, the National Meteorological Institute (INAM),
the National Institute for Disaster Management (INGC), MASA and the Ministry for Land, Environment and Rural
Development (MITADER), relevant departments and provincial governments will harness synergies.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
107.
Details are provided in Sub-component 3.1 dedicated to Project Management.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
108.
Financial management.The financial management assessment showed that Government systems have the potential
to provide adequate controls and ensure proper project fund management. Project planning and budgeting will be
aligned to the government calendar with the objective of having quality annual work plans and budgets approved and
uploaded in the e-SISTAFE by the beginning of each fiscal year[17].
109.
Funding from IFAD will be administered through a separate designated account at the Bank of Mozambique (BoM) to
receive project funds from IFAD. PRODAPE will maintain a local currency operating account in e-SISTAFE under the
Single Treasury Account (CUT) for the PCU. At the provincial level, the funds will be disbursed to the DPMAIP Single
Treasury Accounts for the project. It is recommended that processing of large payments be centralised at PCU level
for the first two years of project implementation.
110.
MIMAIP’s Director of Finance and Administration will be responsible for ensuring existence of adequate financial
management arrangements throughout PRODAPE implementation. The operational day-to-day financial
management functions will be the responsibility of PRODAPE Finance Manager overseen by the Head of Finance,
MIMAIP/IDEPA and assisted by project Accountant and those assigned at the provinces.
24/28
111.
To provide assurance of strong internal controls, the Internal Audit department of MIMAIP is to include PRODAPE in
its internal audit work plans with the submission of PRODAPE’s reports to MIMAIP and the NPSC. Supervision
missions will report on the activity of the internal audit with respect to PRODAPE. Internal controls will also be verified
during the annual audit exercise by external audit and reported to IFAD in a management letter. In line with IFAD’s
General Conditions, PRODAPE financial statements shall be audited on an annual basis. Audit reports and
management letters shall be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after the end of each fiscal year.
112.
Procurement. The existing legal framework for public procurement in Mozambique is currently governed by the PPD
N. 5/2016 that establishes the principles and procedures to be applied in any procurement by public authorities and
institutions governed by public law, under public control or using public funds.
113.
The PCU Procurement Officer will oversee and carry out PRODAPE procurement activities in coordination with
specialized and technical units. At the provincial level, procurement will be limited to small works and locally available
service providers subject to close supervision by the PCU. As required by the PPD, bidding documents will be
submitted to MIMAIP for approval.
114.
The PCU will also provide the necessary technical support in preparation of technical specifications, bills of quantities
and terms of reference to the provinces, as required. While PCU staff is knowledgeable on national procurement
procedures that would be used under PRODAPE, they would need to be trained on applicable IFAD procedures and
guidelines to get acquainted with them. Induction training will be given by IFAD, UFSA and Administrative Tribunal to
explain the different roles within the project and provide guidance for a smooth implementation. The UFSA should
publish all PRODAPE calls for bidding and contract awards. Documentation will be stored in the e-archive system.
115.
Governance. Project governance will be led by the NPSC as the governing body of the project. This set up will
provide strategic guidance towards the achievement of project objectives and contribute to the higher-level sector
policy and strategic goals.
116.
Whilst the enforcement of good governance is the primary responsibility of the GoM, all project stakeholders will be
made aware that IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in
IFAD financed projects.
117.
Disbursement arrangements
118.
The disbursement plan for the project per year will be as per the below table:
Table 7. Disbursement by semesters and Government cash flow
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Financing Available
Financed
GoM
Costs to be
Semester
IFAD Loan IFAD Grant
Beneficiaries
Project
Cumulative
Amount
Amount
Amount
Total
Costs
Cash Flow Cash Flow
1
2
3
978
3,913
978
3,913
78
78
4,970
5,248
-278
-278
4,970
5,248
-278
-557
1,080
4,321
476
5,876
6,229
-353
-910
1,080
4,321
476
25/28
5,876
6,229
-353
-1,263
4
5
6
7
8
9
1,007
4,027
1,007
4,027
663
2,653
663
2,653
572
2,290
10
572
2,290
432
432
446
446
13
123
5,465
5,810
-345
-1,608
5,465
5,810
-345
-1,953
3,762
4,098
-336
-2,289
3,762
4,098
-336
-2,625
2,875
3,123
-248
-2,873
2,875
3,123
-248
-3,121
Total
8,602
34,406
2,889
45,897
49,017
-3,121
-3,121
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
119.
The integrated participatory M&E, Learning and KM system, together with communication plans will be developed in
accordance with GoM frameworks and IFAD guidelines. The system will seek to steer project implementation,
support economic decisions and policymaking, share knowledge and scale up good practices and develop a good
communication strategies / plan.
120.
Detailed planning and budgeting of PRODAPE activities will be carried out based on the AWPB involving the PCU,
MIMAIP/IDEPA and other implementing agencies / stakeholders in a participatory process with DPMAIPs, target
communities and other relevant stakeholders. Learning and KM will be an integral part of PRODAPE to identify, test,
learn, demonstrate and disseminate its results with the use of innovative approaches and technologies. The success
of the KM strategy will rely on the existence of a knowledge-sharing environment within the PCU, IDEPA, DPMAIPs,
and other implementing partners. In this regard, efforts will be made to ensure that the project is conducive to its
establishment. Focal points / KM champions will be identified at all levels.
121.
The project will establish linkages with the Brazilian aquaculture parks system (especially for cage culture) in the
context of SSTC. This knowledge transfer could be achieved through technical assistance support from Brazil and/or
organizing an exchange learning visit to the Brazilian aquaculture parks by a small team of MIMAIP experts and bring
back the experience to the project.
122.
The PRODAPE communication action plan will be an essential element of the M&E system. This will integrate good
practices and an innovation tracking system, learning routes, documentation, dissemination and learning.
b. Innovation and scaling up
123.
PRODAPE attaches great importance to innovation as a means to integrate new ideas, methods and business
models to improve resilience, production efficiency and better services. Three areas of innovation are envisaged
within PRODAPE: (i) Comprehensive targeting and social risk management approach – a robust targeting strategy
has been developed for the project to ensure inclusive reach to different social and address key social risks identified
among producers; (ii) Innovative business concepts – The project promotes innovative business partnerships and
concepts to Mozambique´s aquaculture sector, including "aquaparks" and the organization of farmers into cluster
models linked to players at other levels of the value chain; (iii) Seed quality improvement of the indigenous
Mozambique tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) which is threatened by competition with the introduced and
invasive Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus). PRODAPE will support genetics improvement of this species through
selective breeding and establishment of facilities for seed biosafety.
124.
The scaling up strategy focuses especially on taking forward some of the knowledge, good practices, results and
technologies from PROAQUA and PROPESCA for implementation in PRODAPE's 23 target districts, including: (i)
farmers' input support mechanisms - with some modifications; (ii) the PCR model, including the method in their
establishment and capacity building; and (iii) knowledge from studies conducted under PROAQUA, particularly on
feed, seed and economic analysis of alternative models.
26/28
M. Implementation plans
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.
125.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans. As part of preparations for implementation readiness, a draft
AWPB, Procurement Plan and Programme Implementation Manual have been prepared as part of the design for
PRODAPE and submitted as part of this PDR. This is expected to save time at the beginning of PRODAPE
implementation and allow for quick start up. The other steps to be taken to ensure a quick start up include: a) the
PRODAPE PMU will, to a large extent, build on the existing structures and mechanisms of its predecessors
PROPESCA and PROAQUA. This will contribute to a seamless transition by bringing into PROCAVA lessons,
experiences and achievements of PROPESCA and PROAQUA; b) GoM undertaking to evaluate the performance of
the PROPESCA and PROAQUA PMT staff at the closure of these two projects. On the basis of this evaluation and if
the performance is established to be satisfactory, GoM would (at their discretion) make a recommendation to IFAD
for appointing those staff to the PRODAPE PMU on 2-year performance-based contracts. This arrangement would
ensure an effective and efficient start-up of project activities. Besides this arrangement, the recruitment for staff
would have to be done on a competitive and transparent basis from the market.
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
126.
Supervision. PRODAPE will be jointly supervised by IFAD and the GoM. The emphasis in all supervision missions
will be learning and assessment of achievements and opportunities for scaling up vis-à-vis the overall objective of an
effective project implementation. Implementation support missions will identify and address early emerging issues and
build technical capacity for project implementation. To the extent possible, there will be continuity in the composition
of the supervision and implementation support missions in order to increase mission effectiveness.
127.
Mid-Term Review (MTR). In addition to the annual missions, a joint IFAD-GoM MTR will be undertaken in year three.
The ‘forward looking review’ will assess target group perceptions of project processes, activities, impacts and
benefits, especially for the smallholder farmers involved in aquaculture, the adequacy of targeting mechanisms and
technical project strategies. The Joint Review will assess the project logical framework, objectives, assumptions and
risks, and suggest needed adjustments to project strategies, approaches and methods, among others.
128.
Completion. During the final year of project implementation, a review will be carried out to document project outputs,
outcomes and progress towards the realisation of project goals. The relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and
sustainability of interventions will therefore be reviewed, building on findings of the joint reviews over the course of
the project lifetime. In particular, this will compare changes in the livelihoods of beneficiaries that are related to the
implemented project activities against the situation documented in the baseline study. The issues of scaling-up,
replication and sustainability of development results will be analysed to guide future interventions.
Footnotes
27/28
[1] World Bank, Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Mozambique, March 30, 2017.
[2] Ministério de Economia e Finanças, October 2016. Pobreza e Bem-Estar em Moçambique. Quarta Avaliação Nacional,
Inquérito ao Orçamento Familiar (IOF) 2014/15.
[3]   INE, 2017. Censo 2017, Divulgação dos Resultados Preliminares. IV RGPH, 2017.
[4]   Ministério de Economia e Finanças, October 2016. Pobreza e Bem-Estar em Moçambique: Quarta Avaliação
Nacional. Inquérito ao Orçamento Familiar IOF 2014/15.
[5]https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?view=map Accessed 22 June 2018.
[6] WB, 2016. Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities.
[7] Ministério de Economia e Finanças, October 2016. Pobreza e Bem-Estar em Moçambique. Quarta Avaliação Nacional,
Inquérito ao Orçamento Familiar (IOF) 2014/15.
[8] UNDP, 2016. Human Development Report 2016. Human Development for Everyone: Briefing Notes for Countries on
the 2016 Human Development Report, Mozambique.
[9] CCMASA Partners Presentation on Nut Financial Investments, 2018. The Cost of Hunger in Africa Study. Mozambique
Results.
[10] WB, 2016. Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities.
[11] IDEPA, 2017. Annual Report.
[12] Danish Trade Council for International Development and Cooperation, 2017. Labour Market Profile Mozambique
2017.
[13] GoM Fisheries Master Plan 2010-2019.
[14] The Aquaculture Development Action Plan (PADA).
[15] (i) Nampula Artisanal Fisheries Project (NAFP), a loan approved in 1993 and completed in 2001; (ii) Sofala Bank
Artisanal Fisheries Project (SBAFP), a loan approved in September 2001 and completed in March 2011; (iii) Artisanal
Fisheries Promotion Project (ProPesca), a loan approved in December 2010 and completed in March 2018; (iv) Coastal
HIV/AIDS Prevention and Nutrition Improvement Project (CHAPANI), a grant approved in May 2012 and completed in
October 2015; (v) Project for Promotion of Small-scale Aquaculture (PROAQUA), approved in June 2013 as part of a
larger EU-grant, and completed in September 2017; and (vi) Securing Artisanal Fishers' Resource Rights Project
(ProDIRPA), a grant approved in December 2013 that reached completion in June 2018.
[16] See Impact Evaluation of the Sofala Bank Artisanal Fisheries Project in Mozambique (September , 2016) and the
Country Strategy and Programme Evaluation (CSPE) (February 2017.
[17] For more details please refer to the project´s logical framework.
[18] Tilapia Niloticus should not be used north of the Zambezi river due to biosecurity concerns, or in coastal areas due to
not being salt tolerant. A good performing mossambicus would address both limitations.
[19] The project will also need to take into account that: local population has preference for locally produced tilapia as
there is perception that it is of better quality than imported fish, however imported tilapia especially from Asia is priced
lower than locally produced species. The focus therefore is to lower the cost of local tilapia through lower costs of feed
and the model of production/marketing. In this regard, one large tilapia producer in the country has demonstrated (with
adequate cost-benefit analysis) that tilapia sold at smaller sizes (< 180 grams) can compete favourably with imported
tilapia, selling at about MZN 100 per Kg (See the cost-price structures presented in Annex 6). This shows that there is
adequate demand for this small size fish,especially among the low income consumers (explains why it is usually difficult to
stop catching of "undersize fish"). The project will further test this marketing strategy, coupled with other measures to
reduce the cost of production, to make fish more competitive. The project expects that aquaculture will take time to
develop, hence fish imports will not be eliminated immediately but will gradually reduce through a mixture of increasing
preference and demand for locally produced fish (food safety concerns) and interventions to lower the costs of production
and prices of locally produced fish.
[20] This calculation is made by considering a 500 m2 pond with a maximum capacity of 2,500 fingerlings (including 10%
mortality rate) and a maximum fish unit weight of 300 gr per two production cycles per year thus to remain below the
threshold of 100/tons per year, otherwise this would trigger a Cat. A project according to the Mozambique Environmental
Regulation.
28/28
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Logical Framework
1/6
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outreach 
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Fisheries records,
Economic Surveys,
Project reports, Baseline
and impact studies
Fisheries records,
Economic Surveys,
Project reports, Baseline
and impact studies
Annual
PCU
Economic recovery
Political enabling
environment
Annual
PCU
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of
households members
Household members
0 50700
88900
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Non-women-headed
households
Women-headed
households
0
2329
3560
Households
0 11645
17800
1 Persons receiving services promoted or
supported by the project
Females
Males
Young
0 20280
35560
0 30420
53340
0
5067
8890
Not Young
0 15202
26670
Indigenous people
Non-Indigenous
people
Total number of
persons receiving
services
0 50700
88900
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Project Goal 
Contribute to reducing poverty and enhancing food security
and nutrition in the project Districts
% increase in annual fish consumption from
aquaculture at national level (current national
average kgs/capita)
Baseline and impact
surveys, HH survey
PCU
Year 1,
mid-term &
year 5
Economic and
weather conditions
remain favourable
% increase
15
30
Number of HHs with improved asset ownership
compared to baseline
Baseline and impact
surveys, HH survey
PCU
Year 1,
mid-term &
year 5
Males
Females
0 30420
53340
0 20280
35560
Households
0 11645
17800
Development Objective 
To sustainably enhance the livelihoods of poor households
for increased income from growth of economic activities in
the aquaculture value chain and family nutrition
% of target HHs reporting increased annual net
income (fish producers, processors, input
suppliers)
National, statistics HH
surveys including studies
on poverty and gender
survey
Baseline
and mid-
term
PCU and
Bureau of
Statistics
Males
Females
Young
Households
13335
34671
8890
23114
2223
5334
25
65
Proportion (%) of people who have adequate and
diverse diets
Males
Females
Young
Persons
0 13335
26670
0
0
0
8890
17780
2223
4103
25
50
National statistics, HH
surveys, including studies
on poverty and gender
Baseline
survey and
the end of
Project
PCU and
Bureau of
Statistics
Existence of
macroeconomics
and climacteric
conditions;
Increased income at
HH level from sales
leads to investments
in productive and
domestic assets
Outcome 
1. Increased fish production and productivity of smallholder
farmers in aquaculture
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of
environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient
technologies and practices
Economic Surveys,
Project reports, impact
studies and specific
surveys
Semi-
annual and
annual
Implementing
partners and
PCU
Favourable
conditions for
aquaculture farming
Households
30
75
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Source
Frequency Responsibility
3/6
Name
Total number of
household members
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
26695
66737
Males
Females
Young
Households
3204
8010
2136
5340
534
1335
5340
13350
Output 
1.1.1 Quantity of quality of fish seed (fingerlings) production
improved
# of aquaculture producers accessing fingerlings
required
Project progress reports
Annual
PCU
Package of
attractive incentives
established
Males
Females
Young
producers
0
0
0
0
2659
8571
1773
5714
443
1428
25
80
Output 
1.2.1 Quantity and quality of feed production improved
Output 
1.3.1 Income derived from aquaculture increased
Package of
attractive incentives
established
# of aquaculture producers accessing feed required Project progress reports
Annual
PCU
Males
Females
Young
producers
0
0
0
0
3204
6408
2136
4272
534
1068
30
60
% change in income
Project progress reports
Annual
Males
Females
Young
Percentage
0
70
146
PCU/ Imple-
menting
partners
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
1.4.1 Consumer awareness and basic knowledge on
nutrition improved
# of persons provided with targeted support to
improve their nutrition
Project progress reports;
Survey on nutrition
PCU
Annual,
Midterm
and end of
Project
Favourable policy
environment;
Nutrition
interventions
implemented in the
country
Outcome 
2. Improved efficiency of aquaculture production and market
system
Output 
2.1.1 Aquaparks established
Output 
2.2.1 Market outlets for aquaculture fish operational
Young
5067
8890
Total persons
0 50700
88900
Males
Females
30420
53340
20280
35560
% of producers reporting increase in value of
aquaculture production
4650
8370
3100
5580
775
1395
50
90
Males
Females
Young
Producers
# of aquaparks established
Aquaparks
Functional retail outlets increase
Increase in retail
outlets
0
0
0
0
0
0
Economic Surveys,
Project reports, impact
studies and specific
survey
Semi-
annual and
annual
Implementing
partners and
PCU
Economic and
weather conditions
remain favourable;
Favourable macro-
economic indicators
Project progress reports
Annual
PCU/
Implementing
partners
Favourable
conditions for
aquaparks
Action plans
Baseline
survey
PCU
35
75
Favourable
conditions for
domestic
aquaculture fish
farming and
marketing
Output 
2.2.2 Aqua business linkages established
# of small farmers in business relationship with
input suppliers
Project progress reports
Annual
PCU/
Implementing
partners
Favourable
conditions for
aquaculture farming
Males
Females
Young
Small farmers
0
0
0
0
4800
7200
3200
4800
800
1200
8000
12000
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
2.3.1 Community-based Groups of savings and credit (PCR)
in aquaculture assisted
Output 
2.3.2 Line of credit (LoC) for aquaculture entrepreneurs
established
Output 
2.4.1 Youth aquapreneurships established
Outcome 
3. The sector and project are better managed and strategic
objectives are reached
5/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Active PCR groups identified and assisted to
access finance service
PCR groups
0
150
450
Aquaculture entrepreneurs accessing targeted LoC
(CI/ORMS)
Males
Females
Young
Entrepreneurs
0
0
0
0
120
80
20
300
200
50
200
500
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Supervision Mission
reports, Project progress
reports
On an
annual
basis
Supervision Mission
reports, Project progress
reports
On an
annual
basis
PCU/BNI
PCU/BNI
Groups of PCR
willing and
participate actively
in saving and credit
Aquaculture
entrepreneurs
willing and attracted
by the available LoC
Youths in income generating activities
Project progress reports
On an
annual
basis
PCU/
Implementing
partners
Favourable
conditions for youth
enterprises
Economic surveys,
Project reports, impact
studies and specific
surveys
Semi-
annual and
annual
Implementing
partners and
PCU
Supportive policy
and legal framework
Males
Females
Young
0
0
0
180
120
300
360
240
600
Targeted farmers reporting having access to
services from the ministry
Males
Females
Young
Farmers increase
20
45
Output 
3.1.1 Project coordination systems in place and used
Disbursement and fund utilization
PCU and project reports
Disbursement and
fund utilization
0
50
100
Output 
3.2.1 Institutional capacity of MIMAIP strengthened
Persons benefiting from capacity building activities
PCU and project reports
Males
0
120
300
PCU / MIMAIP Development of
aquaculture
continues being a
priority for the GoM
PCU / MIMAIP
On an
annual
basis
On an
annual
basis
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/6
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Females
Young
Persons
0
0
0
80
20
200
50
200
500
Output 
3.3.1 Sector policy framework strengthened
Aquaculture sector strategies produced (strategic
mapping, suitability map)
PCU and project reports
Strategies
PCU / MIMAIP
On an
annual
basis
The GoM continues
considering
aquaculture as a
priority.
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex 2:  Theory of Change  
PRODAPE Theory of Change 
1 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex 3:  Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
1.  Main Assumptions. The Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
will  be  implemented  over  a  5-year  period.  Project  costs  and  financing  were  calculated 
based on consultations with relevant project sub-component leaders of the design team. 
All costs were produced using COSTAB32.  
2. 
Inflation.  Information  on  the  current  as  well  as  projections  on  inflation  were 
collected  from  the  regular  reports  prepared  by  the  Economist  Intelligence  Unit  (EIU4). 
Local inflation (CPI) reached an average all-time high in 2016 of 19.9% and has steadily 
decreased ever since. Inflation has  dropped to single digits in 2018 and the EIU expects 
the trend to remain for the year 2019. The decrease in inflation was be driven mainly by 
lower oil prices, and the stabilization of food prices following the recovery from shocks to 
internal  production  due  to  weather  related  events.  The  specific  effects  of  the  two 
cyclones  that  hit  Mozambique in  the  first  quarter  of  2019  have  not  yet  been  taken  into 
account in these forecasts. As the forecast does not go beyond 2023 (at 6%), we have 
set the inflation for project year 5 and equal to the forecasted inflation for 2023.  
3. 
Exchange  rate.  After  a  of  continuous  depreciation  of  the  Mozambican  Metical 
against  the  US  dollar  in  2016,  Bank  of  Mozambique  has  tightened  fiscal  policy  in  2017 
and 2018, establishing a single exchange rate system applicable by all banks. As at the 
first  quarter  of  2019  the  official  exchange  rate  for  the  USD  was   1 USD  =  60  MZN. 
Considering the volatile situation, the exchange rate forecast presented by the EIU was 
adjusted for the purposes of the project to 1 USD = 67.4 MZN in PY1 to 1 USD = 75.6 
MZN for PY5 and beyond. 
Table 1: Inflation and Exchange rates for COSTAB 
4 http://www.eiu.com/ 
2 
 Republic of MozambiquePRODAPE - Small Scale Aquaculture Development ProjectInflation and Exchange RatesUp toUp toProjectNegotiationStart20202021202220232024Inflation (in %'s) /a MOST Annual rates Local 0.00.05.15.45.96.06.0Foreign 0.00.03.42.33.74.14.1Compounded rates Local 0.00.02.67.914.020.828.1Foreign 0.00.01.74.67.711.916.5NONE Annual rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Compounded rates Local 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Foreign 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.0Exchange rates (Local/Foreign) /b MOST Rates actually used 60.060.067.469.972.375.675.6Constant purchasing parity rates 60.060.060.561.963.564.865.9% deviation 0.00.011.412.913.816.714.6NONE Rates actually used 60.060.067.469.972.375.675.6Constant purchasing parity rates 60.060.060.060.060.060.060.0% deviation 0.00.012.316.520.526.026.0 _________________________________\a Yearly values are within Each Project Year\b Yearly values are at Project Year Midpoints 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
4.  Physical  contingencies.  A  physical  contingency  of  5%  has  been  applied  to  all 
goods (equipment, vehicles, etc.) and services. This measure will allow for fluctuations in 
the  costs  of  these  expenditure  categories  due  to  uncertainties  not  fully  accounted  for 
during design. No contingencies have been applied to the expenditure category for funds 
disbursed as part of grants or loans (for on lending) to project beneficiaries.   
5.  Project  Costs.  Total  project  costs  including  price  and  physical  contingencies, 
duties and taxes are estimated at USD 49.0 million. Of this amount, USD 21.3 million is 
foreign exchange content, and around USD 3.7 million corresponds to duties and taxes.  
6. 
Project  components  are  (i)  Component  1:  Small-scale  aquaculture  productivity, 
totaling  USD  19.3  million);  (ii)  Component  2:  Development  of  aquaculture  business, 
totaling  USD 17.9 million  and  iii)  Component  3:  Project  management,  institutional 
development  and  policy,  totaling  USD  11.8  million.  Furthermore,  the  project  includes  a 
Component  0:  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Response,  to  which  no  resources  have 
currently  been  allocated.A  summary  breakdown  of  the  Project  costs  by  component  and 
financier is presented below: 
Table 2: PRODAPE breakdown components and financiers (‘000 USD) 
7.  Project  Financing.  PRODAPE  will  be  financed  by:  an  IFAD  grant  (USD  43.0 
million,  87.7%  of  total  project  costs)  under  the  2018-2021  PBAS  cycle,  Government  of 
Mozambique (USD 3.1 million, 6.4% of total project costs), and the project beneficiaries 
(USD  2.9  million,  5.9%  of  total  project  costs).  The  IFAD  financing  may  be  provided 
either  in  USD  or  in  Euros,  subject  to  IFAD’s  acceptance  of  a  formal  request  by 
Government of Mozambique. Finally, the IFAD financing will finance taxes. 
8. 
The  Government  of  Mozambique  will  finance  the  salaries  of  its  own  staff  who  will 
support the implementation of the project on a pro-rata basis, as well as the costs of the 
PMU office in Maputo.  
Table 3: PRODAPE financing plan (‘000 USD) 
3 
IFAD GrantBeneficiariesGoMTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Disaster Risk Reduction and Response --------B. Small-scale aquaculture productivity 1. Agribusiness - Fish input supply 7,989.276.1262.32.52,249.521.410,500.921.42. Develop smallholder aquaculture production capacity 5,787.866.12,458.828.1504.95.88,751.417.9Subtotal 13,776.971.62,721.014.12,754.414.319,252.339.3C. Development of aquaculture business 1. Support to development of Aquaparks 1,090.5100.0--0.0-1,090.52.22. Develop market linkages and business partnerships 16,624.799.7--51.30.316,676.134.03. Develop financial services 182.2100.0--0.0-182.20.4Subtotal 17,897.499.7--51.30.317,948.836.6D. Project management, institutional development and policy 1. Policy development 789.5100.0--0.0-789.51.62. Institutional capacity building 717.169.5--315.130.51,032.12.13. Project management 6,762.5100.0--0.0-6,762.513.84. Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social risks 3,064.694.8167.65.20.0-3,232.26.6Subtotal 11,333.795.9167.61.4315.12.711,816.324.1Total PROJECT COSTS 43,008.087.72,888.65.93,120.86.449,017.4100.0IFAD GrantBeneficiariesGoMTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Equipment & Materials 1,391.431.92,458.856.5504.911.64,355.18.9Works 24,761.9100.0--0.0-24,761.950.5Vehicles 266.5100.0--0.0-266.50.5Consultancies 5,380.794.5--315.15.55,695.811.6Credit, Guarantee Funds 1,049.180.0262.320.0--1,311.42.7Training 4,942.196.7167.63.3--5,109.710.4Workshop 1,870.6100.0--0.0-1,870.63.8Salaries & Allowances 2,757.854.5--2,300.945.55,058.610.3Operating Costs 587.8100.0--0.0-587.81.2Total PROJECT COSTS 43,008.087.72,888.65.93,120.86.449,017.4100.0 
Table 4: Expenditure accounts by financier 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
4 
IFAD GrantBeneficiariesGoMTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Funds 1,049.180.0262.320.0--1,311.42.7B. Works 24,761.9100.0--0.0-24,761.950.5C. Consulting Services 711.2100.0--0.0-711.21.5D. Studies 1,733.4100.0--0.0-1,733.43.5E. Training 4,942.196.7167.63.3--5,109.710.4F. Equipment and materials 1,391.431.92,458.856.5504.911.64,355.18.9G. Workshops 318.5100.0--0.0-318.50.6H. Meetings 1,552.1100.0--0.0-1,552.13.2I. Vehicles 266.5100.0--0.0-266.50.5J. Technical Assistance 2,936.190.3--315.19.73,251.26.6Total Investment Costs 39,662.591.42,888.66.7819.91.943,371.088.5II. Recurrent Costs A. Travel costs 681.6100.0--0.0-681.61.4B. Operation & Maintenance 355.6100.0--0.0-355.60.7C. Salaries 1,172.233.8--2,300.966.23,473.17.1D. Allowances and Benefits 904.0100.0----904.01.8E. Office and general expenses 232.2100.0--0.0-232.20.5Total Recurrent Costs 3,345.559.3--2,300.940.75,646.411.5Total PROJECT COSTS 43,008.087.72,888.65.93,120.86.449,017.4100.0 
Table 5: Project components and sub-components by year 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
5 
Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalA. Disaster Risk Reduction and Response ------B. Small-scale aquaculture productivity 1. Agribusiness - Fish input supply 3,778.83,679.81,988.0625.7428.610,500.92. Develop smallholder aquaculture production capacity 1,310.52,151.52,583.31,773.0933.18,751.4Subtotal 5,089.35,831.34,571.32,398.71,361.719,252.3C. Development of aquaculture business 1. Support to development of Aquaparks 346.2-358.9-385.51,090.52. Develop market linkages and business partnerships 1,733.33,924.24,777.23,470.42,771.016,676.13. Develop financial services 21.044.945.946.823.6182.2Subtotal 2,100.53,969.15,182.03,517.23,180.117,948.8D. Project management, institutional development and policy 1. Policy development 290.7147.8165.089.496.5789.52. Institutional capacity building 218.9528.0112.384.288.81,032.13. Project management 2,426.31,106.01,046.21,175.91,008.16,762.54. Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social risks 371.1876.5543.6930.6510.43,232.2Subtotal 3,306.92,658.31,867.22,280.01,703.811,816.3Total PROJECT COSTS 10,496.712,458.811,620.48,196.06,245.549,017.4 
Table 6: Detailed cost table - sub-component 1.1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
6 
Unit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationTotals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit20202021202220232024Total(USD)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Develop fish seed production capacity Design of hatchery unit & Technical Drawings /a Lumpsum1----110099.8----99.8Tendering Process /b Lumpsum1----155.0----5.0Construction of ultra-modern fish hatcheries/commissioning /c Number222--6392806.8826.1848.6--2,481.5Purchase of hatchery equipment /d Lumpsum1111-44041.842.944.145.6-174.3Purchase of supplies /e Lumpsum1111-43031.332.133.134.2-130.7Rehabilitation/ expansion of hatcheries co-financed by private hatchery operators /f Number33---6250771.8790.3---1,562.1Capacity building for seed production, management and distribution /g Lumpsum1111-43028.829.229.830.2-118.0Development of fish seed standards and certification with the Mozambique National Standards Organization Lumpsum------------Subtotal 1,785.31,720.6955.6110.0-4,571.4B. Develop fish feed production capacity Preparation of technical specification of fish feed machinery/housing /h Lumpsum1----188.0----8.0Preparation of Tendering documents for feed machinery/housing /i Lumpsum1----155.0----5.0Construction and installation/comissioning /j Lumpsum221--5365751.2769.2395.1--1,915.5Tendering and supply of feed ingredients /k Lumpsum1111-43031.332.133.134.2-130.7Supplies and expendable stores /l Lumpsum1111-42020.921.422.022.8-87.1Development of fish seed standards and certification with the Mozambique National Standards Organization Lumpsum--1--1100--104.3--104.3Development of cottage feed industries /m Number33---6250667.7643.8---1,311.4Capacity building for seed production, management and distribution /n Lumpsum1111-43028.829.229.830.2-118.0Subtotal 1,512.81,495.7584.387.2-3,680.1Total Investment Costs 3,298.13,216.31,539.9197.1-8,251.4II. Recurrent Costs A. Support from IDEPA extension network /o Number70707070703507.5467.4450.6435.7416.7416.72,187.0B. Support from IIP extension network /p Number22222107.513.412.912.411.911.962.5Total Recurrent Costs 480.7463.5448.1428.6428.62,249.5Total 3,778.83,679.81,988.0625.7428.610,500.9 _________________________________\a Technical and architectural design of the hatchery facility by consultants\b Competetive bidding for construction and installation of hatchery facilities according to specifications\c Each hatchery units would consist of a permanaent building to specification, two green houses for overwintering and nursery areas, water reiculation, electrical plumbing and quarantine facilities, fish biology, water quality and fish health laboratorie 䀳\d Hatchery equipment would consist of hatching jars, oxygen cylinders,assorted netting materials, fish graders, assorted fish containers\e Fish feeds, assorted hormones such as overprim and MT for fish breeding and sex reversal, other chemicals such as disinfectants, lime, methylene blue and oxygen sypply for fish pakaging\f Provision of matching grants and other financing mechanisms for purchase of new/modern equipment, machinery, expansion and supplies to expand the capacity for existing hatcheries co-financed by private-sector operators\g Supports training of hatchery operators and value chain actors and developing seed distribution networks\h Each feedmill will be established at the same locality as the hatchery for purposes of logistic support. Preparation of technical specifications including housing facilities\i Each feedmill will be established at the same locality as the hatchery for purposes of logistic support. Preparation of technical specifications including housing facilities\j Construction of husing and installation of feedmill machinery, testing and commissioning\k The feed indgredients have to be supplied in bulk through competetive bidding for purposes of quality assurance\l There would be need to provide packaging materials for manufactired fish feeds, branding and labelling services\m Provision of matching grants and other financing mechanisms for purchase of new/modern equipment, machinery, expansion and supplies for existing fish feed manufactiring operations\n Supports training of feed producer and value chain actors and developing feed distribution networks\o Extensio workers supporting farmers in fish feed production - one officer for each 20 farmers\p IIP - Institute for Fisheries Research. On fish seed development capacity - one extension officer for each of the 4  units to be established 
Table 7: Detailed cost table - sub-component 1.2 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 8: Detailed cost table - sub-component 2.1 
7 
Unit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationTotals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit20202021202220232024Total(USD)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Training of extensionists Session2-2-262649.8-51.7-55.5157.0B. Training of fish farmers and fish traders: Fish farmers: on pond/cage construction and fish production, fish handling and business development Session1441441441441447203.58494.2501.5512.3519.1550.22,577.3Follow-up of previous training Session--1441441444321.551--221.9224.9238.4685.2Fish traders - Fish handling and business development Session24-24-24723.3777.5-80.4-86.3244.2Subtotal 571.7501.5814.6744.0874.93,506.7C. Recovery support for aquaculture farmers /a Lumpsum686.0702.5721.6--2,110.1D. Beneficiaries contribution for aquaculture production /b Lumpsum-2,3002,3502,350-7,0000.383-944.6992.61,026.4-2,963.6Total Investment Costs 1,307.62,148.62,580.51,770.4930.48,737.5II. Recurrent Costs A. Support from Government aquaculture experts /c Number1010101010500.3333.02.92.82.62.613.9Total Recurrent Costs 3.02.92.82.62.613.9Total 1,310.52,151.52,583.31,773.0933.18,751.4 _________________________________\a For recontruction and recovery of assets for farmers affected by the IDAI storm\b Purchase of first cycle inputs\c in training of farmersUnit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationTotals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit20202021202220232024Total(USD)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Exchange visits/workshops - Regional For input suppliers Session1-1-131211.5-11.9-12.836.2For IDEPA staff Meeting1-1-131211.5-11.9-12.836.2For DPMAIP staff Meeting1-1-131211.5-11.9-12.836.2Subtotal 34.5-35.8-38.4108.7B. Exchange visits/workshops - Local For extensionists Session3-3-397.5821.8-22.6-24.368.7For fish farmers Meeting80-80-802403.78289.9-300.5-322.8913.1Subtotal 311.7-323.1-347.0981.8Total 346.2-358.9-385.51,090.5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 9: Detailed cost table - sub-component 2.2 
8 
Unit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationTotals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit20202021202220232024Total(USD)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Market linkages and business partnerships 1. Production of training material and organization of fish fairs Lumpsum-30.515.716.016.979.12. Construction of water canals for aquaculture clusters Km252525--754.583117.9120.7124.0--362.73. Grid connection Km-3040201010060-1,896.72,597.81,338.7700.96,534.14. Renewable energy equipment Number30303030-120394.096.499.2102.5-392.15. Spot improvement of access road Km4040404040200351,440.71,475.21,515.41,561.81,635.47,628.56. Improvement of fish markets Number-36692438.333-121.2249.0256.6403.01,029.77. Market and product development study and follow-up Lumpsum49.9--21.4-71.3Subtotal 1,702.53,740.74,601.13,297.12,756.116,097.5B. Support to youth aquapreneurship 1. Business training Number-777-2114.29-97.399.4100.7-297.42. International TA for business training in aquaculture Number-111-350-50.952.253.4-156.5Subtotal -148.2151.6154.1-453.9Total Investment Costs 1,702.53,889.04,752.63,451.22,756.116,551.4II. Recurrent Costs A. Support from ANE on road rehabilitation /a Km40404040402000.27.16.96.66.36.333.3B. Support from District authorities on market rehabilitation/improvement /b Lumpsum40404040402000.27.77.87.98.18.540.0C. Support from EDM on grid connection /c Km30402010-1000.616.020.610.04.8-51.3Total Recurrent Costs 30.835.324.519.214.9124.7Total 1,733.33,924.24,777.23,470.42,771.016,676.1 _________________________________\a Specifically on procurement and contract management for road construction - @1% of investment cost\b Funds to cover support for procurement activities, as well as monitoring visits to work sites\c For procurent k d 
Table 10: Detailed cost table - sub-component 2.3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 11: Detailed cost table - sub-component 3.1 
9 
Unit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationTotals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit20202021202220232024Total(USD)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Develop financial services Financial Services Specialist Person-Month61212126483.521.042.843.844.823.6176.0Total Investment Costs 21.042.843.844.823.6176.0II. Recurrent Costs A. Support from FFP /a Number-101010-300.25-2.12.12.0-6.2Total Recurrent Costs -2.12.12.0-6.2Total 21.044.945.946.823.6182.2 _________________________________\a On the design of financial packages suitable for smallhoder aquaculture productionUnit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationTotals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit20202021202220232024Total(USD)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Social inclusion Senior Sociologist Person-Month1212121212605.562.764.065.667.170.6330.1International trainer on social inclusion. /a Day20----200.8517.0----17.0Printing and distribution of Social Inclusion Manual Number120----1200.033.8----3.8Training of provincial and district level staff on Social Inclusion Day909090--2700.2521.621.922.4--65.8Consultant support /b Day--12-12240.85--10.1-10.921.1Production and printing of technical briefs Number--150-1503000.03--5.0-5.410.3Stakeholder meetings at district, provincial and national level /c Workshop--12-12240.75--8.9-9.618.5Special studies on social issues requiring further understanding for refining project strategies Number-111-320-20.420.921.4-62.6Implementation support on social issues Day-111-30.85-0.90.90.9-2.7Cost of engaging participants in Social Inclusion training Session150----1500.2535.9----35.9Subtotal 141.0107.1133.789.496.5567.7B. Environment, climate change adaptation and mitigation Contribution to the development of climate adaptation and mitigation in agriculture decree Lumpsum49.940.731.3--121.9Climate and weather information dissemination strategy Lumpsum99.8----99.8Subtotal 149.740.731.3--221.7Total 290.7147.8165.089.496.5789.5 _________________________________\a Outputs: 30 people trained and PRODAPE manual on Social Inclusion produced\b To capture lessons learnt and best practices and produce technical briefs on social inclusion\c to present and discuss social inclusion and social mentoring experience and results 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 12: Detailed cost table - sub-component 3.2 
10 
Unit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationTotals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit20202021202220232024Total(USD)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Environment, climate change adaptation and mitigation Training farmers, project staff, government on PICSA Lumpsum111--32019.219.519.9--58.5Training farmers, project staff, government on climate gaming tool Lumpsum111--3109.69.79.9--29.3Training aquaculture extension workers /a Session22222101019.219.519.920.121.3100.0Establishment of Local Committees for Risk Management (CLGRC) Session55---10524.024.3---48.3Capacitation of existing Local Committees for Risk Management (CLGRC) Trainings1010---203.533.534.0---67.6Rehabilitation of 3 meteorological stations Number12---35051.5105.4---156.8Capacitation of INAM (laptop, smartphone) Lumpsum2.1----2.1Support from INAM /b Lumpsum121212121260559.961.162.664.167.4315.1Elaboration of a detailed AEZ map for aquaculture suitable areas Study-1---1250-254.5---254.5Total 218.9528.0112.384.288.81,032.1 _________________________________\a on environment and climate adaptation/mitigation best practices and dissemination of climate and weather info in aquaculture extension support\b on diffusion of meteorological information, and management of met stations 
Table 13: Detailed cost table – component 3.3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
11 
QuantitiesUnit Cost -Totals Including Contingencies20202021202220232024TotalNegotiation20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Environment, climate change adaptation and mitigation Training project staff on applying, monitoring and reporting environment and social safeguards -77.8---77.8Development of site or intervention specific EIAs and simplified EIA /a 14----1450698.6----698.6Implementation oversight and monitoring of ESMPs and Monitoring plans by project staff /b -111-350-50.952.253.4-156.5Seminars, workshops, learning routes for project environment officers -29.229.830.2-89.2Subtotal 698.6157.982.083.6-1,022.1B. Planning , M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management 1. Technical Assistance and studies to support P, M&E and KM  at PMU Design of M&E and knowledge management systems 2----21529.9----29.9Creation of databases -2---27-14.3---14.3Statistics -2---27-14.3---14.3Household survey 2--2-4714.0--14.9-28.9Use of financial management software 1--1-277.0--7.5-14.5ITA to support P,M&E and KM system set up 2----275149.7----149.7Short term  NTA to carry out baseline study 1----15049.9----49.9Short term  NTA to carry out Impact Assessment --1-1230--31.3-33.765.0Short term  NTA to carry out Mid-term review and PCR --1-1250--52.2-56.2108.4Subtotal 250.528.583.522.489.9474.82. Strengthening the PMU Knowledge management System Develop and Implement KM and Communication Action Plan -1---125-25.5---25.5Prepare, Package and Disseminate Knowledge products 22222101020.020.420.921.422.5105.0Organise and conduct the Monitoring and Evaluation training workshops on M&E systems and procedures 22222101528.829.229.830.232.0150.0Organise and conduct annual participatory planning workshop 22222101528.829.229.830.232.0150.0Systematise procedures for baseline survey and impact studies data collection and analysis 5.0-5.2-5.615.8Monitor and supervise KM and communication activities 20.020.420.921.422.5105.0Carry out some unspecified case studies --112425--26.126.756.2109.0Provincial seminars on knowledge management 161616161680230.731.131.832.234.2160.0Subtotal 133.1155.7164.5162.0205.0820.23. Strengthening of DNPEI/IDEPA HQ and DPMIMAIP on M&E and MIS Assess the M&E capacity of focal point 29.9----29.9Develop M&E Database 29.9----29.9Procure and Install Interactive Data Dashboard 1----15052.2----52.2Develop Capacity for utilisation of the database -14.6-15.1-29.7Monitor the pefomance of the M&E system ----16.916.9Subtotal 112.114.6-15.116.9158.7Subtotal 495.7198.8247.9199.6311.71,453.7C. Trainings Financial management and contracts 10.7--11.3-22.0Monitoring and Evaluation 10.7--11.3-22.0Other trainings -5.4-5.6-11.1Exchange visitis -888-241.5-11.711.912.1-35.7Subtotal 21.517.111.940.3-90.8 
Table 14: detailed cost table - sub-component 3.3 (continued) 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
12 
D. National Project Management Unit 1. Vehicles Vehicle 4WD double cabin 1----14041.8----41.8Vehicle 2WD 1----11515.7----15.7Subtotal 57.5----57.52. Office and IT equipment, and software Desktop computer 112-11-241.517.23.2-18.8-39.2Laptop computer 64-6-161.7511.07.5-12.0-30.4Personal Printer/Scanner /c 32-3-80.451.41.0-1.5-3.9Multifunctional printer/copy machine/scanner 1--1-21.51.6--1.7-3.3Scanner /d -2--240.3-0.6--0.71.4Financial management software /e 1----15557.4----57.4File server /f 1--1-255.2--5.7-10.9Office furniture /g 10----10110.4----10.4File cabinets /h 1010---200.252.62.7---5.3Photocamera 1----111.0----1.0Videocamera 1----11.51.6----1.6Subtotal 109.515.0-39.70.7164.93. External audit 1111152020.020.420.921.422.5105.04. Steering committee meetings 1111150.8330.80.80.80.80.94.2Subtotal 187.836.221.761.924.1331.6E. Provincial Directorates /i 1. Vehicles Vehicle 4WD single cabin 8----825209.0----209.02. Office and IT equipment, and software Desktop computer 48--48-961.575.2--82.0-157.2Laptop computer 8--8-161.7514.6--16.0-30.6Personal Printer/Scanner 16--16-320.457.5--8.2-15.7Multifunctional printer/copy machine/scanner 8--8-161.512.5--13.7-26.2Scanner -8--8160.3-2.6--2.95.4Scanner -8--8160.3-2.6--2.95.4Photocamera 8----80.32.5----2.5Subtotal 112.45.1-119.95.7243.13. Steering committee meetings 161616161680230.731.131.832.234.2160.0Subtotal 352.136.331.8152.139.9612.1Total Investment Costs 1,755.7446.3395.3537.4375.73,510.4II. Recurrent Costs A. National Project Management Unit 1. Staff salaries Project Coordinator 1111155448.146.444.842.942.9225.0Financial Manager 1111154540.138.637.335.735.7187.5Procurement Officer 11111541.66737.135.834.633.133.1173.6M&E and KM Officer 1111154237.436.134.933.333.3175.0Financial Management Assistant 11111516.6/Person-Year44.342.741.339.539.5207.5M&E and KM Assistant 11111516.614.814.213.813.213.269.2Administrative Assistant 111115108.98.68.37.97.941.7Driver 1111159.58.58.27.97.57.539.6Subtotal 239.1230.5222.9213.1213.11,118.82. Incentives for national staff Incentives 9.39.08.78.38.343.73. Travel costs Perdiem 2952952952952951,4750.0823.624.024.625.226.5123.9Ticket costs 3131313131155130.931.632.333.134.8162.8Subtotal 54.555.657.058.361.4286.74. Operating costs Fuel, maintenance and repair of vehicles 2222210510.010.210.410.711.252.5Office material and stationery 5.85.86.06.06.430.0Maintenance of office equipment 3.03.13.13.23.415.8Other administrative costs 0.50.50.50.50.52.5Subtotal 19.219.620.020.421.5100.8Subtotal 322.1314.7308.6300.2304.41,550.0B. Provincial Directorates /j 1. Incentives for provincial staff Incentives 183.8177.3171.4163.9163.9860.22. Travel costs Perdiem 1001001001001005000.07/Day55.957.058.459.862.9294.1Ticket costs 44444200.6/Number19.219.520.020.521.6100.8Subtotal 75.176.678.580.384.5394.93. Operating costs Fuel, maintenance and repair of vehicles 1111155/Number39.940.741.742.745.0210.0Office material and stationery 161616161074230.731.131.832.221.3147.2Maintenance of office equipment 161616161074116.016.316.717.111.277.3Other administrative costs 1616111010630.23.13.12.22.02.112.5Subtotal 89.691.392.494.079.7447.0Subtotal 348.5345.1342.3338.2328.11,702.1Total Recurrent Costs 670.6659.8650.8638.4632.53,252.1Total 2,426.31,106.01,046.21,175.91,008.16,762.5 _________________________________\a according to the national regulation, and guidelines thus securing licences from MITADER/DPTADER\b on environment and climate adaptation/mitigation best practices and dissemination of climate and weather info in aquaculture extension support\c For Project Coordinator, Finance Manager and Procurement Officer\d For scanning of accounting and procurement documentation for electronic archiving\e Software should be usable for budgeting, IFAD reporting, preparation of Withdrawal Applications, and procurement management\f To use the financial management software, and electronic archiving software\g Set consists of one desk, chair, drawer, and lamp\h For accounting and procurement documentation\i 8 provincial directorates within DPMAIPs\j of IDEPA responsible for project implementation at provincial level (total of 8) 
Table 15: Detailed cost table - sub-component 3.4 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
13 
Unit Cost -QuantitiesNegotiationTotals Including Contingencies (USD)Unit20202021202220232024Total(USD)20202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Social behaviour change communication (SBCC) activities Nutrition SBCC, market place material development, production and TA Lumpsum-1-1-2400-407.3-427.1-834.4Farmer clusters and/or the PCR group nutrition education sessions Session666663030185.2189.7194.8200.8210.3980.8Market Place  Support ( Fish fairs , radio shows,radio , televison  etc) including TA Number-12121264210-122.2125.2128.167.4443.0Subtotal 185.2719.1320.0756.1277.72,258.1B. Capacity building on nutrition mainstreaming approaches Training  of PRODAPE team( PCU, P/DMIMAIP, extension teams) Session3444-151028.838.939.740.3-147.7Participation in CODSAN, COPSAN and SETSAN(P/DMIMAIP team) Number35553211028.848.649.750.332.0209.5Subtotal 57.587.689.490.632.0357.1C. Nutrition  asessments and evaluations Consumer awareness studies Study1-11691010.0-10.410.767.498.5KAP, MDDW, MDDYC baseline,mideline,endline  studies Study1-1-135049.9-52.2-56.2158.3Subtotal 59.9-62.610.7123.6256.8D. Nutrition Specialist Person-Month121212121260668.469.871.573.277.1360.1Total 371.1876.5543.6930.6510.43,232.2 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
This  Appendix  presents  the  financial  and  economic  analysis  of  the  Small-scale 
Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE). 
I. Project benefits and beneficiaries 
Project Benefits. Financial benefits will be in the form of increased productivity of 
1. 
the  farmers  engaging  in  the  aquaculture  value  chain,  as  well  as  increased  financial 
returns  of  the  HHs  targeted  by  PRODAPE.  Social  benefits  will  include  a  reduction  in 
poverty rates in the areas targeted by the Project, with special measures taken to ensure 
inclusion  of  disadvantaged  groups.  This  will  be  the  effect  of  the  increased  financial 
returns for HHs consequent to Project interventions. 
Project  benefits  not  quantified  in  this  analysis  will  include  a  reduction  in 
2. 
malnutrition  as  a  result  of  increased  levels  of  productivity  of  the  farms  and  other 
economic  activities  engaged  by  the  project  beneficiaries.  This  shall  also  contribute  to 
increased  food  security  of  the  households,  due  to  substantial  increase  of  the  produce 
that is kept by households for self-consumption.  
Project  Beneficiaries.  The  project  aims  to  reach  88,900  people  (17,800 
3. 
households), of which 87,500 (17,500 households) are producers at the various levels of 
the  aquaculture  value  chain.  For  the  purposes  of  this  EFA  we  shall  consider  the  87,500 
producers.  This  EFA  presents  a  few  production  models  used  as  proxy  to  the  actual 
activities that the target group will be engaging too. As such, we note that the model is a 
simplification of the actual dynamic and complex economic situation in the target areas.  
For the purposes of this EFA we have computed the main economic benefits of the 
4. 
production  models  representing  the  above  value  chains  as  per  the  below  incorporation 
matrix:  
Table 7: Direct Beneficiaries of project activities and phasing 
The total period used for the analysis of the profitability of the project is 20 years. 
5. 
Considering the foreseen rate of uptake of the project by the beneficiaries, as well as the 
slow accrual of benefits, a 20-year lifespan allows us to better evaluate the impact of the 
project on farmers’ livelihoods. 
Costs  and  benefits  have  been  evaluated  at  constant  2019  prices.  The  effects  of 
6. 
inflation on prices and revenue have not been taken into account in the analysis. This is 
justified based on the overall difficulty in forecasting inflation for a period of time beyond 
3 to 5 years.  
14 
20202021202220232024Total#Activity1Farm 1 + New Pond5605605601,680         2Farm 2 + Pond (Expansion)7507507507503,000         3Horticulture + Pond (Expansion)7507507507503,000         4Chicken farm + New Pond4704704701,410         5Livestock +New Pond3703703701,110         6Farm 3 + Cage3006006001,500         7Horticulture + Cage2005505501,300         8Market seller2505005001,250         9Domestic ice production2505005001,250         10Fishfeed production (enterprises)222NA11Fishseed production (enterprises)321NA12Road construction100010002,000         Total17,500       Phasing of beneficiaries 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
II. Financial Analysis 
7.  Objectives.  A  financial  analysis  was  carried  out  for  each  of  the  proposed 
interventions to assess their viability. Of particular importance, the analysis was needed 
to verify if the new activities would be profitable to the beneficiaries in the project areas. 
Based  on  the  analysis,  it  was  therefore  possible  to  assess  the  level  of  increased  cash-
flow for beneficiaries participating in the project. 
8.  Methodology  and  financial  models.  The  analysis  was  carried  out  based  on 
production  models  which  are  typical  of  the  ongoing  IFAD  project  in  Mozambique 
investing  in  the  fisheries  and  aquaculture  sector,  specifically  PROPESCA  and  PROAQUA. 
The analysis was needed to verify if there are indeed net increases in revenue as a result 
of  PRODAPE,  based  on  production  model  that  takes  into  account  the  various  forms  of 
access to finance that will be available to project beneficiaries.  
9.  Market prices used to cost the activities were based on two sources of information: 
the prices recorded by project field staff throughout the country, made available by the 
project Coordinators, and the information on prices published regularly by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Food Security on its platform for market prices of agricultural products5. 
Labour  costs  (and  unemployment  rate)  were  based  on  information  published  yearly  by 
the  National  Institute  of  Statistics6.  Furthermore,  the  design  mission  had  the  chance  to 
verify in loco some of the applicable prices. 
In order to better simulate the production cycle and livelihoods of the farmers to be 
10. 
engaged  under  PRODAPE,  the  analysis  specifically  considered  farmers  engaged  in  other 
production systems, who are become aquaculture farmers as part of the implementation 
of PRODAPE. This models allow us to better simulate the synergies between the various 
production systems, as some spill-over effects are bound to exist (for example, usage of 
agriculture  by-products  to  feed  the  fish,  or  the  use  of  the  pond  water  fertilized  by  the 
fish for agricultural purposes). 
11.  Financial  Discount  rate  (FDR).  The  financial  discount  rate  used  in  the  financial 
analysis  was  based  on  information  published  by  Bank  of  Mozambique7  on  the  interest 
rates  applicable  in  the  country  by  Commercial  Banks,  and  on  long  term  Government 
bonds.  Currently,  the  long-term  Mozambican  bond  rate  is  22.35%.  For  the  purposes  of 
the analysis of the financial suitability of each model, we have set the FDR to 22%. 
12.  Credit  analysis  for  production models.  Based  on the assumptions  made in the 
detailed  description  of  the  project,  and  where  needed,  we  have  assumed  that  farmers 
shall  access  loans  through  the  ongoing  IFAD  project  REFP  (Rural  Finance  Enterprise 
Project).  The  current  reference  rate  for  loans  is  the  Maputo  Inter-Bank  Offered  Rate 
(MAIBOR),  which  has  been  set  to  21.5%  by  Bank  of  Mozambique.  For  the  purposes  of 
our  credit  analysis  we  have  used  a  proxy  annual  interest  rate  of  22.5%  for  the  loans 
offered to the project beneficiaries (assuming that the Financial Institutions working with 
REFP shall apply a 1% spread to the MAIBOR for on-lending to farmers. In addition, we 
have assumed that loans to farmers will be seasonal, i.e. repayable in one instalment at 
the end of the production season. 
13.  Family labour. The cost of hired labour has been used as a proxy to estimate the 
cost  of  family  labour,  as  the  hired  labour  considered  under  this  EFA  is  rural,  unskilled 
labour. 
14.  Assumptions for production models. As PRODAPE will target several different 
kinds of enterprises, this analysis seeks to evaluate the profitability of modelled 
production models. Where deemed necessary, we considered the effects of access to 
5 http://www.masa.gov.mz/sima/ 
6 http://www.ine.gov.mz/estatisticas/estatisticas-sectoriais 
7 http://www.bancomoc.mz/fm_pgTab1.aspx?id=106 
15 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
credit in the production models, especially in view of the high annual interest rate 
charged by commercial banks and MFIs.  
15.  We  have  analysed  a  total  of  9  production  models  (all  profitability  indicators  are 
included in the tables attached to this EFA as appendixes):  
a)  Model 1: Farm 1 (cassava, maize and beans) + New Pond. This model captures the 
typical economic activities of some of the subsistence farmers in the target areas. 
Farmers produce 3 crops under an area of 1 ha with relatively poor revenues in the 
WOP scenario. The WP scenario shows a farmer that receives a pond built by 
PRODAPE along with inputs for the first production cycle. Land holding remains at 
1ha, however there are some synergies between the two production systems as the 
farmer is able to use byproducts from his agriculture production  to supplement the 
fish feeding. We assume also an initial low productivity for the pond as these farmers 
will still require substantial training on the novel production system. Revenue 
increase is mostly due to fish sales. A subsequent scenario, which shows farmers 
improving agriculture yields through increased revenue from fish sales was not 
explored, as it may be difficult to isolate the effects of the sole aquaculture activity. 
The financial analysis shows that the model is profitable, with NPV being positive and 
IRR above the opportunity cost of capital. 
b)  Model 2: Farm 2( legumes 1) + Pond (expansion): this model captures the activity of 
an economically active household that already owns a small, 300 m2 pond. The 
farmer produces legumes (dry beans, soybeans and sesame), mostly for the market 
and maize as a staple food.. We assume furthermore that this farmer owns a small 
earthen pond of 300 square meters from which he generates extra income. Fish are 
fed a combination of household produced feed and other agricultural byproducts, 
generating low weights at the time of capture. In the WP scenario, PRODAPE 
supports the farmer in the expansion of his pond to 500 square meters and higher 
quality feed for the first cycle. We also consider a substantial increase in the stocking 
rate of the pond. The model also assumes that the farmer continues to supplement 
the feed from the produce of his legume farm, boosting the protein intake of the fish. 
c)  Model 3 - horticulture + Pond (expansion): under this model and in the WOP scenario 
the farmer cultivates tomatoes, lettuce and green peppers in a 0.5h plot, mostly for 
the market and also owns a small 300 m2 pond.. Yields are still below optimal results 
if the farmer had access to an improved irrigation system. The productivity of the 
pond is also sub-optimal. Under the WP scenario, the project supports the farmer in 
expanding his pond to  500 m2 and for the inputs for the first cycle. As we assume 
that the pond is located close to the cultivated plot, there are opportunities for  
synergies between the two production systems if the farmer is well trained by 
aquaculture extension services. The farmer uses part of the water drained from the 
pond for the plants. As this water is fertilized by the fish, this reduces marginally the 
use of purchased fertilizers by the farmer. Furthermore, the farmer also uses some 
byproducts of the cultivation to feed the fish, resulting in a slight decrease in the 
amount of purchased feed. The financial analysis shows that the model is profitable 
with positive NPV the IRR is above the opportunity cost of capital. 
d)  Model 4 – Poultry + New Pond – represents a rural entrepreneur engaged in the 
poultry value chain. The project supports the producer in opening a 500 square 
meters pond in the WP scenario. Furthermore, the producer exploits the synergies 
between the two productions systems: part of the fertilizer for the pond comes from 
the chicken house, and byproducts of the chicken house are also used as feed for the 
pond. As a consequence, there’s a slight reduction in both the fertilizer and feed 
needs for the fish. The financial analysis shows that the model is profitable, that the 
IRR is above the opportunity cost of capital and financial NPV is positive. 
e)  Model 5 - livestock production + New Pond - this model simulates a livestock 
producer who enters into the aquaculture business. The WOP scenario considers a 
16 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
small scale livestock producer, operating at a sub-optimal level. Under the WP 
scenario, the livestock producer yields the same benefits as the chicken producer: 
part of the fertilizer for the pond comes from the manure, and byproducts of the 
livestock production are also used as feed for the pond. There’s a slight reduction in 
both the fertilizer and feed needs for the fish. The financial analysis shows that the 
model is profitable. The IRR is above the opportunity cost of capital and financial NPV 
is positive. 
f)  Model 6 - Horticulture + Cage: this model considers the same farm model as 
presented in the third model as the WOP scenario. Hence the WOP assumptions are 
similar, and we assume that the farmer’s land holdings are located near a large body 
of water. For the WP scenario, PRODAPE finances 80% of the construction of a 120 
cubic meter cage, while the farmer finances the remaining 20% and the costs of the 
feed for the cage. Cages yields are topically much higher than ponds, with 
productivity levels of up to 6 times those of ponds, however they also require a much 
higher level of management. As such, we have nonetheless assumed a conservative 
yield per cage of double the production of the ponds. The model under consideration 
is profitable, with positive NPV and IRR above the opportunity cost of capital.  
g)  Model 7 – Farm 3 (legumes) + Cage: this model considers the same farm model as 
presented in the second model as the WOP scenario. Hence the WOP assumptions 
are similar, and we assume that the farmer’s land holdings are located near a large 
body of water. For the WP scenario, PRODAPE finances 80% of the construction of a 
120 cubic meter cage, while the farmer finances the remaining 20% and the costs of 
the feed for the cage. Cages yields are topically much higher than ponds, with 
productivity levels of up to 6 times those of ponds, however they also require a much 
higher level of management. As such, we have nonetheless assumed a conservative 
yield per cage of double the production of the ponds. The model under consideration 
is profitable, with positive NPV and IRR above the opportunity cost of capital.  
h)  Model 8 – Market seller – this model capture the economic activities of producers 
engaged in other levels of the value chain. In this scenario, a producer purchases fish 
(from both fishermen and aquaculture farmers) and resells the produce at the 
market. Quality of the fish varies substantially with three existing category. In the 
WOP scenario we assume that the reseller only buys second and third grade fish to 
resell. As the reseller does not own any means of transport, and as recorded in field 
visits to PROAQUA/PROPESCA implementation areas, the reseller purchases the fish 
and keeps it in a simple basing full of ice and covered by cloth. Transport to market 
is through local buses.  In the WP scenario, the producer acquires a loan (and 
contributes from his own savings) to purchase a bicycle and a cooler box. This 
increases the total volume of production that the producer is able to market, while 
also cutting drastically on transportation costs. Again, the model is profitable. 
i)  Model 9 – Domestic ice production – this is another model that presents economic 
activities of beneficiaries that derive their subsistence from other levels of the value 
chain other than production. A farmer that owns a small fridge produces and sells ice 
for a fee. However, we assume that in the WOP scenario the farmer uses an old 
freezer, and that under WP the farmer purchases a new freezer to increase his yearly 
output. A side effect of the purchase is also the lower electricity expenses as we 
assume that the new freezer has a much better energy management system.  
j)  Model 10 - fish feed production: this model presents the assumptions under one of 
the activities to be financed by PRODAPE, based on consultations with IDEPA experts 
during the mission. Under this model, the project shall establish a partnership with a 
private sector operator and builds and equips the facility for a small facility for the 
production of feed. The private sector operator enters with a matching contribution 
and also accesses a commercial loan (payable within a 3-year period) to finance the 
purchase of raw material for the first quarter of production. The overall model shows 
17 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
this the enterprise is profitable, with positive financial NPV and IRR above the 
opportunity cost of capital. 
k)  Model 11 - fish seed production - PRODAPE will also finance investments in fingerling 
production. The design team had the opportunity to visit a fingerling facility which 
was rehabilitated under the IFAD project PROQUA. The data used for this model has 
been based extensively on the business plan submitted by the private sector provider 
for the rehabilitation of the facility. Under this model, and very similarly to the case 
of fish feed production, we assume that the project shall finance the construction and 
equipment of 4 modern fingerling production units. It is expected that the project 
enters into a partnership with a private sector operator to run the production unit 
and this operator that shall provide capital investments for the acquisition of the 
inputs for the production of fingerlings, as well as workforce. The overall model 
shows this the enterprise is profitable, with positive financial NPV and IRR above the 
opportunity cost of capital. 
l)  Model 12 – road rehabilitation - EFA models the benefits expected from the 
rehabilitation and or construction of 200 Km of roads by PRODAPE. Considering the 
country’s population density (40 people/km2), the average size of the households in 
Mozambique (5.1 people/household), and assuming a road catchment area with a of 
5km around the road, it is possible to deduce that the road network may benefit 
around 80,000 people, or 15,686 households. As per the targeting working paper, 
this EFA has already modelled 15,500 households through economic models 1 to 11. 
As such, and to avoid double counting, the remaining 2,000 households have been 
simulated based on the road model, which analyses the typical benefits expected, 
linked to lowering of transport costs, reduction of post-harvest losses and increased 
marketed produce. Furthermore, the benefits from the model have been directly 
incorporated into the overall EFA. The calculations on NPV and IRR for this model 
have been made simply for the sake of completeness, and not to justify the economic 
feasibility of road construction/rehabilitation. Road investment and maintenance 
costs have been sourced directly from COSTAB. 
16.  Results  of  the  Financial  Analysis.  The  analysis  of  the  proposed  models  shows 
that  there’s  substantial  increase  in  net  revenue  for  smallholder  farmers  as  show  in  the 
table below: 
Table 8: Income analysis 
18 
WOP (MZN)WP* (MZN)WOP (USD)WP* (USD)% increase#Activity1Farm 1 + New Pond16,13446,316269772187.08%2Farm 2 + Pond (Expansion)21,56653,726359895149.13%3Horticulture + Pond (Expansion)27,84155,65746492899.91%4Chicken farm + New Pond24,24853,858404898122.11%5Livestock +New Pond37,03151,56661785939.25%6Farm 3 + Cage16,00958,579267976265.91%7Horticulture + Cage20,41649,901340832144.42%8Market seller25,34867,6204221,127166.77%9Domestic ice production7,64319,362127323153.34%10Fishfeed production0265,53504,426NA11Fishseed production0542,88209,048NA*at full WP146%Yearly revenue stream before taxes (EBTDA)Average increase in revenue 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
III. Economic Analysis 
17.  Scope. The economic analysis was carried on the project as a whole to evaluate its 
effect on the overall Mozambican economy.  
18.  Methodology  and  assumptions.  An  overall  Project  Economic  Net  Present  Value 
(ENPV) and economic internal rate of return (EIRR) have been estimated by aggregating 
the net incremental benefits of all production models phased according to Project Years 
in which they are expected to be implemented. Benefit streams are analysed for a total 
period of 20 years. This is justified based on the rate of adoption of project interventions 
by farmers, in order to fully analyse the benefits that accrue once revenue streams are 
substantially equal for all project beneficiaries.  
19.  Social  Discount  Rate  (SDR).  As  noted  above,  the  FDR  has  been  set  to  22%, 
based on the yield of long-term Government bonds. However, it must be noted that this 
yield also reflects a significant default risk, taking into account that the most prominent 
rating agencies have rated the Mozambican bonds issued in international capital markets 
as  highly  speculative,  with  high  default  risk8.  On  the  other  hand,  the  most  recently 
approved  World  Bank  project  (Mozambique  Urban  Sanitation  Project,  May  2019 9) 
employed an SDR of 10%. As such, for the purposes of this EFA, the SDR has been set 
to 10%.  
20.  Standard  Conversion  Factor  (SCF).  The  SCF  was  calculated  based  on  the 
balance of payments information published by the Bank of Mozambique. Other sources of 
information  were  UNCOMTRADE  international  trade  statistics  database10.  Data  on 
subsidies  (on  the  import  of  fuels,  mostly)  was  obtained  from  IMF  Country  Report  on 
Mozambique, detailing that subsidies on fuels have ranged between 1% to 1.4% of GDP 
between  2013  and  2015.  Mozambique  has  removed  the  subsidies  on  fuel  in  July  2017, 
however,  for  the  purposes  of  our  analysis  we  have  considered  a  subsidy  equivalent  to 
1.2%  of  GDP  for  the  period  considered  in  the  balance  of  payments.  The  SCF  is  thus 
0.896 based on the available data. 
Table 9: Trade data - Mozambique - 2012 – 2017 (in millions MZN) 
21.  Conversion  factors  and  economic  prices.  All  prices  used  in  the  analysis  were 
gathered at the domestic level. Mozambique applies import taxes ranging from 0% up to 
a maximum of 20%  on most goods that  cross the border11. Valued Added Tax (VAT) is 
17%.  For  the  commodities  under  analysis  in  our  models,  we  note  that  the  export  tax 
applied is zero.  
22.  Based  on  the  import  tax  for  each  of  the  project  inputs  as  published  by 
Mozambique’s Customs Authority, as well as based  on the VAT and export taxes it was 
8 https://www.moodys.com/credit-ratings/Mozambique-Government-of-credit-rating-806356928 
9 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/556331558836037864/pdf/Mozambique-Urban-Sanitation-
Project.pdf 
10 https://comtrade.un.org/ 
11 http://www.at.gov.mz/por/Pauta-Aduaneira 
19 
yearimportstax on importssubsidiesexportstax on exportsbalanceGDP/aaverage fuel subsidy (import)/b20126,1771,2971633,47035-2,70714,534163201310,0992,1211794,02440-6,07516,01917920148,7431,8361904,72547-4,01816,96119020157,9081,6611663,19632-4,71214,79816620165,2951,1121233,35234-1,94311,01512320175,2231,0971384,72547-49812,334138Data on impots and exports from World Trade Yearbook  (https://comtrade.un.org/pb/first.aspx)/a GDP data from http://data.worldbank.org/country/mozambique/b IMF estimates that import subsidy on fuel was on average 1.2% of GDP between 2013 and 2015Balance of payments (USD millions) 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
possible to calculate specific Conversion Factors for each input and output related to the 
production models. These conversion factors are presented in the tables presented in the 
annexes to this working paper. 
23.  Economic  prices  were  converted  from  financial  prices  per  single  input  and  output 
based  on  their  classification  as:  tradable  and  exported  goods/services,  tradable  and 
imported,  non-tradable,  and  shadow  wage.  The  production/revenue  of  all  models  was 
treated  as  tradable  exported  goods  (label  Te  in  the  EFA  models),  and  as  such  the 
economic  prices  were  obtained  as  the  market  prices,  free  of  VAT  and  free  of  export 
taxes,  adjusted  by  the  SCF.  Regarding  the  inputs,  the  economic  price  for  tradable 
national goods (Tn), was calculated as the market price free of VAT. The economic price 
for tradable imported goods (Ti) was to set to the market price, free of VAT and free of 
import duty, adjusted by the SCF. The economic price for non-tradable goods (NT) was 
set to the market price free of VAT. 
24.  Shadow  wage.  The unemployment rate in Mozambique, as published by National 
Statistics  and  recorded  by  Government  of  Mozambique  was  24.5%  in  2018.  For  the 
purposes  of  our  analysis  we  have  calculated  the  economic  wage  in  the  project  areas 
using the unemployment rate as a proxy. As proposed in the IFAD Guidelines for EFA, we 
have set: EW = MW*(1-UR), where EW is the economic wage, MW the market wage and 
UR the unemployment rate. For the analysis carried in this EFA EW = 0.755*MW. 
25.  Project  costs.  Project  economic  costs  were  computed  COSTAB.  The  economic 
costs of the project were obtained from COSTAB based on a standard conversion factor 
of 0.896 as discussed above. Where costs included in COSTAB were also computed in the 
activity  models  the  same  were  deducted  from  the  overall  economic  costs  to  avoid 
double-counting.  As  such,  all  project  costs  for  the  support  to  beneficiaries  on  opening 
ponds,  purchasing  cages,  as  well  as  for  the  construction  of  fish  feed  and  fish  seed 
facilities were deducted from the total costs used in this EFA. 
26.  Project  profitability  indicators.  The  overall  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return 
(EIRR)  of  the  Project  is  estimated  at  26%.  The  Economic  Net  Present  Value  (ENPV)  is 
MZN 4.4  billion,  or  USD 73.3 million.  As  ENPV  is  positive  and  EIRR  is  above  the  Social 
Discount Rate the project is deemed economically viable and acceptable for investment.  
27.  Sensitivity  Analysis.  The  sensitivity  analysis  evaluated  the  robustness  of  the 
proposed  interventions.  Proxies  analyzed  were:  reduction  of  project  benefits  (due,  for 
example, to failure of the capacity building initiatives of the project), increase in project 
costs. 
28.  The  sensitivity  analysis  also  assessed  the  result  in  the  delay  of  overall  project 
benefits  by  one  or  two  years  (all  production  models).  The  results  of  the  analysis  are 
presented in the table below: 
Table 10: Sensitivity Analysis 
Table 11: Sensitivity analysis (continued) 
20 
Sensitivity Analysis (Economic)Base caseIndicator10%-10%-20%-30%10%20%30%1 year2 yearENPV (millions MZN)4,3983,6522,7581,8634,3834,2194,0553,5012,550ENPV (millions USD)736146317370685843EIRR26.0%23.9%21.0%17.9%25.3%24.2%23.2%21.6%17.8%Delay in accrual of project benefitsReduction in project benefits Increase in project costsBase caseIndicator10%-5%-10%10%30%10%20%ENPV (millions MZN)4,3982,239794,0583,3771,982-434ENPV (millions USD)73351685633-7EIRR26.0%18.4%10.3%24.7%22.3%17.4%8.3%Decrease in fish pricesIncrease in fingerling pricesIncrease in feed prices 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
29.  The results of the analysis show that the reduction of project benefits of up to 30% 
do  not  endanger  the  economic  suitability  of  the  project,  as  ENPV  remains  positive,  and 
IRR is still above the SDR. 
30.  An increase of project costs of a maximum of 30% would also not seriously imperil 
the project as ENPV would remain positive and EIRR well above the SDR.  
31.  Finally,  a  delay  in  accrual  of  project  benefits  of  2  years  would  still  not  drop  ENPV 
below zero (and IRR below the SDR), hence the project would remain profitable. 
32.  However, a 10% decrease in the fish price at the producer level would bring EIRR 
at  only  0.3%  above  the  SDR,  which  shows  that  the  price  of  the  fish  applied  by  the 
producer  is  a  variable  that  may  affect  the  economic  feasibility  of  the  project. 
Furthermore, were fish  feed prices to increase  by 20%, the  EIRR would drop below the 
SDR and the ENPV would be below zero, rendering the project economically unfeasible. 
21 
Table 12: PRODAPE Economic Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
22 
Republic of MozambiquePRODAPE - Small-scale Aquaculture Development ProjectProduction ModelsEconomc Budget (in MZN millions)WithoutWithProduction ModelsProjectProject1 to 2012345678910 to 201Farm 1 + New Pond21,3980-39,178-14,56434,634123,855149,284150,130150,130150,130150,1302Farm 2 + Pond (Expansion)52,9090-17,06419,26088,224158,322245,483279,257280,390280,390280,3903Horticulture + Pond (Expansion)72,7100-13,17727,033100,083173,132259,359292,199292,199292,199292,1994Chicken farm + New Pond33,8920-48,241-36,049-2,64451,973154,831197,255218,468218,468218,4685Livestock + New Pond39,1220-18,6289,68154,072117,091133,173133,173133,173133,173133,1736Farm 3 + Cage18,7330-12,1143,26668,988180,405223,339244,806244,806244,806244,8067Horticulture + Cage19,1070-7,280-89658,854162,018209,686234,348229,115229,115229,1158Market seller58,59109,66335,74071,22691,809101,546106,859107,749106,859106,8599Domestic ice production7,7980-7101,5027,80016,42618,24119,14919,14919,14919,14910Fishfeed production (enterprises)0-5981561,1002,8313,2093,3983,3983,3983,3983,39811Fishseed production (enterprises)0-30,606-16,660-2,98410,09411,07111,39611,39611,39611,39611,39612Road construction006,35612,71319,06925,42631,78231,78231,78231,78231,782ATotal production models cash flows 324,258-31,204-156,87755,801513,2311,114,7371,541,5201,703,7531,721,7561,720,8661,720,866BProject Economic Costs (COSTAB)401,875501,439502,119417,275315,200CMaintenance Costs4,3498,96713,87419,16224,70024,70024,70024,70024,700DNet cash flows (A-B)324,258-433,079-662,665-455,28582,081780,3741,516,8211,679,0531,697,0561,696,1661,696,166Incremental Economic Benefits-757,337-986,923-779,544-242,177456,1161,192,5621,354,7951,372,7981,371,9081,371,908millions MZNmillions USDENPV (@10% SDR)4,398.573.3EIRR26.0%ex.rate: USD/MZN60.0 
Table 13: Complete sensitivity analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
23 
Republic of MozambiquePRODAPE - Small-scale Aquaculture Development ProjectSensitivity Analysis (Economic)Base caseIndicator10%-10%-20%-30%10%20%30%1 year2 yearENPV (millions MZN)4,3983,6522,7581,8634,3834,2194,0553,5012,550ENPV (millions USD)736146317370685843EIRR26.0%23.9%21.0%17.9%25.3%24.2%23.2%21.6%17.8%Base caseIndicator10%-5%-10%10%30%10%20%ENPV (millions MZN)4,3982,239794,0583,3771,982-434ENPV (millions USD)73351685633-7EIRR26.0%18.4%10.3%24.7%22.3%17.4%8.3%Reduction in project benefitsWOWPPY1 to 2012345678910 to 2011121314151617181920-10%324,258.4-429,958.4-642,628.5-451,898.244,632.3688,062.81,387,368.11,533,377.61,549,580.31,548,779.11,548,779.11,549,580.31,548,779.11,548,779.11,549,580.31,548,779.11,548,779.11,549,580.31,548,779.11,548,779.11,549,580.3-754,216.8-966,886.9-776,156.6-279,626.1363,804.41,063,109.71,209,119.21,225,321.91,224,520.71,224,520.71,225,321.91,224,520.71,224,520.71,225,321.91,224,520.71,224,520.71,225,321.91,224,520.71,224,520.71,225,321.9-20%324,258.4-426,838.0-626,940.8-457,478.3-6,690.7576,589.11,233,216.11,363,002.31,377,404.71,376,692.61,376,692.61,377,404.71,376,692.61,376,692.61,377,404.71,376,692.61,376,692.61,377,404.71,376,692.61,376,692.61,377,404.7-751,096.4-951,199.2-781,736.8-330,949.1252,330.7908,957.71,038,743.91,053,146.31,052,434.11,052,434.11,053,146.31,052,434.11,052,434.11,053,146.31,052,434.11,052,434.11,053,146.31,052,434.11,052,434.11,053,146.3-30%324,258.4-423,717.6-611,253.1-463,058.5-58,013.8465,115.41,079,064.11,192,627.11,205,229.11,204,606.01,204,606.01,205,229.11,204,606.01,204,606.01,205,229.11,204,606.01,204,606.01,205,229.11,204,606.01,204,606.01,205,229.1-747,976.0-935,511.5-787,316.9-382,272.2140,857.0754,805.7868,368.6880,970.7880,347.6880,347.6880,970.7880,347.6880,347.6880,970.7880,347.6880,347.6880,970.7880,347.6880,347.6880,970.7Increase in project costs10%324,258.4-473,266.3-708,460.1-496,530.054,227.9768,016.41,541,520.11,703,752.91,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.9-797,524.7-1,032,718.5-820,788.4-270,030.6443,758.01,217,261.71,379,494.51,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.520%324,258.4-513,453.8-758,604.0-546,742.012,500.3736,496.41,541,520.11,703,752.91,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.9-837,712.2-1,082,862.4-871,000.4-311,758.1412,238.01,217,261.71,379,494.51,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.530%324,258.4-553,641.3-808,747.9-596,953.9-29,227.2704,976.31,541,520.11,703,752.91,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.9-877,899.7-1,133,006.4-921,212.3-353,485.6380,717.91,217,261.71,379,494.51,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.5Reduction in all benefits due to delays in implementation1 year324,258.4-401,874.9-532,643.2-658,996.1-361,474.0198,030.01,114,737.01,541,520.11,703,752.91,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.7-726,133.3-856,901.6-983,254.5-685,732.4-126,228.4790,478.51,217,261.71,379,494.51,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.32 year324,258.4-401,874.9-501,439.3-533,323.1-574,151.9-259,399.3513,230.51,114,737.01,541,520.11,703,752.91,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.71,720,865.71,721,755.91,720,865.7-726,133.3-825,697.7-857,581.6-898,410.4-583,657.7188,972.1790,478.51,217,261.71,379,494.51,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.31,396,607.31,397,497.51,396,607.3Delay in accrual of project benefitsDecrease in fish pricesIncrease in fingerling pricesIncrease in feed pricesReduction in project benefits Increase in project costs 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 14: Farm 1 + Pond  – Financial Analysis 
24 
Model 4: rainfed cassava, maize and dry beans + cageWOPWPFarm:Rainfed cassava + maize + beans = 1haRainfed cassava + maize + beans = 1haAquaculture pond (m2)0.00500.00WOPPY1-20P12345678910 to 20Production patternCropsCassava0.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.25Maize0.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50Dry beans0.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.25Total crop area1.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.00pondsnumber of ponds01111111111Productivity rate of ponds0%80%90%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)45,000498,600555,300612,000612,000612,000612,000612,000612,000612,000612,000Sales of Cassava10,57510,57510,57510,57510,57510,57510,57510,57510,57510,57510,575Sales of Maize16,87516,87516,87516,87516,87516,87516,87516,87516,87516,87516,875Sales of Dry beans17,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,550Sales of tilapia (liveweight)0453,600510,300567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000Investment0110,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,000Construction of ponds0100,000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)010,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,000Inputs10,074437,041437,041437,041437,041437,041437,041437,041437,041437,041437,041Cropsmarginal effectsCassava cuttings2,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,500Maize seed1,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,0501,050Beans seed2,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,250Fertilizers2,2252,2252,2252,2252,2252,2252,2252,2252,2252,2252,225Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)00000000000Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides2,0492,0492,0492,0492,0492,0492,0492,0492,0492,0492,049PondsCatfish fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m2050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000Pelleted diet (reduction of costs due to supplementary feed @)3%0351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000Supplementary feed (from maize brain, beans and vegetable material)/a02,8882,8882,8882,8882,8882,8882,8882,8882,8882,888Fertilizer for pond010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,000Domestic fertilizer for pond04,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,800Agriculture lime08,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,280Family labour11,77717,77717,77717,62717,62717,62717,62717,62717,62717,62717,627On-farm: cassava+maize+beans11,77711,77711,77711,77711,77711,77711,77711,77711,77711,77711,777On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest (economy of scale per pond @)/b3%06,0006,0005,8505,8505,8505,8505,8505,8505,8505,850Hired labour4,473104,473104,473103,973101,973101,973101,973101,973101,973101,973101,973On-farm: cassava+maize+beans4,4734,4734,4734,4734,4734,4734,4734,4734,4734,4734,473On-pond: Labor, levee repairs, after draining (economy of scale per pond @)/b3%020,00020,00019,50019,50019,50019,50019,50019,50019,50019,500Security personnel per month per pond (economy of scale per pond @)/b3%080,00080,00080,00078,00078,00078,00078,00078,00078,00078,000Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)2,5438,0438,0438,0438,0438,0438,0438,0438,0438,0438,043Transport of farm products2,0752,0752,0752,0752,0752,0752,0752,0752,0752,0752,075Bags (50Kg)468468468468468468468468468468468O&M @ % of investment costs5%05,5005,5005,5005,5005,5005,5005,5005,5005,5005,500Total costs28,866677,334568,334567,684565,684565,684565,684565,684565,684565,684565,684Net Revenue Before Financing16,134-178,734-13,03444,31646,31646,31646,31646,31646,31646,31646,316Incremental net revenue before financing-194,868-29,16828,18330,18330,18330,18330,18330,18330,18330,183Financing AnalysisFinancial inflowsPRODAPE financing for pond + fingerlings + feed for 1st cycle310,500Short term loan under REFP Contribution from own savingsTransfer from previous period131,112118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001Financial OutflowsShort term principalShort term interestTransfer to next period (inputs for next period @ decreasing %)30%131,112118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001118,001Net financing179,38813,11100000000Net Revenue AFTER financing6547744,31646,31646,31646,31646,31646,31646,31646,316Incremental Net Revenue AFTER financing-15,480-16,05628,18330,18330,18330,18330,18330,18330,18330,183Return of family labour1.370.040.002.512.632.632.632.632.632.632.63FIRR69%NPV @22%509,749           B/C ratio1.06WP 
Table 15: Farm 1 + Pond – Economic analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
25 
Model 2: rainfed cassava, maize and dry beans + pondWOPWPFarm:Rainfed cassava + maize + beans = 1haRainfed cassava + maize + beans = 1haAquaculture pond (m2)0.00500.00Parameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF(fingerlings)0.638From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%CF (inputs)Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%Beans, sesame, soybeans  seeds0.747Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%fertilizers, fungicides, (Ti)0.747Import tax (soy, sesame, beans seeds)2.50%equipment0.712Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides)2.50%feeds0.638NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (fingerlings)20.0%CF (outputs)SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import tax (equipment)7.50%Dry beans, soybeans, sesame0.766MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import Taximport tax (feeds)20%live tilapia0.766EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxCF (other costs)0.766CF (labour)0.755WOPPY1-20P1234567891011121314151617181920Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)34,451381,720425,129468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538468,538Sales of Cassava8,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,0968,096Sales of Maize12,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,91912,919Sales of Dry beans13,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,436Sales of tilapia (liveweight)0347,269390,678434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086Investment071,217712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712Construction of ponds071,2170000000000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)07,122712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712Inputs7,524282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682282,682Cropsmarginal effectsCassava cuttings1,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,8671,867Maize seed784784784784784784784784784784784784784784784784784784784784784Beans seed1,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,681Fertilizers1,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,6621,662Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)000000000000000000000Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides1,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,530PondsCatfish fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m2031,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,899Pelleted diet (reduction of costs due to supplementary feed @)10%0223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933Supplementary feed (from maize brain, beans and vegetable material)/a01,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,8421,842Fertilizer for pond07,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,469Domestic fertilizer for pond03,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,675Agriculture lime06,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,339Family labour8,89213,42213,42213,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,30813,308On-farm: cassava+maize+beans8,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,8928,892On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest (economy of scale per pond @)/b10%04,5304,5304,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,417Hired labour3,37778,87778,87778,50076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,99076,990On-farm: cassava+maize+beans3,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,3773,377On-pond: Labor, levee repairs, after draining (economy of scale per pond @)/b10%015,10015,10014,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,723Security personnel per month per pond (economy of scale per pond @)/b30%060,40060,40060,40058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,890Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)1,9225,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,4825,482Transport of farm products1,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,5891,589Bags (50Kg)333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333333O&M @ % of investment costs5%03,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,5613,561Total costs21,714451,680381,175380,685379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175379,175Net Economic Benefits12,737-69,96043,95487,85389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,363Incremental Net Economic Benefits-69,96043,95487,85389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,36389,363Economic Return of family labour1.43-5.213.276.606.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.716.71ENPV @10%577,295        EIRR95%B/C1.18WP 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 16: Farm 2 + Pond (Expansion) – Financial Analysis 
26 
Model 2: Legumes + Maize + Expansion PondWOPWPFarm:Rainfed dry beans, soybeans, sesame and Soybeans = 1.0haRainfed dry beans, soybeans, sesame and Soybeans = 1.0haAquaculture pond (m2)300.00500.00WOPPY1-20P12345678910Production patternCropsDry beans0.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.25Soybeans0.250.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50Sesame0.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.25Maize0.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.25Total crop area1.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.00PondsPond size (m2)300500500500500500500500500500500number of ponds11111111111Productivity rate of ponds80%90%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)73,148504,068560,768617,468617,468617,468617,468617,468617,468617,468617,468Sales of Dry beans17,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,550Sales of Soybeans20,25020,25020,25020,25020,25020,25020,25020,25020,25020,25020,250Sales of Sesame4,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,230Sales of Maize8,4388,4388,4388,4388,4388,4388,4388,4388,4388,4388,438Sales of fish (liveweight)22,680453,600510,300567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000Investment040,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,000Expansion of aquaculture pond (+construction of new pond in year 4)030,000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)010,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,000Inputs20,256435,666435,666435,666435,666435,666435,666435,666435,666435,666435,666Cropsmarginal effectsSeed (Dry beans)2,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,250Seed (Soybeans)1,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,8001,800Seed (Sesame)2323232323232323232323Seed (Maize)525525525525525525525525525525525Fertilizers4,9754,9754,9754,9754,9754,9754,9754,9754,9754,9754,975Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)00000000000Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides5,0295,0295,0295,0295,0295,0295,0295,0295,0295,0295,029PondsTilapia fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m23,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000Pelleted diet (reduction of costs due to supplementary feed @)5%0342,000342,000342,000342,000342,000342,000342,000342,000342,000342,000Supplementary feed (from Soybeans brain, beans and vegetable material)/a1,2155,9855,9855,9855,9855,9855,9855,9855,9855,9855,985Fertilizer for pond010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,000Domestic fertilizer for pond1,4404,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,800Agriculture lime08,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,280Family labour18,75921,15921,15921,00921,00921,00921,00921,00921,00921,00921,009On-farm: 15,15915,15915,15915,15915,15915,15915,15915,15915,15915,15915,159On-pond:  (economy of scale per pond @)/b3%3,6006,0006,0005,8505,8505,8505,8505,8505,8505,8505,850Hired labour11,053105,053105,053105,053103,053103,053103,053103,053103,053103,053103,053On-farm: 5,0535,0535,0535,0535,0535,0535,0535,0535,0535,0535,053On-pond: /b0%6,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000Security personnel per month per pond (economy of scale per pond @)/b3%080,00080,00080,00078,00078,00078,00078,00078,00078,00078,000Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)1,5131,5131,5131,5131,5131,5131,5131,5131,5131,5131,513O&M @ % of investment costs5%02,0002,0002,0002,0001,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,500Total costs51,582605,392566,392566,242564,242563,742563,742563,742563,742563,742563,742Net Revenue Before Financing21,566-101,324-5,62451,22653,22653,72653,72653,72653,72653,72653,726Financing AnalysisFinancial inflowsPRODAPE financing for fingerlings + feed (1st cycle)211,000Short term loan under REFP Contribution from own savings25,000Transfer from previous period130,700117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630Financial OutflowsShort term principalShort term interestTransfer to next period (inputs for next period @ decreasing %)30%130,700117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630117,630Net financing105,30013,07000000000Net Revenue AFTER financing3,9767,44651,22653,22653,72653,72653,72653,72653,72653,726Incremental Net Revenue AFTER financing-17,590-14,12029,66031,66032,16032,16032,16032,16032,16032,160Return of family labour1.150.190.352.442.532.562.562.562.562.562.56FIRR70%NPV @22%544,170         B/C ratio1.03sAmortization ScheduleNo.Due DatePayment DueAdditional PaymentInterestPrincipalBalance40,000.00142370490009,000.0040,000.000.00WP 
Table 17: Farm 2 + Pond (Expansion) – Economic Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
27 
Model 2: rainfed cassava, maize and dry beans + pondWOPWPFarm:Rainfed cassava + maize + beans = 1haRainfed cassava + maize + beans = 1haAquaculture pond (m2)0.00500.00Parameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF(fingerlings)0.638From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%CF (inputs)Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%Beans, sesame, soybeans , maize0.747Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%fertilizers, fungicides, (Ti)0.747Import tax (soy, sesame, beans, maize)2.50%equipment0.712Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides)2.50%feeds0.638NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (fingerlings)20.0%CF (outputs)SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import tax (equipment)7.50%Dry beans, soybeans, sesame0.766MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import Taximport tax (feeds)20%live tilapia0.766EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxCF (other costs)0.766CF (labour)0.755WOPPY1-20P1234567891011121314151617181920Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)56,001385,906429,315472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723472,723Sales of Dry beans13,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,43613,436Sales of Soybeans15,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,50315,503Sales of Sesame3,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,2383,238Sales of Maize6,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,4606,460Sales of tilapia (liveweight)17,363347,269390,678434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086Investment028,487712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712Expansion/Construction of ponds021,3650000000000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)07,122712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712Inputs14,697282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298282,298Cropsmarginal effectsSeed (Dry beans)1,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,681Seed (Soybeans)1,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,3441,344Seed (Sesame)171717171717171717171717171717171717171717Seed (Maize)392392392392392392392392392392392392392392392392392392392392392Fertilizers3,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,7163,716Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)000000000000000000000Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides3,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,7563,756PondsCatfish fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m21,91431,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,899Pelleted diet 10%0218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192218,192Supplementary feed 7753,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,8183,818Fertilizer for pond07,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,469Domestic fertilizer for pond1,1023,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,675Agriculture lime06,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,339Family labour14,16315,97515,97515,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,86215,862On-farm: 11,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,44511,445On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest2,7184,5304,5304,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,4174,417Hired labour8,34579,31579,31579,31577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,80577,805On-farm: 3,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,8153,815On-pond: Labor, levee repairs, after draining 4,53015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,10015,100Security personnel per month per pond 060,40060,40060,40058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,89058,890Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)1,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,1581,158O&M @ % of investment costs5%01,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,424Total costs38,364408,658380,883380,770379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260379,260Net Economic Benefits17,636-22,75248,43191,95393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,46393,463Incremental Net Economic Benefits-40,38830,79574,31775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,82775,827Return of family labour2.7125.5823.8424.0123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.9123.91ENPV @10%501,557        EIRR125%B/C1.20WP 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 12: Horticulture + Pond (Expansion) – Financial Analysis 
28 
Model 1: legume and Lettuce farm + pondsWOPWPFarm:Irrigated Tomato, Lettuce and Green Pepper 0.5 haIrrigated Tomato, Lettuce, Green Pepper and Lettuce = 0.5haAquaculture pond (m2)300.00500.00WOPWPPY1-20P12345678910Production patternCropsTomato0.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.20Lettuce0.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.20Green Pepper0.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.10Total crop area0.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50PondsPond size (m2)300500500500500500500500500500500number of ponds11111111111Productivity rate of ponds80%90%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)113,279544,199600,899657,599657,599657,599657,599657,599657,599657,599657,599Sales of Tomato54,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,144Sales of Lettuce20,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,475Sales of Green Pepper15,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,980Sales of fish (liveweight)22,680453,600510,300567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000567,000Investment040,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,000Expansion of aquaculture pond 030,000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)010,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,0001,000Inputs32,322452,770452,770452,770452,770452,770452,770452,770452,770452,770452,770Cropsmarginal effectsSeed (Tomato)11,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,450Seed (Lettuce)2,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Seed (Green Pepper)538538538538538538538538538538538Fertilizers (% reduction due to use of pond water)3%9,6609,4199,4199,4199,4199,4199,4199,4199,4199,4199,419Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)750750750750750750750750750750750Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides2,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,269PondsTilapia fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m23,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000Pelleted diet (reduction of costs due to supplementary feed @)3%0351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000351,000Supplementary feed (from vegetable material)/a1,2152,265             2,2652,2652,2652,2652,2652,2652,2652,2652,265Fertilizer for pond010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,000Domestic fertilizer for pond1,4404,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,8004,800Agriculture lime08,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,2808,280Family labour19,25621,65621,65621,65621,65621,65621,65621,65621,65621,65621,656On-farm: 15,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,656On-pond:  0%3,6006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,000Hired labour14,985106,640106,640106,140106,140106,140106,140106,140106,140106,140106,140On-farm: 8,9856,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,640On-pond:  (economy of scale per pond @)/b3%6,00020,00020,00019,50019,50019,50019,50019,50019,50019,50019,500Security personnel per month per pond (economy of scale per pond @)/b3%080,00080,00080,00080,00080,00080,00080,00080,00080,00080,000Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)18,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,876O&M @ % of investment costs5%02,0002,0002,0001,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,5001,500Total costs85,438641,942602,942602,442601,942601,942601,942601,942601,942601,942601,942Net Economic Benefits27,841-97,743-2,04355,15755,65755,65755,65755,65755,65755,65755,657Incremental Net Economic Benefits-125,584-29,88427,31627,81627,81627,81627,81627,81627,81627,816Financing AnalysisFinancial inflowsPRODAPE financing for first production cycle200,500Short term loan under REFP 40,0000Contribution from own savings 0Transfer from previous period135,831122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248Financial OutflowsShort term principal0Short term interest0Transfer to next period (inputs for next period @ decreasing %)30%135,831122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248122,248Net financing104,66913,58300000000Net Revenue AFTER financing6,92611,54055,15755,65755,65755,65755,65755,65755,65755,657Incremental Net Revenue AFTER financing-20,915-16,30127,31627,81627,81627,81627,81627,81627,81627,816Return of family labour1.450.320.532.552.572.572.572.572.572.572.57FIRR56%NPV @22%462,972.61      B/C ratio1.07 
Table 18: Horticulture + Pond (Expansion) – Economic Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
29 
Model 1: legume and Lettuce farm + pondsWOPWPFarm:Irrigated Tomato, Lettuce and Green Pepper 0.5 haIrrigated Tomato, Lettuce, Green Pepper and Lettuce = 0.5haAquaculture pond (m2)300.00500.00Parameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF(fingerlings)0.638From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%CF (inputs)Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%seeds0.638Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%fertilizers, fungicides, (Ti)0.747Import tax (tomato, lettuce, green pepper seeds)20.00%equipment0.712Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides)2.50%feeds0.638NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (fingerlings)20.0%CF (outputs)SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import tax (equipment)7.50%seeds0.766MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import Taximport tax (feeds)20%live tilapia0.766EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxCF (other costs)0.766CF (labour)0.755Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)86,725416,630460,039503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447503,447Sales of Tomato41,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,45241,452Sales of Lettuce15,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,67515,675Sales of Green Pepper12,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,23412,234Sales of tilapia (liveweight)17,363347,269390,678434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086434,086Investment028,487712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712Construction of ponds021,3650000000000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)07,122712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712712Inputs22,185292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974292,974Cropsmarginal effectsSeed (Tomato)7,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,3057,305Seed (Lettuce)1,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,2761,276Seed (Green Pepper)343343343343343343343343343343343343343343343343343343343343343Fertilizers7,2157,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,0357,035Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides1,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,695PondsCatfish fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m21,91431,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,89931,899Pelleted diet (reduction of costs due to supplementary feed @)10%0223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933223,933Supplementary feed (from maize brain, beans and vegetable material)/a7751,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,4451,445Fertilizer for pond07,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,4697,469Domestic fertilizer for pond1,1023,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,6753,675Agriculture lime06,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,3396,339Family labour14,53816,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,35016,350On-farm: 11,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,820On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest (economy of scale per pond @)/b2,7184,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,5304,530Hired labour11,31380,51380,51380,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,13680,136On-farm: 6,7835,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,013On-pond: Labor, levee repairs4,53015,10015,10014,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,72314,723Security personnel 060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,40060,400Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)14,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,451O&M @ % of investment costs5%01,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,424Total costs62,488434,200406,425406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048406,048Net Economic Benefits24,237-17,57053,61497,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,40097,400Incremental Net Economic Benefits-41,80629,37773,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,16373,163Return of family labour1.67-1.073.285.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.965.96ENPV @10%482,174        EIRR118%B/C1.20 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 19: Chicken farm + New Pond – Financial Analysis 
30 
Model 5: chicken farm + pondWOPWPProduction:Chicken productionChicken production + pondAquaculture pond (m2)0.00500.00WOPWPProduction patternP1-20PY12345678910Chickennumber of batches44444444444Mortality rate @10.0%10.0%7.5%5.0%2.5%2.5%2.5%2.5%2.5%2.5%2.5%PondsPond size (m2)300500500500500500500500500500500Nunber of ponds11111111111Productivity rate @0%70%80%90%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)82,800          479,700        538,700        597,700        656,700        656,700        656,700        656,700        656,700        656,700        656,700        Sales of Chickens 82,800          82,800          85,100          87,400          89,700          89,700          89,700          89,700          89,700          89,700          89,700          Sales of fish-                396,900  453,600  510,300  567,000  567,000  567,000  567,000  567,000  567,000  567,000  Investment-                110,000        1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            Construction of aquaculture pond-                100,000        -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)10%-                10,000          1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            1,000            Inputs43,052          451,922        451,980        452,037        452,095        452,095        452,095        452,095        452,095        452,095        452,095        Chickenmarginal effects at WP1 day-old  Chicks 16,000          16,000          16,000          16,000          16,000          16,000          16,000          16,000          16,000          16,000          16,000          Supplementary feed 25,160          25,160          25,160          25,160          25,160          25,160          25,160          25,160          25,160          25,160          25,160          Vaccines, Antibiotics and Vitamins812               812               812               812               812               812               812               812               812               812               812               Consumables1,080            1,080            1,080            1,080            1,080            1,080            1,080            1,080            1,080            1,080            1,080            PondsTilapia fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m2-                50,000          50,000          50,000          50,000          50,000          50,000          50,000          50,000          50,000          50,000          Pelleted diet (reduction due to use of chicken-house byproducts @)5%-                342,000        342,000        342,000        342,000        342,000        342,000        342,000        342,000        342,000        342,000        Supplementary feed (from chicken byproducts @ % of sales)3%-                2,070            2,128            2,185            2,243            2,243            2,243            2,243            2,243            2,243            2,243            Fertilizer-                14,800          14,800          14,800          14,800          14,800          14,800          14,800          14,800          14,800          14,800          Agriculture lime8,280            8,280            8,280            8,280            8,280            8,280            8,280            8,280            8,280            8,280            Family labour14,000          20,000          20,000          20,000          20,000          20,000          20,000          20,000          20,000          20,000          20,000          For chicken production14,000          14,000          14,000          14,000          14,000          14,000          14,000          14,000          14,000          14,000          14,000          On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest-                6,000            6,000            6,000            6,000            6,000            6,000            6,000            6,000            6,000            6,000            Hired labour-                100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        For chicken production-                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                On-pond: Labor, levee repairs, after draining, security-                100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        100,000        Other CostsElectricity (from main line)-                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                Water (from EDM)1,500            1,500            1,500            1,500            1,500            1,500            1,500            1,500            1,500            1,500            1,500            Operation and maintenance (@5% of investment costs)5%-                5,000            5,000            5,000            5,000            5,000            5,000            5,000            5,000            5,000            5,000            Subtotal other costs1,500            6,500            6,500            6,500            6,500            6,500            6,500            6,500            6,500            6,500            6,500            Total Costs58,552          578,422        578,480        578,537        578,595        578,595        578,595        578,595        578,595        578,595        578,595        Net Benefits BEFORE financing24,248          (98,722)         (39,780)         19,163          78,106          78,106          78,106          78,106          78,106          78,106          78,106          Financing AnalysisPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10Financial inflowsPRODAPE investment271,000        -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                Loan from REFPTransfer from previous period180,792        144,652        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        Contribution from own savingsSub-Total financial inflows271,000        180,792        144,652        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        Financial outflowsShort term principal (under REFP @ 22.5% APR)-                Short term InterestTransfer to next period 40%180,792        144,652        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        Sub-Total financial outflows180,792        144,652        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        144,670        Net Financing90,208          36,140          (18)                -                -                -                -                -                -                -                Net revenue AFTER financing(8,514)           (3,640)           19,145          78,106          78,106          78,106          78,106          78,106          78,106          78,106          Incremental net revenue AFTER financing(32,762)         (27,888)         (5,103)           53,858          53,858          53,858          53,858          53,858          53,858          53,858          Returns to family labour1.73-0.43-0.180.963.913.913.913.913.913.913.91FNPV @22%81,828       IRR46%B/C ratio1.04 
Table 20: Chicken farm + New Pond – Economic Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
31 
EnterpriseFishfeed production unit  - With ProjectParameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF(fingerlings)0.638From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%CF (inputs)Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%chicks0.638Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%vitamins, antibiotics, vaccines0.747Import tax (chicks)20.00%equipment0.712Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (vitamins, antibiotics, vaccines)2.50%feeds0.638NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (fingerlings)20.0%CF (outputs)SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import tax (equipment)7.50%chicken0.766MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import Taximport tax (feeds)20.0%live tilapia0.766EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxCF (other costs)0.766CF (labour)0.755WOPPY1-20P1234567891011121314151617181920Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)63,390    367,251         412,420         457,590         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759         502,759     502,759     Sales of Chickens 63,390    63,390           65,151           66,912           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673           68,673       68,673       Sales of fish-          303,860         347,269         390,678         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086     434,086     Investment-          84,214           766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766            766            Construction of aquaculture pond-          76,558           -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -             -             Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)-          7,656             766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766            766            Inputs27,635    290,101         290,138         290,174         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211         290,211     290,211     Chicken1 day-old  Chicks 10,208    10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208           10,208       10,208       Supplementary feed 16,052    16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052           16,052       16,052       Vaccines, Antibiotics and Vitamins606         606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606                606            606            Consumables769         769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769                769            769            PondsTilapia fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m2-          31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899       31,899       Pelleted diet (reduction due to use of chicken-house byproducts @)-          218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192         218,192     218,192     Supplementary feed (from chicken byproducts @ % of sales)-          1,321             1,357             1,394             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431             1,431         1,431         Fertilizer-          11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054           11,054       11,054       Agriculture lime6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339             6,339         6,339         Family labour10,570    15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100           15,100       15,100       For chicken production10,570    10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570           10,570       10,570       On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest-          4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530         4,530         Hired labour-          75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500       75,500       For chicken production-          -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -             -             On-pond: Labor, levee repairs, after draining, security-          75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500       75,500       Other CostsElectricity (from main line)-          -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -             -             Water (from EDM)1,148      1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148             1,148         1,148         Operation and maintenance (@5% of investment costs)5%-          3,827.92        3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828             3,828         3,828         Subtotal other costs1,148      4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976             4,976         4,976         Total Costs39,354    469,892         386,480         386,516         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553         386,553     386,553     Net Economic Benefits24,037    (102,641)        25,941           71,074           116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206         116,206     116,206     Incremental Net Economic Benefits(126,678)        1,904             47,037           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169           92,169       92,169       Returns to family labour2.27-6.801.724.717.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.707.70ENPV @10%477,230  EIRR44%B/C ratio1.20WP 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 21: Livestock + Pond – Financial Analysis 
32 
EnterpriseCattle production, WPWOPWPPY1-20PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10Production patternP1-20PY12345678910LivestockVariation of ideal weight of animal at sale80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%80%PondsPond size (m2)300500500500500500500500500500500Nunber of ponds01111111111Productivity rate @0%80%90%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)Sales of weaners9,6809,6809,6809,6809,6809,6809,6809,6809,6809,6809,680Sales of heifers24,64024,64024,64024,64024,64024,64024,64024,64024,64024,64024,640Sales of cows30,80030,80030,80030,80030,80030,80030,80030,80030,80030,80030,800Sales of fish-               453,600 510,300 567,000 567,000  567,000 567,000 567,000 567,000 567,000 567,000 Total revenue65,120518,720575,420632,120632,120632,120632,120632,120632,120632,120632,120Investment-               110,000       1,000           1,000           1,000            1,000           1,000           1,000           1,000           1,000           1,000           Construction of aquaculture pond-               100,000       -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)10%-               10,000         1,000           1,000           1,000            1,000           1,000           1,000           1,000           1,000           1,000           Operating costs5,409           402,637       402,637       402,623       402,623        402,623       402,623       402,623       402,623       402,623       402,623       LivestockSupplementary Feeds00000000000Veterinary cost (includes drugs, vaccines, fees)5,409           5,4095,4095,3955,3955,3955,3955,3955,3955,3955,395PondsTilapia fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m2-               50,000         50,000         50,000         50,000          50,000         50,000         50,000         50,000         50,000         50,000         Pelleted diet (reduction due to use of livestock byproducts @)10%-               324,000       324,000       324,000       324,000        324,000       324,000       324,000       324,000       324,000       324,000       Supplementary feeds (from livestock by-products)3%1,628           1,628           1,628           1,628            1,628           1,628           1,628           1,628           1,628           1,628           Fertilizer (@ % reduction due to use of manure)10%-               13,320         13,320         13,320         13,320          13,320         13,320         13,320         13,320         13,320         13,320         Agriculture lime8,280           8,280           8,280           8,280            8,280           8,280           8,280           8,280           8,280           8,280           Family labour22,68028,68028,68028,62028,62028,62028,62028,62028,62028,62028,620person-days per animal22,68022,68022,68022,62022,62022,62022,62022,62022,62022,62022,620On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest06,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,000Hired labour0100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000Hired labour (person-days per animal)00000000000On-pond: Labor, levee repairs, after draining0100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000Other Costs011,28011,28011,28011,28011,28011,28011,28011,28011,28011,280Water (from borehole)02,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,5202,520Crush pen fees01,2601,2601,2601,2601,2601,2601,2601,2601,2601,260Transport to market02,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,5002,500Operation and maintenance (@5% of investment costs)05,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,0005,000Total Costs28,089652,597543,597543,523543,523543,523543,523543,523543,523543,523543,523Net revenue before financing37,031-133,87731,82388,59788,59788,59788,59788,59788,59788,59788,597Financing AnalysisPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10Financial inflowsPRODAPE investment272,0000Disbursement of short term loan under REFP/a0000000000Transfer from previous period0120,791120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787Contribution from own savings (inputs for first cycle)0Sub-Total financial inflows272,000120,791120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787Financial outflowsShort term principal (@22.5% APR, seasonal)Short term InterestTransfer to next period30%120,791120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787Sub-Total financial outflows120,791120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787120,787Net Financing151,209400000000Net revenue AFTER financing17,33231,82788,59788,59788,59788,59788,59788,59788,59788,597Incremental net revenue AFTER financing-19,699-5,20451,56651,56651,56651,56651,56651,56651,56651,566Returns to family labour1.630.601.113.103.103.103.103.103.103.103.10Total financing package0FNPV @22%133,444        Loan (Line of Credit)0FIRR110%Contribution from farmer0B/C1.07Grace period0 monthsInterest rate (APR)22.5% 
Table 22: Livestock + Pond - Economic analysis  
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
33 
EnterpriseLivestock production unit  - With ProjectParameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF(fingerlings)0.638From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%CF (inputs)Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%vitamins, antibiotics, vaccines0.747Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%equipment0.712Import tax (vitamins, antibiotics, vaccines)2.50%feeds0.638Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (fingerlings)20.0%CF (outputs)NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (equipment)7.50%chicken0.766SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)import tax (feeds)20.0%live tilapia0.766MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import TaxCF (other costs)0.766CF (labour)0.755EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxWOPPY1-20P1234567891011121314151617181920Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)49,855    397,124         440,533         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941         483,941     483,941     Sales of Cattle49,855    49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855           49,855       49,855       Sales of fish-          347,269         390,678         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086         434,086     434,086     Investment-          84,214           766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766            766            Construction of aquaculture pond-          76,558           -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -             -             Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)-          7,656             766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766                766            766            Inputs4,040      257,466         257,466         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456         257,456     257,456     LivestockSupplementary Feeds000000000000000000000Veterinary cost (includes drugs, vaccines, fees)4,040   4,040             4,040             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029             4,029         4,029         PondsTilapia fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m2-          31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899           31,899       31,899       Pelleted diet (reduction due to use of chicken-house byproducts @)-          206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708         206,708     206,708     Supplementary feed (from chicken byproducts @ % of sales)-          1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039             1,039         1,039         Fertilizer-          8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498             8,498         8,498         Agriculture lime5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283             5,283         5,283         Family labour10,570    21,653           21,653           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608           21,608       21,608       For chicken production10,570    17,123           17,123           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078           17,078       17,078       On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest-          4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530             4,530         4,530         Hired labour-          75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500       75,500       For chicken production-          -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -             -             On-pond: Labor, levee repairs, after draining, security-          75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500           75,500       75,500       Other Costs08,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,6368,636Water (from borehole)01,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,9291,929Crush pen fees0965965965965965965965965965965965965965965965965965965965965Transport to market01,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,9141,914Operation and maintenance (@5% of investment costs)03,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,8283,828Total Costs14,610    447,470         364,021         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965         363,965     363,965     Net Economic Benefits35,245    (50,346)          76,511           119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976         119,976     119,976     Incremental Net Economic benefits(85,591)          41,267           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731           84,731       84,731       Returns to family labour3.33-2.333.535.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.555.55ENPV @10%530,606  EIRR77%B/C ratio1.26WP 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 23: Farm 3 + Cage – Financial Analysis 
34 
Model 6: rainfed Dry beans, Soybeans and Sesame + cageWOPWPFarm:Rainfed Dry beans + Soybeans + Sesame = 1haRainfed Dry beans + Soybeans + Sesame = 1haCage (125 m3)01WOPPY1-20P12345678910Production patternCropsDry beans0.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.25Soybeans0.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50Sesame0.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.250.25Total crop area1.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.001.00Cagesnumber of cages01111111111Productivity rate of ponds70.0%80.00%90.00%100.00%100.00%100.00%100.00%100.0%100.0%100.0%Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)62,280856,080969,4801,082,8801,196,2801,196,2801,196,2801,196,2801,196,2801,196,2801,196,280Sales of Dry beans17,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,55017,550Sales of Soybeans40,50040,50040,50040,50040,50040,50040,50040,50040,50040,50040,500Sales of Sesame4,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,2304,230Sales of fish (liveweight)0793,800907,2001,020,6001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,000Investment0137,1502,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Purchase of cages0117,150000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)020,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Inputs21,476681,476761,476841,476921,476921,476921,476921,476921,476921,476921,476Cropsmarginal effectsSeeds (Dry beans)2,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,2502,250Seeds (Soybeans)3,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,6003,600Seeds (Sesame)2323232323232323232323Fertilizers7,7257,7257,7257,7257,7257,7257,7257,7257,7257,7257,725Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)00000000000Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides7,8797,8797,8797,8797,8797,8797,8797,8797,8797,8797,879PondsTilapia fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m20100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000Pelleted diet0%0560,000640,000720,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000Family labour17,869137,869137,869137,869137,869137,869137,869137,869137,869137,869137,869On-farm: 17,86917,86917,86917,86917,86917,86917,86917,86917,86917,86917,869On-cage: stock, feed, harvest 0%0120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000Hired labour5,95647,95647,95647,95647,95647,95647,95647,95647,95647,95647,956On-farm: 5,9565,9565,9565,9565,9565,9565,9565,9565,9565,9565,956Security personnel per pond (economy of scale per pond @)/b0%042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,000Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)969969969969969969969969969969969O&M @ % of investment costs20%027,43027,43027,43027,43027,43027,43027,43027,43027,43027,430Total costs46,2711,032,851977,7011,057,7011,137,7011,137,7011,137,7011,137,7011,137,7011,137,7011,137,701Net Revenue Before Financing16,009-176,771-8,22125,17958,57958,57958,57958,57958,57958,57958,579Incremental net revenue before financing-192,780-24,2309,17042,57042,57042,57042,57042,57042,57042,570Financing AnalysisFinancial inflowsPRODAPE financing for cage construction + fingerlings + feed for 1st cycle439,720Short term loan under REFP 0Contribution from own savings27,4300Transfer from previous period282,000266,000270,000270,000270,000270,000270,000270,000270,000Financial OutflowsShort term principal00Short term interest0Transfer to next period (inputs for next period @ decreasing %)30%282,000266,000270,000270,000270,000270,000270,000270,000270,000270,000Net financing185,15016,000-4,0000000000Net Revenue AFTER financing8,3797,77921,17958,57958,57958,57958,57958,57958,57958,579Incremental Net Revenue AFTER financing-7,630-8,2305,17042,57042,57042,57042,57042,57042,57042,570Return of family labour0.900.060.060.150.420.420.420.420.420.420.42FIRR101%NPV @22%713,000.00      B/C ratio1.04WP 
Table 24: Farm 3 + Cage – Economic Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
35 
Model 2: rainfed cassava, maize and dry beans + CageWOPWPFarm:Rainfed cassava + maize + beans = 1haRainfed cassava + maize + beans = 1haAquaculture Cage (m3)0.00125.00Parameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF(fingerlings)0.638From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%CF (inputs)Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%Seeds0.747Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%fertilizers, fungicides, (Ti)0.747Import tax (seeds)2.50%equipment0.712Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides)2.50%feeds0.638NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (fingerlings)20.0%CF (outputs)SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import tax (equipment)7.50%Dry beas, Soybeans, Sesame0.766MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import Taximport tax (feeds)20.0%live tilapia0.766EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxCF (other costs)0.766CF (labour)0.755WOPPY1-20P1234567891011121314151617181920Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)46,518654,238741,056827,873914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690914,690Sales of Dry beans13,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,10813,108Sales of Soybeans30,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,250Sales of Sesame3,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,1593,159Sales of tilapia (liveweight)0607,721694,538781,355868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173Investment097,6741,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,424Purchase of cages083,4310000000000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)014,2431,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,424Inputs16,041437,112488,151539,190590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229590,229Cropsmarginal effectsSeeds (Dry beans)1,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,6811,681Seeds (Soybeans)2,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,6892,689Seeds (Sesame)171717171717171717171717171717171717171717Fertilizers5,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,7705,770Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)000000000000000000000Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides5,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,8855,885CagesCatfish fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m2063,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,799Pelleted diet10%0357,273408,312459,351510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390Family labour13,491104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091104,091On-farm: 13,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,49113,491On-cage: stock, feed, harvest 10%090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,60090,600Hired labour4,49736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,20736,207On-farm: 4,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,4974,497Security personnel per month per pond (economy of scale per pond @)/b30%031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,710Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)019,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,535O&M @ % of investment costs20%019,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,535Total costs34,029694,619649,408700,447751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486751,486Net Economic Benefits12,489-40,38191,647127,426163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204Incremental Net Economic Benefits-40,38191,647127,426163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204163,204Return of family labour0.93-0.390.881.221.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.571.57ENPV @10%1,118,353     EIRR259%B/C1.18WP 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 25: Horticulture + Cage –Financial analysis 
36 
Model: Horticulture farm + cagesWOPWPFarm:Irrigated Tomato, Lettuce and Green Pepper 0.5 haIrrigated Tomato, Lettuce, Green Pepper and Lettuce = 0.5haAquaculture pond (m2)300.00500.00WOPPY1-20P1234567891011121314151617181920Production patternCropsTomato0.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.20Lettuce0.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.200.20Green Pepper0.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.100.10Total crop area0.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50Cagesnumber of cages011111111111111111111Productivity rate of cages70%80%90%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)90,599884,399997,7991,111,1991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,5991,224,599Sales of Tomato54,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,14454,144Sales of Lettuce20,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,47520,475Sales of Green Pepper15,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,98015,980Sales of fish (liveweight)0793,800907,2001,020,6001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,0001,134,000Investment0137,1502,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Construction of cage0117,1500000000000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)020,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Inputs26,667686,667766,667846,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667926,667Cropsmarginal effectsSeed (Tomato)11,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,45011,450Seed (Lettuce)2,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Seed (Green Pepper)538538538538538538538538538538538538538538538538538538538538538Fertilizers 0%9,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,6609,660Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)750750750750750750750750750750750750750750750750750750750750750Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides2,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,2692,269CagesTilapia fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m20100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000100,000Pelleted diet (reduction of costs due to supplementary feed @)0%0560,000640,000720,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000800,000Family labour15,65675,65675,65675,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,65669,656On-farm: 15,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,65615,656On-cage:  (economy of scale per pond @)/b10%060,00060,00060,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,000Hired labour8,985108,640108,640108,64090,040102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640102,640On-farm: 8,9856,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,6406,640On-cage:  (economy of scale per pond @)/b10%060,00060,00060,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,00054,000Security personnel per month per pond (economy of scale per pond @)/b30%042,00042,00042,00029,40042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,00042,000Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)18,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,87618,876O&M @ % of investment costs20%027,43027,43027,43054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,86054,860Total costs70,1831,054,418999,2681,079,2681,162,0981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,6981,174,698Net Revenue Before Financing20,416-170,019-1,46931,93162,50149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,901Incremental net revenue before financing-190,436-21,88611,51542,08529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,485Financing AnalysisFinancial inflowsPRODAPE financing 489,720Short term loan under REFP 00Contribution from own savings (first cycle feeds)27,4300Transfer from previous period336,000333,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000Financial OutflowsShort term principalShort term interestTransfer to next period (inputs for next period @ %)40%336,000333,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000360,000Net financing181,1503,000-27,00000000000000000000Net Revenue AFTER financing11,1311,5314,93162,50149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,90149,901Incremental Net Revenue AFTER financing-9,286-18,886-15,48642,08529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,48529,485Return of family labour1.300.150.020.070.900.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.720.72FIRR52%NPV @22%470,180           B/C ratio1.03WP 
Table 26: Horticulture + Cage – Economic Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
37 
Model: Horticulture farm + pondsWOPWPFarm:Irrigated Tomato, Lettuce and Green Pepper 0.5 haIrrigated Tomato, Lettuce, Green Pepper and Lettuce = 0.5haAquaculture pond (m2)300.00500.00Parameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF(fingerlings)0.638From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%CF (inputs)Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%Cassava cuttings, maize, beans0.747Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%fertilizers, fungicides, (Ti)0.747Import tax (maize, beans, cassava)2.50%equipment0.712Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides)2.50%feeds0.638NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (fingerlings)20.0%CF (outputs)SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import tax (equipment)7.50%Cassava cuttings, maize, beans0.766MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import Taximport tax (feeds)20%live tilapia0.766EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxCF (other costs)0.766CF (labour)0.755WOPPY1-20P1234567891011121314151617181920Revenue (minus post-harvest loss and self-consumption)67,669675,390762,208849,025935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842935,842Sales of Tomato40,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,44140,441Sales of Lettuce15,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,29315,293Sales of Green Pepper11,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,93611,936Sales of tilapia (liveweight)0607,721694,538781,355868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173868,173Investment097,6741,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,424Purchase of cages083,4310000000000000000000Aquaculture kits (10% replacement each year)014,2431,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,4241,424Inputs19,918440,989492,028543,067594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106594,106Cropsmarginal effectsSeed (Tomato)8,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,5528,552Seed (Lettuce)1,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,4941,494Seed (Green Pepper)401401401401401401401401401401401401401401401401401401401401401Fertilizers7,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,2157,215Other fertilizers (manure, domestic,etc)560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560560Pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and herbicides1,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,6951,695CagesCatfish fingerlings (hatchery raised) number/m2063,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,79963,799Pelleted diet0357,273408,312459,351510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390510,390Family labour11,82057,12057,12057,12052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,59052,590On-farm: 11,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,82011,820On-pond: stock, feed, fertilize, harvest (economy of scale per pond @)/b045,30045,30045,30040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,770Hired labour6,78382,02382,02382,02367,98077,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,49377,493On-farm: 6,7835,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,0135,013On-pond: Labor, levee repairs, after draining (economy of scale per pond @)/b045,30045,30045,30040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,77040,770Security personnel per month per pond (economy of scale per pond @)/b031,71031,71031,71022,19731,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,71031,710Other costs (water, fuel, bags, storage, etc)14,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,45114,451O&M @ % of investment costs20%019,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,53519,535Total costs52,972711,793666,582717,621750,086759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599759,599Net Economic Benefits14,697-36,40295,626131,404185,756176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243Incremental Net Economic Benefits-36,40295,626131,404185,756176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243176,243Return of family labour1.24-0.641.672.303.533.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.353.35ENPV @10%1,213,324     EIRR297%B/C1.19WP 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 27: Market seller – Financial analysis 
38 
EnterpriseMarket seller, WOPWOPWPRevenueP1-20PY12345678910% maximum weight purchased70.0%80.0%90.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%Sales of fish282,960      257,494       294,278       331,063       367,848       367,848       367,848       367,848       367,848       367,848       367,848       Total revenue282,960      257,494       294,278       331,063       367,848       367,848       367,848       367,848       367,848       367,848       367,848       Investment Costs-              23,000         -               -               5,000           -               -               5,000           -               -               5,000           Purchase of bycicle-              18,000         -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Purchase of coolerbox-              5,000           -               -               5,000           -               -               5,000           -               -               5,000           Operating Costs237,612      193,381       220,836       248,290       275,744       275,744       275,744       275,744       275,744       275,744       275,744       Purchase of fish (first grade)-              33,852         38,688         43,524         48,360         48,360         48,360         48,360         48,360         48,360         48,360         Purchase of fish (second grade)151,200      114,660       131,040       147,420       163,800       163,800       163,800       163,800       163,800       163,800       163,800       Purchase of fish (third grade)62,400        42,588         48,672         54,756         60,840         60,840         60,840         60,840         60,840         60,840         60,840         Purchase of ice1,320          1,081           1,236           1,390           1,544           1,544           1,544           1,544           1,544           1,544           1,544           Trasport21,492        -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Market tax1,200          1,200           1,200           1,200           1,200           1,200           1,200           1,200           1,200           1,200           1,200           Labour20,000        23,333         23,333         23,333         23,333         23,333         23,333         23,333         23,333         23,333         23,333         Faniily labour20,000        3,333           3,333           3,333           3,333           3,333           3,333           3,333           3,333           3,333           3,333           Assistant market seller-              20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         Other costs1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           Operation & Maintenance 1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           1,150           Total costs257,612      240,864       245,319       272,773       305,228       300,228       300,228       305,228       300,228       300,228       305,228       Net Revenue Before Financing25,348        16,629         48,960         58,290         62,620         67,620         67,620         62,620         67,620         67,620         62,620         Financing AnalysisPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10Financial inflowsPRODAPE investment-               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Loan under REFP23,000         Transfer from previous period-               66,251         74,487         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         Contribution from own savings58,014         Sub-Total financial inflows81,014         66,251         74,487         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         Financial outflowsShort term principal 23,000         Short term Interest5,175           Transfer to next period 30%66,251         74,487         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         Sub-Total financial outflows94,426         74,487         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         82,723         Net Financing-13,411-8,236-8,2360000000Net revenue AFTER financing3,21840,72350,05462,62067,62067,62062,62067,62067,62062,620Incremental Net Revenue-22,13015,37524,70637,27242,27242,27237,27242,27242,27237,272Return of family labour1.270.141.752.152.682.902.902.682.902.902.68FNPV @22%103,128       FIRR106%B/C ratio1.19Amortization ScheduleNo.Due DatePayment DueAdditional PaymentInterestPrincipalBalance2300014237028175517523,000.000 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 28: Market seller - Economic Analysis 
39 
EnterpriseMarket seller, WPParameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF (inputs)From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%live tilapia0.638Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%equipment0.712Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%CF (outputs)Import tax (live fish)20.0%live tilapia0.766Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (equipment)7.50%CF (labour)0.755NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFCF (other costs)0.766SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import TaxEP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxWOPWPRevenueP1-20PY1234567891011121314151617181920Sales of fish216,630      197,133       225,295       253,457       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       Total revenue216,630      197,133       225,295       253,457       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       281,619       Investment Costs-              16,380         -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               Purchase of bycicle-              12,819         -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Purchase of coolerbox-              3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               -               3,561           -               Operating Costs154,657      123,666       141,201       158,736       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       176,272       Purchase of fish (first grade)-              21,597         24,682         27,768         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         30,853         Purchase of fish (second grade)96,464        73,152         83,602         94,052         104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       104,502       Purchase of fish (third grade)39,810        27,171         31,052         34,934         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         38,815         Purchase of ice1,011          828              946              1,064           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           1,182           Transport16,454        -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Market tax919             919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              919              Labour15,100        17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         17,617         Faniily labour15,100        2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           2,517           Assistant market seller-              15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         15,100         Other costs819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              Operation & Maintenance 819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              819              Total costs169,757      158,481       159,637       177,172       198,268       194,707       194,707       198,268       194,707       194,707       198,268       194,707       194,707       198,268       194,707       194,707       198,268       194,707       194,707       198,268       194,707       Net Economic Benefits Before Financing46,873        38,652         65,658         76,285         83,351         86,911         86,911         83,351         86,911         86,911         83,351         86,911         86,911         83,351         86,911         86,911         83,351         86,911         86,911         83,351         86,911         Incremental Net Economic Benefits Revenue-8,22118,78629,41236,47840,03940,03936,47840,03940,03936,47840,03940,03936,47840,03940,03936,47840,03940,03936,47840,039Return of family labour3.102.193.734.334.734.934.934.734.934.934.734.934.934.734.934.934.734.934.934.734.93ENPV @10%263,433      EIRR270%B/C8.55 
Table 29: Domestic Ice production – Financial Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
40 
EnterpriseDomestic ice production, WOPWOPWPP1-20PY12345678910RevenueOutput level80%90%100%110%110%110%110%110%110%110%Sales of Ice16,500.0022,00024,75027,50030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,25030,250Total revenue16,500.0022,000.0024,750.0027,500.0030,250.0030,250.0030,250.0030,250.0030,250.0030,250.0030,250.00Investment Costs0.0017,500.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.00Purchase of fridge (500 lt)0.0017,500.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.00Operating Costs6,857.456,790.317,197.927,605.538,013.148,013.148,013.148,013.148,013.148,013.148,013.14Water2,445.653,260.873,668.484,076.094,483.704,483.704,483.704,483.704,483.704,483.704,483.70Electricity4,411.803,529.443,529.443,529.443,529.443,529.443,529.443,529.443,529.443,529.443,529.44Labour2,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.00Family labour2,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.002,000.00Assistant market seller0.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.000.00Other costs875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00Operation & Maintenance (@ % of investment)500.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00875.00Total costs8,857.4527,165.3110,072.9210,480.5310,888.1410,888.1410,888.1410,888.1410,888.1410,888.1410,888.14Net Benefits before financing7,642.55-5,165.3114,677.0817,019.4719,361.8619,361.8619,361.8619,361.8619,361.8619,361.8619,361.86Financing AnalysisPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10Financial inflowsPRODAPE investment-                   -                    -                   -                -                    -                     -             -             -                 -             Loan under REFP10,000             Transfer from previous period-                   2,159                2,282               2,404            2,404                2,404                 2,404         2,404         2,404             2,404         Contribution from own savings10,000             Sub-Total financial inflows20,000             2,159                2,282               2,404            2,404                2,404                 2,404         2,404         2,404             2,404         Financial outflowsShort term principal 10,000             Short term Interest2,250               Transfer to next period 30%2,159               2,282                2,404               2,404            2,404                2,404                 2,404         2,404         2,404             2,404         Sub-Total financial outflows14,409             2,282                2,404               2,404            2,404                2,404                 2,404         2,404         2,404             2,404         Net Financing5,591-122-1220000000Net revenue AFTER financing42514,55516,89719,36219,36219,36219,36219,36219,36219,362Incremental Net Revenue-7,21714,55516,89719,36219,36219,36219,36219,36219,36219,362Return of family labour3.820.217.288.459.689.689.689.689.689.689.68FNPV @22%59,986              FIRR215%B/C ratio2.01Amortization ScheduleNo.Due DatePayment DueAdditional PaymentInterestPrincipalBalance1000014237012250225010,000.000 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 30: Domestic Ice production - Economic Analysis 
41 
EnterpriseDomestic ice production, WOPParameters for conversion from market to economic pricesSCF0.90CF (inputs)From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%water, electricity0.712Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%equipment0.712Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax (all commodities)0.00%CF (outputs)Import tax (water, electricity)7.50%ice0.766Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (equipment)7.50%CF (labour)0.755NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFCF (other costs)0.766SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import TaxEP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxWOPWPP1-20PY1234567891011121314151617181920RevenueSales of Ice12,63216,84318,94821,05423,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,159Total revenue12,63216,84318,94821,05423,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,15923,159Investment Costs012,4630000000000000000000Purchase of fridge (500 lt)012,4630000000000000000000Operating Costs4,8844,8365,1265,4165,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,7075,707Water1,7422,3222,6132,9033,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,1933,193Electricity3,1422,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,5142,514Labour1,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,510Family labour1,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,5101,510Assistant market seller000000000000000000000Other costs875623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623Operation & Maintenance (@ % of investment)383623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623623Total costs6,39419,6847,2597,5507,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,8407,840Net Economic Benefits 6,238-2,84111,68913,50415,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,31915,319Incremental Net Economic Benefits-9,0795,4507,2669,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,0819,081Return of family labour4.13-1.887.748.9410.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.1510.15ENPV @10%56,435       EIRR78%B/C1.70 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 31: Fishfeed production - Financial Analysis 
42 
EnterpriseFishfeed production unit  - With ProjectRevenuePY12345678910% production output70.0%80.0%90.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%Sales of fishfeed1,973,1602,255,0402,536,9202,818,8002,818,8002,818,8002,818,8002,818,8002,818,8002,818,800Total revenue1,973,1602,255,0402,536,9202,818,8002,818,8002,818,8002,818,8002,818,8002,818,8002,818,800Investment Costs851,69835,08535,08535,08535,08535,08535,08535,08535,08535,085Construction of workshop150,000000000000Equipment, assembled (@% replacement each year)5%701,69835,08535,08535,08535,08535,08535,08535,08535,08535,085Operating Costs1,310,0711,497,2241,684,3771,871,5301,871,5301,871,5301,871,5301,871,5301,871,5301,871,530Purchase of raw material (flours)1,164,7251,331,1151,497,5041,663,8931,663,8931,663,8931,663,8931,663,8931,663,8931,663,893Electricity116,112132,700149,287165,875165,875165,875165,875165,875165,875165,875Water15,75018,00020,25022,50022,50022,50022,50022,50022,50022,500Transport raw material6,9067,8938,8799,8669,8669,8669,8669,8669,8669,866Transport fishfeed to market6,5777,5178,4569,3969,3969,3969,3969,3969,3969,396Labour390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000Producers (5)210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000Manager (1)120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000120,000Administrative Assistant/Accountant (1)60,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,000Other costs17,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,542Operation & Maintenance 17,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,54217,542Total costs2,569,3111,939,8512,127,0042,314,1572,314,1572,314,1572,314,1572,314,1572,314,1572,314,157Net Revenue Before Financing-596,151315,189409,916504,643504,643504,643504,643504,643504,643504,643Financing AnalysisPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10Financial inflowsPRODAPE investment (construction + equipment )851,698000000000Bank loan (commercial rate 60 months @ 30% APR)582,363Transfer from previous period0199,667224,626249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584Contribution from own savings582,363Sub-Total financial inflows2,016,424199,667224,626249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584Financial outflowsShort term principal 64,39983,718108,834141,484183,929Short term Interest174,709155,389130,27497,62455,179Transfer to next period 15%199,667224,626249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584Sub-Total financial outflows438,775463,733488,691488,691488,691249,584249,584249,584249,584249,584Net Financing1,577,649-264,066-264,066-239,107-239,10700000Net revenue AFTER financing981,49851,123145,850265,535265,536504,643504,643504,643504,643504,643FNPV @22%1,943,011    FIRRNAB/C ratio1.11Amortization ScheduleNo.Due DatePayment DueAdditional PaymentInterestPrincipalBalance582362.7176142370239107.4174,708.8264398.57517964.1476242736239107.4155,389.2483718.15434245.9976343101239107.4130,273.80108833.59325412.4076443466239107.497,623.72141483.67183928.7376543831239107.455,178.62183928.74-0.00242 
Table 32: Fishfeed production – Economic Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
43 
EnterpriseFishfeed production unit  - With ProjectParamentersSCF0.90CF (costs)From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%feeds0.638Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%flours0.638Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax0.00%equipment0.712Import tax (feeds)20.00%CF (outputs)Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (water, electricity)7.50%fish feed0.766NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (flours)20.00%CF (labour)0.755SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import tax (equipment, construction material, tools)7.50%CF (non tradable, national)0.855MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import TaxCF(electricity, water)0.712CF (skilled labour)1EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxRevenuePY1234567891011121314151617181920Sales of fishfeed1,510,6201,726,4231,942,2262,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,029Total revenue1,510,6201,726,4231,942,2262,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,0292,158,029Investment Costs606,55524,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,986Construction of building106,826Equipment, assembled (5% replacement from year 3)499,72924,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,98624,986Operating Costs848,512969,7281,090,9441,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,1601,212,160Purchase of raw material (flours)743,080849,234955,3881,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,5421,061,542Electricity82,69294,505106,318118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131Water11,21712,81914,42116,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,02416,024Transport raw material5,9036,7467,5898,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,4328,432Transport fishfeed to market5,6226,4257,2288,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,0318,031Labour342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051342,051Producers (5)179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487Manager (1)102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564102,564Administrative Assistant/Accountant (1)60,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,00060,000Other costs12,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,493Operation & Maintenance (@2.5% of investment of equipment)12,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,49312,493Total costs1,809,6121,349,2591,470,4751,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,6911,591,691Net Revenue Before Financing-298,991377,164471,751566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338566,338ENPV @10%3,807,483      EIRR144%B/C ratio1.28 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 33: Fishseed production – Financial Analysis 
44 
EnterpriseFishseed production unit  - With ProjectRevenuePY12345678910% build output70.0%80.0%90.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%Sales of fingerlings3,500,0004,000,0004,500,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,000Total revenue3,500,0004,000,0004,500,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,0005,000,000Investment Costs15,732,810112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328Construction of building4,500,000000000000Equipment, assembled (@% replacement each year)1%11,232,810112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328112,328Operating Costs585,112668,700752,287835,875835,875835,875835,875835,875835,875835,875Purchase of feed367,500420,000472,500525,000525,000525,000525,000525,000525,000525,000Vitamins and other organic chemicals35,00040,00045,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000Electricity116,112132,700149,287165,875165,875165,875165,875165,875165,875165,875Water0000000000Transport raw material31,50036,00040,50045,00045,00045,00045,00045,00045,00045,000Transport fishfeed to market35,00040,00045,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000Labour1,260,0001,260,0001,260,0001,260,0001,260,0001,260,0001,260,0001,260,0001,260,0001,260,000Workers (5)210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000210,000Manager (1)480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000480,000Aquaculture expert (1)390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000390,000Administrative Assistant/Accountant (1)180,000180,000180,000180,000180,000180,000180,000180,000180,000180,000Other costs213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320Operation & Maintenance 213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320213,320Total costs17,791,2422,254,3482,337,9352,421,5232,421,5232,421,5232,421,5232,421,5232,421,5232,421,523Net Revenue Before Financing-14,291,2421,745,6522,162,0652,578,4772,578,4772,578,4772,578,4772,578,4772,578,4772,578,477Financing AnalysisPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10Financial inflowsPRODAPE investment (construction and equipment of workshop)9,439,686000000000Loan from Credit Institution (commercial rate 60 months @ 30% APR)6,293,124Transfer from previous period0126,000141,750157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500Contribution from own savings0Sub-Total financial inflows15,732,810126,000141,750157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500Financial outflowsShort term principal 147,658191,956249,543324,405421,727548,245712,719926,5341,204,4941,565,843Short term Interest1,887,9371,843,6401,786,0531,711,1901,613,8691,487,3501,322,8771,109,061831,101469,753Transfer to next period (@% of raw material cost for next year)30%126,000141,750157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500157,500Sub-Total financial outflows2,161,5962,177,3462,193,0962,193,0962,193,0962,193,0962,193,0962,193,0962,193,0962,193,096Net Financing13,571,214-2,051,346-2,051,346-2,035,596-2,035,596-2,035,596-2,035,596-2,035,596-2,035,596-2,035,596Net revenue AFTER financing-720,028-305,693110,719542,882542,882542,882542,882542,882542,882542,881FNPV @22%1,671,385    FIRR41%B/C ratio0.87Amortization ScheduleNo.Due DatePayment DueAdditional PaymentInterestPrincipalBalance629312414237020355961,887,937147,6586,145,46624273620355961,843,640191,9565,953,51034310120355961,786,053249,5435,703,96744346620355961,711,190324,4055,379,56254383120355961,613,869421,7274,957,83564419720355961,487,350548,2454,409,59074456220355961,322,877712,7193,696,87184492720355961,109,061926,5342,770,3379452922035596831,1011,204,4941,565,84310456582035596469,7531,565,8430 
Table 34: Fishseed production – Economic Analysis 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
45 
EnterpriseFishseed production unit  - With ProjectParamentersSCF0.90CF (costs)From financial to economic prices:Unemployment rate24.50%vitamins0.747Te - Tradable, exported (for outputs)EP= MP*SCF/(1+VAT+EXPTAX+VAT*EXPTAX) = MP*CFVAT17.00%feed0.638Tn - Tradable, nationalEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFExport tax0.00%equipment0.712Import tax (vitamins)2.50%CF (outputs)Ti - Tradable, imported (inputs)EP = MP*SCF/(1+VAT+IMPTAX+VAT*IMPTAX)=MP*CFImport tax (water, electricity)7.50%fingerlings0.766NT - Non tradableEP = MP/(1+VAT)=MP*CFImport tax (flours)20.00%CF (labour)0.755SW - Shadow WageSW=MW*(1-UNEMPLOYMENTRATE)Import tax (equipment, construction material, tools)7.50%CF (non tradable, national)0.855MP - Market PriceVAT - Valued Added TaxIMPTAX - import TaxCF(electricity, water)0.712CF (skilled labour)1EP - Economic PriceEXPTAX - Export TaxEXPTAX - Export TaxRevenuePY1234567891011121314151617181920Sales of fingerlings2,679,5453,062,3373,445,1293,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,922Total revenue2,679,5453,062,3373,445,1293,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,9223,827,922Investment Costs11,204,45879,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,997Construction of building3,204,772Equipment, assembled (5% replacement from year 3)7,999,68779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,99779,997Operating Costs400,131457,293514,455571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616571,616Purchase of feed234,460267,955301,449334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943334,943Vitamins and other organic chemicals26,14229,87633,61137,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,34637,346Electricity82,69294,505106,318118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131118,131Water00000000000000000000Transport raw material26,92330,76934,61538,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,46238,462Transport fishfeed to market29,91534,18838,46242,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,73542,735Labour1,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,9231,076,923Producers (5)179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487179,487Manager (1)410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256410,256Aquaculture Expert (1)333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333333,333Administrative Assistant/Accountant (1)153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846153,846Other costs199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992Operation & Maintenance 199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992199,992Total costs12,881,5051,814,2051,871,3671,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,5291,928,529Net Revenue Before Financing-10,201,9601,248,1321,573,7631,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,3931,899,393ENPV @10%4,386,491    EIRR16%B/C ratio1.17 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 35: Road model - Financial Analysis 
46 
Republic of MozambiquePRODAPE - Small-scale Aquaculture Development ProjectFinancial Analysis - road rehabilitation202020212022202320242025-2040Road rehabilitation4040404040Cumulative road rehabilitation4080120160200Economic BenefitsTraffic increaseMZN5,724,78011,449,55917,174,33922,899,11928,623,898Reduction in trasportation costsMZN1,371,6252,743,2504,114,8745,486,4996,858,124Total benefitsMZN7,096,40414,192,80921,289,21328,385,61835,482,022Road Investment costsMZN97,102,794103,115,494109,564,084118,075,344123,634,938-Maintenance costsMZN-4,855,14010,010,91415,489,11921,392,88627,574,633Net Benefits**MZN-97,102,794-100,874,230-105,382,190-112,275,249-116,642,2067,907,390**Net benefits equals incremental net benefits for calculating ERR, against the "do nothing" scenarioNPV (MZN million)(357.59)NPV (USD million)(0.48)FIRR-12%Aggregation by year 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 36: Road model - Economic analysis                                             
47 
Republic of MozambiquePRODAPE - Small-scale Aquaculture Development ProjectEconomic Analysis - road rehabilitationSCF0.896202020212022202320242025-2040Road rehabilitation25425020020096Cumulative road rehabilitation2545047049041000Economic BenefitsTraffic increaseMZN5,127,87810,255,75615,383,63420,511,51225,639,389Reduction in trasportation costsMZN1,228,6112,457,2213,685,8324,914,4426,143,053Total benefitsMZN-6,356,48812,712,97719,069,46525,425,95431,782,442Road Investment costsMZN78,998,97678,998,97678,998,97678,998,97678,998,976-Maintenance costsMZN-4,348,9128,967,11313,874,12519,162,32824,699,527Net Benefits**MZN-78,998,976-76,991,400-75,253,112-73,803,636-72,735,3507,082,915.19**Net benefits equals incremental net benefits for calculating ERR, against the "do nothing" scenarioENPV (MWK million)(245.62)ENPV (USD million)(0.33)EIRR-10%Aggregation by year 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
Major landscape characteristics and Issues 
a. 
Socio-cultural context 
1.
Despite  considerable  socio-economic  development  and  investments  over  the  past 
two  decades,  Mozambique  still  grapples  with  food  insecurity  today.70  The  Country’s 
population of ~ 28 million people71 are among the poorest and most climate-vulnerable 
in Africa.72 The vast majority of the population (80%) cannot afford the minimum cost of 
an adequate diet, and the situation is exacerbated by inflation and a rise in food-prices.73 
The  HDI  ranks  Mozambique  as  one  of  the  lowest  in  Africa  (0,481),  placing  the  country 
among those with the most unfavourable conditions for human well-being and prosperity. 
High poverty rates are especially registered in Zambézia, Nampula and Sofala provinces. 
Key  factors  include  low  productivity,  high-post  harvest  losses,  lack  of  economic 
diversification  among  others.  High  incidence  of  water-borne  and  vector-borne  diseases, 
such  as  malaria  and  cholera,  associated  with  floods  and  high  temperatures,  are  a 
concern.74 
2.
The  agriculture  sector  is  a  mainstay  of  the  country’s  economy,  accounting  for 
approximately 80% of total employment and contributing an annual average  of 18% to 
the GDP.75 Over 80% of the cultivated land is used for production of staple crops.76 The 
majority of farmers are reliant on diverse forms of crops and/or livestock agriculture as 
well  as  fishing  (mainly in the  coastal  zones)  and  other  forms  of  natural  resource-based 
livelihoods. In this context, the potential for aquaculture development in Mozambique is 
enormous,  also  given  its  generally  favourable  climatic  conditions  (tropical  and  sub-
tropical  climate,  low  population  pressure)  and  plays  an  important  role  in  the  socio-
economic development of the country. However, it is still practiced at a small-scale level 
with  few  exceptions,  and  the  sector  potential  is  not  fully  exploited.  The  culture  of 
freshwater  species  such  as  tilapia  has  existed  for  many  decades  (since  the  1950s), 
whereas  the  cultivation  of  marine  species  has  emerged  over  the  last  five  years. 
Aquaculture  practices  range  from  extensive  farming  (tilapia  and  seaweeds)  with  few 
inputs and modest output, to semi-intensive farming (shrimp) with high inputs and high 
output.77  
3.
Furthermore,  all  land  in  Mozambique  is  the  property  of  the  State,  with  use  and 
benefit  rights  (known  as  DUAT)  granted  to  land  users.78  Under  a  DUAT,  land  cannot  be 
sold,  mortgaged  or  alienated,  but  infrastructure  and  improvements  made  on  it  may  be 
70 It is estimated that more than two-thirds of Mozambique population live on less than USD 1,90/day and 55% 
live below the national poverty line. 
71 In Mozambique, 68% of the population live in rural areas.  
72  In  terms  of  GDP  per  capita,  Mozambique’s  population  are  the  7th  poorest  nation  in  Africa  with  an  average 
annual income of USD 382. 
73 Other factors, such as high rates of infectious diseases like malaria and poor access to health services, water 
and  sanitation  –  poorly  diversified  diets  lie  at  the  root  of persistently  high  malnutrition,  which  affects  almost 
half of the children under five. 
74  Netherlands  Commission  for  Environmental  Assessment  (2015).  Climate  Change  Profile  Mozambique. 
[ONLINE]  Available  at:  https://ees.kuleuven.be/klimos/toolkit/documents/689_CC_moz.pdf.  See  also:  World 
Bank  (2015).  Data  bank  retrieved  from  htttp://databank.worldbank.org/data/home.aspx.  The  incidence  of 
malaria cases (298 per 1000 population at risk), rank Mozambique as 10 in Africa, with increase prevalence of 
water-borne diseases during flooding events, including diarrheal disease.  
75  World  Bank.  2017.  World  Development  Indicators.  Washington,  D.C.:  World  Bank.  Available  at: 
http://data.worldbank.org  
76 USDA. 2015. Global Agricultural Information Network Report. Mozambique Agricultural Economic Factsheet. 
United States Development Agency (USDA). Available at: http://gain.fas.usda.gov  
77  Technoserve.  2017.  Aquaculture  Industry  Strategic  Plan  –  Final  Report.  The  sector  could  provide  cheap 
source  of  protein,  improve  the  population’s  diet,  create  jobs,  generate  income  and  promote  regional 
development. 
78  Rural  communities  obtain  perpetual  DUAT  for  land  occupied  under  customary  systems.  Farmers  who  can 
prove their use of land for ten years or more can get perpetual DUAT for residential and family use. 
56 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
mortgaged and sold.  Investors  can apply for a DUAT  of up to 50  years for the use  of a 
land plot after the local community agrees to cede its rights in exchange for negotiated 
benefits.79  Since  2014/2015  the  GoM  has  been  implementing  the  Programme  “Terra 
Segura”  through  ITC  (Iniciativa  de  Terras  Comunitarias).  However,  a  large  part  of  the 
rural  population  remains  unaware  of  their  land  rights  and  those  aware  mostly  lack  the 
financial  and  technical  support  necessary  to  assert  their  rights.80  Regarding  the  water 
resources,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  water  management  and  development  at 
national  level  is  the  responsibility  of  the  five  Regional  Water  Administrations  (ARAs)  in 
their respective river basins. They control the  irrigation systems, collect water  fees and 
hydrological data.81  
4.
Since 2014 the Ministry for Land, Environment and Rural Development (MITADER) 
is  the  national  responsible  entity  for  environmental,  natural  resource  management  and 
climate issues.82 Institutional capacity for effective implementation and monitoring of NR 
management interventions is however still low and needs to be enforced.  
b.  Natural Resource and NRM  
5.
Deforestation,  degradation  and  fragmentation  of  ecosystems  due  to  agricultural 
expansion,  slash  and  burn  cultivation,  conversion  of  natural  forests  to  industrial  forest 
plantations of exotic species, unsustainable wood fuel collection, charcoal production and 
logging are among the main threats to the natural resource base of the country.37  
6.
Land  degradation,  driven  by  deforestation  and  poor  land  use  practices,  is  a  key 
challenge  in  Mozambique.  Fire,  used  as  the  main  tool  to  clear  land  for  cultivation, 
frequently results in large extensions of forest burnt. Approximately 40,000 to 50,000 ha 
are  burned  each  year,  with  the  central  area  of  the  country  being  the  most  affected. 83 
Additionally,  stocks  of  small-scale  fisheries  are  decreasing  mainly  due  to  overfishing, 
destructive  fishing  practices,  habitat  degradation,  pollution  from  extractive  industries, 
poor  management  and  weak  implementation  of  fisheries  laws  and  regulations.84  This  is 
also linked to mangrove losses, with consequent negative effects on coastal erosion.85 
  Other  environmental  challenges  include:  pollution  of  river  waters  from  industrial 
7.
activities,  agriculture,  sewage  and  domestic  waste,  reaching  coastal  and  marine 
environments; air pollution from wood fuel and mining activities.86 Mining industries has 
to  be  considered  as  an  emerging  threat  given  its  recent  expansion.87  Furthermore,  in 
urban  settings,  rural  sewage  treatment  is  inadequate,  exposing  people  to  potential 
outbreaks of disease. Illegal or unregulated harvesting of economically valuable species, 
including  over-extraction  of  high-value  timber  species,  prawns  and  pelagic  fish  and 
79  Nielsen,  R.  L.  et  al.  (2011).  Mozambique’s  Innovative  Land  and  Law.  Available  [ONLINE]  at: 
http://www.focusonland.com/download/538ddd5cb3283/  
80 USAID (2010). Country Profile Property Rights and Resource Governance: Mozambique. [ONLINE] Available 
at: https://www.land-links.org/wp-content/ uploads/2016/09/USAID_Land_Tenure_Mozambique_Profile.pdf 
81 ARAs have administrative and financial autonomy but report to the National Directorate of Agrarian Services 
(DNSA). In areas not yet covered by an ARA, the Provincial Directorates of Public Works and Housing are the 
authority responsible for water resources management in the province. 
82  Other  entities  involved  in  NR  management  include:  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  (MASA), 
Mozambique  Agriculture  Research  Institute  (IIAM),  National  Council  on  Sustainable  Development  (CONDES), 
National  Meteorological  Institute  (INAM)  and  National  Institute  of  Disaster  Management  (INGC)  and  National 
Institute of Irrigation (INIR). 
83 Ministry for the Coordination of Environmental Affairs (2014). Fifth National Report on the Implementation of 
the 
at: 
Diversity 
https://www.cbd.int/doc/world/mz/mz-nr-05-en.pdf 
See also:  Wingqvist, G.Ö. (2011). Environment and Climate Change Policy Brief.  
84 USAID (2016). Fishing for Food Security: The Importance of Wild Fisheries for Food Security and Nutrition. 
[ONLINE]  Available  at:  http://pdf.usaid.gov/  pdf_docs/PA00M1T3.pdf.  See  also:  Wingqvist,  G.Ö.  (2011). 
Environment and Climate Change Policy Brief 
85 Wingqvist, G.Ö. (2011). Environment and Climate Change Policy Brief 
86 Ibid. USAID (2016). 
87  USAID  (2013).  Mozambique  Environmental  Threats  and  Opportunities  Assessment.  [ONLINE]  Available  at: 
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pnaea332.pdf 
Mozambique. 
Convention 
[ONLINE] 
Biological 
Available 
on 
in 
57 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
unsustainable  subsistence  hunting  (also  of  protected  species)  in  or  near  conservation 
areas must also be considered as a major natural resource issue.88 
c. 
Climate  
  Mozambique  is  among  the  most  vulnerable  and  least  prepared  countries  with 
8.
regard  to  natural  disasters,  ranking  160  out  of  181  nations  on  the  Global  Adaptation 
Index,  with  a  score  of  35.2.89  The  country’s  vulnerability  is  driven  by  an  array  of 
biophysical,  climatic,  and  socio-economic  factors.  Over  the  period  1996-2015,  climatic 
hazards  such  as  droughts,  floods,  and  cyclones  generated  economic  losses  of 
approximately USD 790 million.  
9.
The  seasonal  rainfall  pattern  coincides  with  the  position  of  the  Intertropical 
Convergence  Zone  (ITCZ),  which  is  at  the  north  of  the  country  during  the  warmest 
months,  bringing  150-300mm  of  rain/month,  while  southern  areas  receive  50-150 
mm/month.  Topography  alters  the  general  north-south  rainfall  gradient  and  the  largest 
amounts  fall  at  high  elevations.  El  Niño  Southern  Oscillation  (ENSO)  causes  drier  than 
average  conditions  during  the  rainy  season  in  its  warm  phase  (El  Niño)  and  relatively 
cold and wet conditions in its cold phase (La Niña).  
  Droughts  have  the  largest  impact  of  all  climate-related  disasters  in  Mozambique, 
10.
with  17  million  people  affected  since  1979.  The  southern  and  central  regions  have 
experienced 7 and 4 droughts per decade respectively.90 Floods occur almost every year, 
causing  multiple  casualties  and  loss  of  economic  assets.  Tropical  storms,  originating  in 
the south-west Indian Ocean basin, hit Mozambique at varying intensity at least once a 
year.91 
11.
  Climate  projections  for  the  country  indicated  an  expected  change  in  mean  annual 
temperature  by  up  to  +1,4°C  by  2030  and  by  +2,2°C  by  2070,  with  the  Northeast 
experiencing  the  highest  increase.  Total  precipitation  is  not  likely  to  decrease 
significantly. However, negative impacts of climate change on agriculture will primarily be 
caused by the increased likelihood of extreme events such as cyclones and flooding.92 
Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks 
d.  Key potential impacts   
  Mozambique’s raw natural potential for aquaculture is often reported to be high: it 
12.
has  8  main  rivers,  four  large  lakes,  fiver  reservoirs  and  numerous  other  smaller  water 
bodies,  2,500  km  if  coastline  and  ideal  temperature  in  most  regions.93  PRODAPE  will 
88 Ibid. USAID (2013). 
89  https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/ranking  ND-GAIN  ranks  181  countries  based  on  their  vulnerability  to  natural 
disasters  (compiling  indicators  of  exposure,  sensitivity  and  adaptive  capacity,  each  scored  equally)  and  their 
economic, governance and social readiness to implement adaptation solutions.  
90  GFDRR (2012). Mozambique: Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Country Note. [ONLINE] Available at: 
http://www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr.org/files/ DRFICountryNote_Mozambique_Jan072013_Final.pdf 
91 Fitchett L. and Grab, S.W. (2014). A 66-year Tropical Cyclone Record for South-East Africa: Temporal Trends 
in  a  Global  Context.  International  Journal  of  Climatology  DOI:  10.1002/joc.3932  [ONLINE]  Available  at: 
http://www.aca-demia.edu/6278730/A_66-year_tropical_cyclone_record_for_south-east_Afri-
ca_temporal_trends_in_a_global_context 
92  Choudhary,  V.;  Suit,  K.C.  2015.  Mozambique  –  Agricultural  sector  risk  assessment:  risk  prioritization. 
Agriculture  global  practice  technical  assistance  paper.  Washington,  D.C.:  World  Bank  Group.  Available  at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org   
93 There are two main natural lakes. Lake Niassa, shared with Malawi and the United Republic of Tanzania, is 
the southernmost of the large Rift Valley lakes with a surface area of 30 800 km², of which 21 percent belong 
to  Mozambique.  The second  lake,  Lake Chiura,  has  a  surface  area of  750 km²  and  is shared with  Malawi.  In 
addition, there are more than 1 300 small lakes, 20 of which have an area between 10 and 100 km², as well as 
6  main  artificial  lakes.  The  total  capacity  of  27  dams  with  a  height  of  10  m  or  more  is  estimated  at  74 137 
million m³. The largest reservoir is the Cahora Bassa Lake created in 1973 on the Zambezi river, hosting the 
largest hydroelectric plant in southern Africa with an installed capacity of 2 060 MW. The Chicamba Real dam 
on the Revue river, the Massingir dams on the Elephants river, the Corumana dam on the Sabie river and the 
58 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
invest in aquaculture development activities which entail a number of potential social and 
environmental impacts. Major areas of environmental concern are: i) biological pollution 
(both  of  inlet-outlet  water)  caused  by  poor/inadequate  siting  and  monitoring, 
introduction of non-indigenous  fish species and weak application of good environmental 
and biosecurity procedures which may lead to fish disease  outbreaks; ii) eutrophication 
of water bodies due to  the accumulation of nutrients from the release  of uneaten food, 
faeces and metabolites  that damage the  water column and may generate algae bloom; 
iii)  habitat  degradation,  especially  lakes/dams  water  quality,  due  to  unregulated  cage 
culture94;  iv)  poor  fish  waste  management;  and  v)  adverse  interaction  and  potential 
conflicts with wild animals (mainly predators).  
  Unauthorized  water  abstraction  and  diversion  from  natural  water  bodies  with 
13.
potential resource use conflicts with other users is also an adverse impact which must be 
avoided.  On  the  same  line,  ensuring  beneficiaries’  access  and  use  rights  to  NR  assets 
such  as  land,  will  be  of  paramount  importance  for  the  sustainability  of  PRODAPE’s 
interventions.  Additional  aspects  related  to  social  and  health  issues  include:  i)  use  of 
polluted  water  for  agriculture  purposes  and  disease  outbreaks  due  to  poor  food  safety 
standards; ii) poor safety measures around ponds; iii) risks associated with construction 
works;  iv)  loss  of  investment  and  physical  and  economic  assets  as  a  consequence  of 
environmental  and  climate  factors.  Increased  water  borne  disease  (i.e.  malaria)  due  to 
stagnating  water  could  also  be  considered  as  an  undesirable  consequence  of  project’s 
interventions.95  
  Overall,  the  strengthening  of  the  national  aquaculture  regulatory  framework  is 
14.
deemed  necessary  to  ensure  environmental  and  climate  change  concerns  can  be 
systematically included into the sector’s development. 
e. 
Climate change and adaptation 
  Mozambique  is  particularly  prone  to  extreme  climate  events.  The  climate  varies 
15.
from tropical and subtropical in the north and central parts of Mozambique to dry semi-
arid  steppe  and  dry  arid  desert  in  the  south.  The  hottest  regions  are  located  in  the 
Zambezi basin, the coastline of Cabo Delgado, Nampula, Zambézia and Sofala. The south 
is the coolest part of the country, with an average maximum and minimum temperature 
of 30ºC and 19ºC respectively.  
  The annual average precipitation for the whole country is 1032 mm and the rainy 
16.
season  lasts  from  October  to  April.  It  varies  widely  from  the  coast  to  the  inland  areas 
and from north to south. Average annual precipitation ranges from 800 mm to 1000 mm 
along the coast, with values above 1200 mm between Beira and Quelimane. It decreases 
inland, reaching 400 mm at the border with South Africa and Zimbabwe. The north and 
central  part  of  the  country  has  annual  precipitation  from  1000  mm  to  over  2000  mm 
because  of  the  northeast  monsoon  and  high  mountains.  In  the  southern  inland  part  of 
the  country  it  ranges  from  500  mm  to  600  mm.  Annual  evapotranspiration  varies 
between 800 mm in central Niassa and on the border with Zimbabwe to more than 1600 
mm  in  the  eastern  and  middle  Zambezi  basin.  Along  the  coast  it  varies  between  1200 
mm and 1500 mm. 
Pequenos  Libombos dams on  the  Umbeluzi  river,  providing  drinking  water  for  Maputo,  are  other  major dams 
(NEPAD, 2013). 
94 Cage farming is limited to lakes and reservoirs with specific conditions, such as depth, oxygen availability at 
certain  depths,  temperature  fluctuations  and  water  renewal/flow  rate.  Plus,  none  of  the  lakes  has  been  fully 
assessed  or  had  a  complete  baseline  study  for  cage  farming  (An  EIA  is  reported  to  be  produced  for  specific 
areas  of  the  Cahora  Bassa  dam,  but  was  not  available  to  the  mission)  hence  the  carrying  capacity  and 
suitability for sustainable fish farming in the lakes is not yet established.   
95  Fishponds  are  important  breeding  sites  for  anopheline  larvae  (Anopheles  darlingi),  and  adequate/  proper 
management  of  fish-ponds,  such  as  removal  of  border  vegetation  where  larvae  proliferate  coupled  with  the 
number of larvae eaten by fish will limit their abundance and possibly reduce this risk. 
59 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
17.
  The  target  districts  are  periodically  hit  by  extreme  weather  events,  such  as 
drought, floods, and cyclones which are likely to affect PRODAPE’s interventions and its 
proposed  aquaculture  models.  High  temperatures  and  evapotranspiration  rates,  dry 
spells  and  changes  in  rainfall  patterns  are  also  a  concern.  Project’s  activities  are 
expected  to  be  exposed  to  both  direct  and  indirect  impacts  of  climate  change.  These 
include:  i)  sea  level  rise  and  storms  surges  and  increased  run-off  from  inland;  ii) 
changes in rainfall patterns and  evaporation rates; and iii) increase in extreme weather 
events,  including  more  frequent  drought  periods.  Key  potential impacts  associated  with 
PRODAPE and mitigation measures are outlined in Table 1 below. 
Environmental and social category (A, B, C) 
18.
  Small-scale  aquaculture  generally  poses  medium  risks  to  the  environment. 
However,  it  can  also  have  significant  impacts,  especially  if  it  is  newly  introduced  and  if 
the  system  of  production  has  high  demand  of  water  in  areas  where  freshwater  is  a 
scarce  natural  resource.  In  order  to  avoid  these  risks,  the  project  will  use  technologies 
and  production  methods  adapted  to  local  conditions  and  avoid  operations  located  in 
fragile or environmental sensitive areas, including natural reserves and parks. PRODAPE 
will focus on two main production models, namely ponds aquaculture and cage-culture of 
indigenous  species,  using  locally  adapted  technologies  where  fish  farming  can  be 
practised  without  significantly  altering  the  local  ecosystem.  Integrated  livestock  –  fish 
culture  –  crop  production  approaches  will  be  promoted  and,  where  appropriate,  water 
harvesting,  and  storage  will  be  adopted  to  increase  resilience  during  the  dry  season.  It 
can thus be concluded that the social and environmental impacts PRODAPE may have are 
manageable and/or reversible and it is therefore categorized as a Category “B” project.   
  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be elaborated to 
19.
set out the principles, rules, guidelines, and procedures to assess the environmental and 
social  risks  and  impacts  of  the  Project.  The  ESMF  will  also  serve  as  a  basis  to  identify 
environmentally  and  socially  suitable  sites  for  aquaculture  development  in  each  target 
district providing specific social and environmental requirements for Category B projects 
in  compliance  with  the  National  Environmental  Regulation  and  IFAD’s  SECAP.96  An 
analysis of natural resource uses, and access rights of project’s beneficiaries will also be 
included  as  an  integral  part  of  the  analysis.    For  this  project  to  remain  a  Category  B, 
engagement in pond or cage culture in large dams/reservoirs is limited to the compliance 
with the criteria set out within the ESMF as well as to the development of guidelines for 
sustainable production and demonstration of best practices (especially in cage farming). 
20.
  There  are  social  and  environmental  risk  mitigation  measures  that  can  address 
raised concerns.  These mitigation measures constitute the basis for the development of 
an  Environment  and  Social  Management  Plan  (ESMP)  and  provide  guidance  for 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) if required.  Both climate analysis and ESMF are 
recommended before implementation and in tandem with the ESMP. For sustainability of 
interventions,  environmental  education  and  climate  adaptation  measures  will  be  a  key 
output of training offered to extension workers and farmers. 
Climate risk category (High, Moderate, Low) 
  The  project’s  climate  risk  classification  is  “High”  and  a  detailed  Climate  Risk 
21.
Analysis  is  deemed  necessary.  Investments  will  focus  on  aquaculture  systems  sensitive 
to  climate  change  and  will  require  measures  to  reduce  vulnerability.  More  frequent  and 
extreme  weather  events,  combined  with  a  slow  onset  sea  level  rise  and  increasing 
salinity,  threatens  aquaculture  installations  along  coastal  shorelines.  Changing  rainfall 
patterns and water scarcity may impact on river and water bodies where aquaculture is 
practiced. In addition, more erratic rainfall and extreme events may cause droughts and 
96 Soil texture, water quality availability and access throughout the year etc. 
60 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
floods,  modifying  soil  erosion  and  siltation  processes,  thus  causing  major  negative 
changes in rivers and water bodies.  
  The  project  will  promote  locally  suited  climate  smart  aquaculture  and  adaptation 
22.
practices, also taking into consideration, when available, the LAPs elaborated within the 
NCCAMS framework in order to reduce vulnerability and increase the coping capacities of 
beneficiaries. The promotion of sustainable land and water management practices as well 
as capacity building at farm and institutional levels will further reduce vulnerability. 
23.
  Finally,  the  Project  proposes  assessments  and  research  into  aspects  such  as 
carrying  capacity,  stocking  densities,  cage  culture  best  practices,  water  quality  and 
quantity requirements per region as a mean to making informed decisions on scaling up 
of  interventions.  Strong  collaboration  between  relevant  institutions  such  as  IDEPA,  IIP, 
INAM,  INGC,  MASA  and  MITADER’s  relevant  departments,  and  provincial  governments 
will harness synergies and focused interventions. 
Recommended features of project design and implementation 
f. 
Environment and social mitigation measures 
  PRODAPE  will  promote  an  ecosystem  approach  to  aquaculture  (EAA)  ensuring 
24.
adequate siting and avoiding any activity in fragile or protected ecosystems. In order to 
minimise  potential  adverse  impacts  a  precautionary  system  will  be  in  place  to  carefully 
ensure  best  environmental  management  practices  are  adopted  through  relevant 
guidelines  and  regulatory 
interested 
communities  will  also  guide  the  on-site  implementation  as  specified  in  the  ESMF,  while 
relevant  institutions  for  sustainable  NRM  (particularly  water  and  land)  such  as  INIR, 
ARAs,  MITADER  (DPTADER)  etc.  will  play  a  key  role  during  the  site  selection  and 
implementation phases. This will also facilitate the formalisation of well-defined land and 
water user rights as appropriate.  
frameworks.  Early  stage  consultation  of 
25.
  Best  Management  Practices  for  aquaculture  activities  as  well  as  good  water 
management will be sought in all phases of the project to  ensure adequate pond water 
exchange  and  flushing  systems.  In  this  regard,  site  selection  criteria  will  be  guided  by 
the principles listed within the ESMF. Particular attention will be given to: (i)  favourable 
environmental,  climate  and  natural  resource  conditions  for  aquaculture  (including 
aspects  related  to  the  environmental  categorization  of  the  selected  sites  thus  also 
ensuring  an  analysis  of  potential  cumulative  impacts);  and  (ii)  the  existence  of  water 
bodies capable of providing sufficient water quantity and quality for aquaculture activity 
(including  the  avoidance  of  sites  where  conflicts  may  arise  with  other  existing  uses, 
especially  during  the  dry  season  so  that  withdrawals  do  not  exceed  "safe  yield"  from 
surface  and/or  groundwater  resources).  Regular  monitoring  of  effluents,  ponds  and 
dams/reservoirs’  water  quality  will  be  also  in  place  and  supported  by  management 
protocols to mitigate risks and establish remedial actions.  
  The  project  will  promote  two  main  production  models,  namely  ponds  aquaculture 
26.
and  cage-culture  of  indigenous  fish  species,  using  locally  adapted  technologies  where 
fish  farming  can  be  practised  without  significantly  altering  the  local  ecosystem.  It  is 
important to note that with aquaparks in environments where the water body is shared 
between  producers/other  users  (including  lakes),  extra  care  will  be  necessary  with 
biosecurity  since  the  whole  area  may  be  quickly  affected  with  potential  issues  such  as 
disease,  and  over-stocking  which  may  lead  to  collapse  of  the  whole  lake  ecosystem.  A 
baseline study to identify suitable area for cages will be conducted before activities start 
including  potential  cumulative  impacts  in  the  area  of  intervention.  For  large  water 
reservoirs  the  elaboration  of  guidelines  will  cover  important  issues  such  as  the 
introduction/testing  of  fingerlings  providers,  maximum  stocking  densities  in  cages, 
minimum  distance  between  farms.  Existence  of  the  cultivated  specie  within  the  large 
lake/reservoir  as  well  as  sufficient  depth  to  sustain  environmentally  sustainable 
operations will be a precondition for site selection.  
61 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
27.
  The  project  will  also  secure  clear  water  and  land  access  and  use  rights.  Hence, 
provisions will be made to strengthen the position of  the individuals/groups that will be 
accessing and utilizing those resources both for cluster and aquaparks models.  It will be 
necessary  to  either  specify  access  and  use  rights  to  the  pond  in  the  lease  or  DUATs, 
and/or  initiate  a  sub-lease  agreement  with  the  group.  This  in  order  to  guarantee 
ownership  over  the  pond  infrastructure/s  for  the  direct  beneficiaries  of  the  project 
activity for a period no shorter in time to that of the main operator/s in the aquapark/s. 
g. 
Climate change mitigation measures 
  A  detailed  Climate  Risk  Analysis  will  help  the  project  in  avoiding  improper  site 
28.
selection  and  chose  appropriate  technologies  to  mitigate  adverse  effects.  PRODAPE  will 
promote  climate  smart  aquaculture  practices  and  technologies  to  increase  fish  farmers 
resilience to climate related shocks. These include context specific interventions tailored 
to the current and projected weather patterns. Reference will be made, when available, 
to the Local Adaptation Plans (LAPs) developed within the NCCAMS framework to ensure 
alignment with national efforts in adapting to climate change.97  
  Climate-proof  aquaculture  production  models  will  be  established.98  For  instance, 
29.
integrated  aquaculture  offers  efficient  water  and  land  use  as  well  as  a  balanced,  mixed 
farm approach.99 Upgrading pond dykes with nylon netting (or any other material serving 
the  purpose)  and  dykes  raising  would  be  one  of  the  possible  solutions  in  flood  prone 
areas  to  minimise  mass  escapes.  Also,  stocking  bigger  seed  would  shorten  the  farming 
period and thus reduce the risk of losing the crop.  
30.
In  this  regard,  the  project  linkage  with  CEPAQ,  which  is  investing  in  genetic 
enhancement  of  the  mossambicus  strains,  will  possibly  guarantee  availability  in  the 
medium-long  term  of  fast-growing,  salt/temperature  tolerant  species  suited  to  brackish 
water  conditions,  particularly  in  disaster  prone  areas.  At  the  same  time,  the  use  of 
flooded  and  /or  salinized  land  for  aquaculture  systems  may  turn  useful in  rehabilitating 
degraded soils in the longer term and will therefore be promoted by PRODAPE. 
  On  a  final  note,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  adoption  of  BPMs  can  play  a  key 
31.
role in increasing farmers’ creditworthiness and access to specific financial products (i.e. 
through  REFP).100  This  will  be  coupled  with  the  strengthening/equipment  of  the  Local 
Committees for Risk Management (CLGRC) for early warning as well as with an improved 
climate  information  service  and  packaging  system,  thus  increasing  overall  resilience  of 
project’s beneficiaries.101  
h.  Multi-benefit approaches 
  Major  benefits  will  include  the  adoption  of  climate  smart  aquaculture  approaches 
32.
and  technologies  including  Integrated  Aquaculture  (INTAQ)  which  is  expected  to:  i) 
contribute to less effluent disposal in water bodies; ii) provide nutrition for crops thereby 
saving costs on fertilizers; iii) lead to a more efficient use of land and water resources; 
and  iv)  induce  higher  farm  productivity  and  incomes  per  ha.  The  development  of  cage 
culture  guidelines  and  the  demonstration/  adoption  of  BMPs  including  bio-security 
standards  will  likely  reduce  the  risk  of  environmental  pollution,  potential  disease 
outbreaks,  define  and  adhere  to  carrying  capacity  and  reduce  potential  social  conflicts. 
97 An updated map of LAPs elaborated or in the process of being elaborated is attached as an annex. 
98 For instance, depending on climate context, trenches along ponds to divert excess water during flooding into 
dry ponds or reservoirs to store excess water would be a solution. Efficient water uses and water conservation 
solutions will be also promoted for drought exposed areas.   
99  Integration  of  aquaculture  and  agriculture  is  increasingly  attractive  where  water  is  a  limited  resource 
considering  its  potential  to  reduce  water  requirement  for  the  production  of  quality  fish  protein  and  fresh 
vegetable products relative to both culture systems operated independently. 
100  Weather/climate  index-based  insurance  products  tailored  for  small-scale  fish  farmers  can  be  accessed 
through REFP to cover against losses due to natural calamities (i.e. dyke breaking, floods etc.).  
101 An updated list of Local Committees is attached as an annex to this document.   
62 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
The adoption of water management practices will ensure good water quality avoid health 
risks and benefit production and productivity. Environmental conservation activities (soil 
erosion  control  and  afforestation)  will  mitigate  the  risk  of  siltation  in  ponds  and  trees 
planting will serve as  carbon sinks.  At the  same time, clearer  NR access and use  rights 
will  strengthen  beneficiaries’  ownership  and  security  over  their  livelihood  assets. 
Adequate  capacity  building  at  institutional  level  as  well  as  knowledge  production  will 
benefit  sustainability  and  scale-up  of  project’s  interventions  while  enhancing  national’s 
sector  capacity.  These  benefits  may  be  costed  during  the  first/second  year  of 
implementation when evidence on the ground will start being clearer and quantifiable.  
i. 
Incentives for good practices 
  The  project  will  reward  good  practices  through  a  recognition  mechanism  that 
33.
provides  exposure  and  learning  experiences  for  outstanding  farmers,  processors  and 
other value chain actors. The asset transfer will be combined with appropriate training on 
environmental  management  (i.e.  BMPs  in  pond/cage  culture  and  water  management). 
The E&S Consultant hired within the PMU will be responsible for this.  
j. 
Participatory processes 
  The  project  will  ensure  target  beneficiaries  and  stakeholders  participation  and 
34.
involvement  in  consultative  and  decision-making  processes,  especially  on  management 
and  utilization  of  environmental,  physical  and  cultural  resources.  This  will  be  key  in 
ensuring  long-term  sustainability  of  the  interventions.  The  improvement  of  stakeholder 
awareness of the nature of environment, social and climate vulnerability and change will 
be necessary in all phases of consultative processes. 
Institutional analysis 
k. 
Institutional framework 
35.
  Since  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  held  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in 
1992,  Mozambique  has  established  institutions  to  address  the  need  of  protecting 
biodiversity  and  tropical  forests.  The  MITADER  is  charged  with  preparing  environmental 
and climate policies and coordinating their implementation. MITADER is the Government 
of  Mozambique’s  focal  point  for  all  international  48  Mozambique  Environmental  Threats 
and  Opportunities  Assessment  conventions  related  to  biodiversity  conservation  (e.g., 
CBD,  CITES),  and  it  coordinates  Mozambique’s  REDD+  preparations  and  the  climate 
change  adaptation  strategy.  MITADER  is  represented  at  provincial level  by its  Provincial 
Directorates (DPTADER). The latter ensure the execution of the EIA process at local level 
which  is  a  legal  requirement  in  Mozambique  under  the  Environmental  Law  (Law  no. 
20/97) for any activities which may have direct or indirect impacts on the environment. 
The  Environmental  Law  requires  that  activities  (whether  by  their  nature,  location  or 
dimensions)  which  are  likely  to  cause  significant  environmental  impacts  need  to  be 
licensed  by  MITADER,  based  on  the  outcomes  of  the  EIA  process.102  The  National 
Environmental  Policy  (Resolution  no.  5/1995)  was  established  to  manage  natural  and 
environmental  resources  so  as  to  maintain  their  functional  and  productive  capacity  for 
current  and  future  generations.  The  Regulation  regarding  the  Environmental  Auditing 
Process  (Decree  no.  25/2011)  was  established  to  regulate  supervisory  and  auditing 
activities  related  to  compliance  with  environmental  protection  standards  at  the  national 
level.  Mozambique  has  made  progress  in  establishing  institutions  whose  mandates 
102 The latest regulation was established in 2015 (Decree 54/2015). Article 8 of the Environmental Law requires 
that  the  Government  create  adequate  mechanisms  so  as  to  involve  the  various  sectors  of  civil  society,  local 
communities  and  environmental  protection  organizations  in  the  preparation  of  policies  and  legislation  for  the 
management of the country’s natural resources. Article 9 prohibits the production and deposit of any toxic and 
polluting substances on soils, subsoils, water or atmosphere as well as the conduct of activities that will tend to 
accelerate  erosion  and  desertification,  deforestation  or  any  other  form  of  environmental  degradation  beyond 
the limits established by law. 
63 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
to  environmental  protection,  biodiversity  conservation  and 
forest 
contribute 
management.  However,  some  weaknesses  remain  in  institutional  capacity,  organization 
and  coordination.  The  various  responsibilities  concerning  environmental  protection  are 
dispersed  among  several  ministries.  This  renders  the  concentration  of  human  and 
financial resources and equipment for the protection of the environment difficult. At the 
same  time,  the  limits  of  responsibilities  among  institutions  are  not  clear,  which,  when 
coupled with weak coordination, can result in the duplication or absence of efforts among 
institutions.  
  Other  relevant  institutions  are  the  National  Meteorology  Agency  (INAM)  and  the 
36.
National  Institute  for  Disaster  Risk  Management  (INGC)  which  contribute  in  producing 
and  distributing  meteorological  information  and  ensuring  early  risk  reaction  along  the 
country.  However,  effective  coverage  of  meteorological  services  is  still  weak  and  EWSs 
have to be strengthened.   
  At regional level, water management and development are the responsibility of the 
37.
five Regional Water Administrations (ARAs) in their respective river basins. They control 
the irrigation systems, collect water fees and hydrological data. They have administrative 
and financial autonomy but report to the DNSA. In areas not yet covered by an ARA, the 
Provincial  Directorates  of  Public  Works  and  Housing  are  the  authority  responsible  for 
water resources management. 
38.
  Finally,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  project  is  consistent  with  Mozambique’s 
National  Determined  Contribution  (NDC  2015)  and  its  priorities  and  will  facilitate 
investments  in  the  use  of  renewable  energy  technologies  when  necessary,  thus 
contributing to low levels of greenhouse gas emissions. In this framework, the project is 
also  congruous  with  the  National  Adaptation  Programme  of  Action  (2007),  which  is 
already  factored  in  the  NCCAMS  and  the  NDC,  which  in  turn  sets  the  basis  for  the 
National Adaptation Plan (NAP).  
l. 
Capacity building & Research  
  On  the  institutional  support  side,  the  elaboration  and  use  of  adequate  policy  and 
39.
regulations as well as capacity building& research  activities will be a  key activity of the 
Project.  The  elaboration/adoption  of  Best  Management  Practices  (BMPs)  –    such  as:  i) 
good water management standards; ii) water monitoring103; iii) protocols for feeding,104 
fish  behaviour,  as  well  as  for  risk  mitigation  and  remedial  actions;  iv)  bio-security 
procedures (including quarantine requirements)105;  and v) waste management – will be 
part  of  this  effort.  Moreover,  PRODAPE  will  ensure  adequate  advisory  capacity  for 
aquaculture  extension  workers  thus  revising  extension  training  material  to  take  into 
account  environmental,  social  and  climate  change  effects  implications  in  aquaculture 
projects.  Research  activities  will  see  the  involvement  of  different  actors  (i.e.  IPP)  will 
concentrate  on  providing  evidence  base  of  good  environmental  and  climate  practices 
adoption, with attention to costs and benefits. The production of an Agroecological Map 
for  Suitable  Aquaculture  Sites  in  Mozambique  will  also  represent  an  important  outcome 
in this regard.106   
103 The designed authority for water quality monitoring are ARAs. 
104    To  use  small  portions  of  feed  at  timely  intervals  rather  than  a  large  portion  at  one  time  to  avoid 
eutrophication. 
105 Currently there is limited control of biosecurity procedures for safety importing and producing brood stock in 
the  country.  The  only  bio-secure  facility  is  CEPAQ  which  established  collaboration  with  private  labs  and 
universities  for  screening  diseases  prior  to  shipment  as  well  as  during  quarantine  in  Mozambique,  thus 
significantly  reducing  the  risk  of  disease  (i.e.  TiLV)  entering  the  country.  This  facility  can  also  train  other 
private hatcheries. All hatcheries in PRODAPE will be required to follow these standards.  
106  Currently,  some  work  in  this  direction  has  been  done  and  the  Project  should  integrate  what  has  been 
already produced into this exercise.  
64 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
m.  Additional funding 
  Opportunities  for  additional  financing  can  be  identified,  particularly  in  relation  to 
40.
adaptation  and  mitigation  finance  (i.e.  GCF  or  AF).  These  resources  may  secure  the 
efficient  adoption  of  a  climate  information  system  and  the  strengthening  of  the  current 
early  warning  capacities.  Environmental  conservation  activities  or  risk  mitigation 
measures  such  as  soil  erosion  control  and  afforestation  are  likely  to  reduce  siltation  in 
ponds,  thereby  increasing  production  and  incomes,  and  can  thus  be  considered  as 
potential  activities  to  be  financed  through  additional  resources.  Also,  as  a  good 
environmental  practice,  the  project  may  think  to  promote  indigenous  tree  planting 
around  ponds  areas  during  implementation,  selecting  species  which  could  provide 
additional economic/environmental benefits as for instance, the use of fruits/leaves into 
feed production techniques.  
Monitoring and Evaluation 
  A  log-frame  for  PRODAPE  has  been  produced  to  assess  progress  and  success.  A 
41.
specific  indicator  to  measure  the  number  of  smallholder  fish  farmers  whose  climate 
resilience has been increased is included in the project’s log-frame. In addition, guidance 
for  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  project’s  environmental  and  social  performance 
should be detailed in the ESMF and Plan. The project M&E and KM officer should work in 
close  collaboration  with  the  Environmental  and  Social  Consultant  to  assess  the 
performance and progress of the project during implementation.   
Budgetary resources and schedule 
42.
  Budget  resources  are  made  available  for  the  elaboration  of  an  ESMF  through  the 
design  allocated  budget.  The  detailed  Climate  Risk  Analysis  will  be  co-financed  with 
PROCAVA  which  is  currently  under  design.  The  two  studies  will  be  produced  during 
design  and  before  the  project  is  submitted  for  approval.  TORs  for  the  preparation  of 
these  studies,  which  will  require  roughly  3  months  to  be  finalised,  are  attached  to  this 
report.  
65 
Table 1: PRODAPE Social, Environment and Climate Risks and Mitigation Measures107 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Activity 
Pond 
culture & 
Cage 
culture 
Social 
Risk 
Mitigation 
(H) Weak Natural 
Resource (land& 
water) access and 
use rights and 
potential competition 
with other 
land/water users 
Ensure clear land 
access and use rights 
through DUATs 
(clusters) and lease 
agreements (in 
aquaparks) and 
assess pre-existing 
competition with 
other NR users before 
implementation 
Environment 
Climate Change 
Risk 
(H) Variation in 
water levels 
caused by weather 
extremes (i.e. 
drought/ floods)  
Risk 
(H) Poor pond 
location/ 
siting 
(including 
adequate soil, 
water quality & 
quantity all year 
round) 
Mitigation 
Comply with the 
criteria set out within 
the ESMF thus 
excluding fragile 
ecosystems, protected 
areas (i.e. 
conservation areas, 
reserves, parks and 
their buffer zones) and 
ensuring adequate 
environmental 
conditions 
Water abstraction or 
diversion should be 
permitted by the 
relevant ARAs/ Water 
management 
authority. 
Ensure water 
availability and quality 
all-year-round. 
Preferably ponds 
location will exclude 
areas where water 
from natural bodies 
cannot flow-in through 
gravity for pond 
culture.  
Baseline study to 
identify suitable areas 
for cage culture (i.e. 
depth and 
1 
107 (H) High, (M) Medium, (L) Low. 
Mitigation 
Improve planning and 
zoning to take into 
consideration climate 
change aspects. 
Integration of 
aquaculture with 
agriculture crop-
livestock-fish 
integrated farming 
systems thus 
improving water 
efficient water use 
Water harvesting and 
tree planting nearby 
ponds to reduce 
drought impact 
Fast-growing fish 
species (also through 
research). 
Upgrade aquaculture 
facilities to withstand 
extreme weather and 
disasters: i.e. higher 
dykes, lining ponds, 
features that minimise 
mass escapes of 
cultured fish during 
flooding such as nets.   
Building trenches 
along ponds to divert 
excess water during 
flooding into dry 
Activity 
Social 
Environment 
Climate Change 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Risk 
Create Water 
Management 
Committees involving 
community 
groups/associations 
Community 
participation and 
consultation in all 
stages including the 
establishment of a 
grievance/ complaints 
channelling 
mechanism 
Clear delimitation of 
cage culture farms 
Provide adequate 
training module/s and 
material on best 
aquaculture social, 
environmental and 
climate adaptation/ 
mitigation practices 
within the extension 
workers curricula.  
Integrate 
environmental 
education and 
training for farmers 
within project training 
interventions 
including early 
(M) Lack of 
adequate support to 
small scale fish-
farmers 
oxygenation) 
Develop/improve AEZ 
map for Suitable 
Aquaculture Areas 
(including soil, water, 
NR uses, health and 
climate change 
factors) to guide 
aquaculture 
development and 
species selection 
(M) Water 
quality 
deterioration 
of in-let 
effluent/water 
bodies during 
implementation 
Regular monitoring of 
water quality by ARAs 
and/or water 
management 
authorities 
(M) Higher 
incidence of 
disease due to 
climate change 
Good risk 
communication/ early 
warning system in 
place 
2 
Mitigation 
ponds or reservoirs to 
store excess water 
Promote brackish 
water aquaculture on 
flooded and/or 
salinized land and 
water bodies thus 
potentially 
rehabilitating the soil 
in the longer term 
Ensure adequate 
capacity of extension 
workers to assess 
climate change risks 
and support 
adaptation measures 
suited to the local 
context 
Promote best 
management 
practices (BPMs) and 
biosecurity in all 
production models 
also to adapt to 
disease risk due to 
the impact of climate 
change 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Activity 
Social 
Environment 
Climate Change 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Risk 
Mitigation 
warning. 
(M) Investment loss   Weather/climate 
index-based 
insurance products 
tailored for small-
scale fish farmers can 
be accessed through 
REFP to cover against 
losses due to natural 
calamities (i.e. dyke 
breaking, floods etc.).  
(M) Pollution 
or 
eutrophication 
of water 
bodies through 
effluent 
discharge 
including 
increase in 
harmful algal 
blooms (HABs) 
(M) Elite capture 
Ensure targeted 
groups have access to 
relevant info, are 
represented and 
actively participate in 
(H) Fish 
disease 
outbreaks 108 
(H) Lack of 
weather 
information and 
disaster risk 
preparedness  
Coordinate with INAM 
to improve climate 
information services 
through extension 
service training and 
rehabilitation of met 
stations. 
Coordinate with INGC 
to create/ capacitate 
Local Committees for 
Disaster Risk 
Management as part 
of the National EWS.    
Integrated farming 
approach 
Regular monitoring of 
water quality by both 
farmers and ARAs/ 
water management 
authorities including 
good risk 
communication/ early 
warning system in 
place 
Adoption of a protocol 
for remedial actions 
Avoid use of 
agrochemicals and 
antibiotics 
Efficient feeding 
regimes and high feed 
quality (BMPs) 
Farmers’ trainings on 
water monitoring, 
good risk 
communication and 
awareness creation 
Follow correct 
biosecurity procedures 
and quarantine to 
better control import 
of brood stock 
108 Following correct procedure and quarantine guidelines is particularly important in light of the recently discovered TiLV.   
3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Activity 
Social 
Environment 
Climate Change 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Ensure correct 
stocking density 
through the adoption 
of BMPs and aquatic 
animal health 
surveillance system – 
training  
Good husbandry at 
farm level 
Avoid introduction of 
any exotic species. 
The Nile Tilapia will be 
introduced exclusively 
below the Zambezi 
River 
Good management 
practices (BMPs) to 
include adequate 
protection measures 
(i.e. fencing, clear 
bushes, netting 
against birds) 
all Project’s related 
processes, including 
monitoring 
(L) Exclusive 
reliance on 
aquaculture 
activities 
Diversification of 
livelihoods and 
income sources 
including nutrition 
aspects 
(M) 
Introduction 
of exotic 
species 
(M) Risk of 
predators such 
as frogs, 
lizards, birds, 
crocodiles etc. 
(M) Disease outbreaks 
due to 
contaminants/ 
pollutants release 
into common water 
bodies 
(M) Outbreak of 
malaria and other 
water borne diseases 
Use of organic 
fertilizers. Avoid use 
of agrochemicals or 
antibiotics 
Integrated farming 
approach109 
Adoption of a protocol 
for remedial actions 
Adherence to BMPs 
and continuous 
monitoring of water 
quality in place 
Encourage clearance 
of bushes around 
ponds and use of 
mosquito nets or 
repellents 
Involve public health 
and create awareness 
(H) Degradation 
of lake/large 
reservoirs water 
quality and 
environment 
due to 
unregulated 
Development of cage 
culture best practices 
and environmental 
management 
guidelines including 
regulations (i.e. 
minimum distance 
109 Ensure avoidance of excessive levels of potentially hazardous elements (i.e. nitrogen). 
4 
Activity 
Social 
Environment 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Climate Change 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Mitigation 
between farms) 
Undertake studies and 
assessment on the 
viability of cage 
culture before 
implementation 
Demonstration of best 
practices based on the 
outcomes of 
assessment studies 
Ensure adoption of 
environmental 
monitoring /reporting 
plan and waste 
management plan 
Ensure adoption of 
biosecurity procedures 
for fingerlings 
introduction, and 
carrying capacity 
guidelines to avoid 
overstocking 
Risk 
cage culture 
with potential 
disease 
outbreaks 
Risk 
Mitigation 
(M) Expensive, 
unreliable/unavaila
ble electricity for 
aquaculture activities 
Opt for gravity 
solutions to fill the 
ponds. When not 
possible promote the 
use of green 
technologies (i.e. 
solar pumps, solar 
panels etc.) 
(L) Accidental falling 
and drowning in 
ponds (for example, 
by children) 
Fencing off ponds and 
putting up warning 
signs 
Public awareness 
(L) Risks associated 
with construction 
works 
Post-
harvest 
(H) Outbreak of food 
borne diseases due 
to poor food safety 
standards 
ESMF to specify the 
ES management 
requirements that will 
be the responsibility 
of contractors and 
primary suppliers 
hired to this scope 
(including health and 
safety). 
Adoption and 
adherence to food 
safety standards 
Adoption of good food 
handling and 
preparation practices 
at farm level including 
labelling 
Promotion of 
technologies for 
preservation (i.e. 
solar dryers) 
(H) Post-harvest loss and poor waste 
management contributing to 
environmental pollution / GHG 
emissions 
Minimise waste by improving harvest and 
post-harvest technology, including 
improved fish storage, handling and 
processing equipment 
Reuse fish waste (i.e. as manure for crops, 
for fish feed, as collagen etc.) 
5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Activity 
Social 
Risk 
(H) Poor access to 
higher value 
markets and lower 
revenues due to low 
quality standards 
Mitigation 
Train farmers on good 
food safety standards 
and handling. 
Adopt good quality 
standards and 
promote technologies 
to preserve quality   
Environment 
Climate Change 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Risk 
Mitigation 
Rooftop water harvesting in 
rehabilitation of markets/ selling 
points 
(M) 
Lack of 
water 
in fish 
market
s 
6 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex 6: Annual Work Plan and Budget 
PRODAPE Annual Work Plan and Budget for Project Year 1 and 2 
Jan 2020 - Dec 2021 
The Work plan for January 2020 to December 2021 
1.1    Overall approach to planning process and coordination 
During the implementation phase the approach to planning and coordination of the 
1. 
PRODAPE is designed to take into account four major guidelines namely: 
 Project Design Report (PDR); 
 Coordination of the actions of entities / agencies involved; 
 Decentralization  of  planning  and  implementation  activities  by  the  implementing 
agencies;  
 Maximization of accountability and transparency. 
2. 
Project  Design  Report  (PDR)  -  provides  the  general  framework  for  Project 
implementation,  hence  the  basic  for  the  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budget  (AWPB) 
preparation. 
3. 
Coordination of activities will be ensured through mechanisms that will operate at 
both the PCU and all other implementing agencies. Project resources (that is, money to 
pay  for  the  purchase  of  goods  and  services)  will  released  only  against  the  approved 
Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPBs)  that  are  built  up  from  separate  AWPBs 
prepared  at  different  units  of  implementing  agency  and  other  levels.  Flexibility  will  be 
ensured  through  annual  reviews  and  adjustments  and  by  greater  decentralization  and 
beneficiary  participation  in  the  preparation,  management,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of 
the AWPBs. 
4.  Decentralization of operations will be guaranteed by devolving or delegating the 
responsibility  for  preparing  provincial  AWPBs  to  the  DPMAIPs  together  with  SIDAEs  and 
for  central  AWPBs  to  the  PCU/IDEPA  and  central  agencies  participating  in  the  project. 
Allocation of funds for project implementation, based on approved provincial and central 
AWPBs,  is  then  to  project  accounts  held  by  the  DPMAIPs  and  the  central  agencies.  The 
current structure  of Government in Mozambique is already decentralized and as such is 
clearly  a ppropriate  for  the  dispersed  type  of  decision  making  and  implementation 
authority  of  the  PRODAPE.  Responsiveness  to  beneficiary  and  needs  will  be  ensured  by 
supporting a participatory approach to extension and research and establishing a system 
of  continuous  evaluation  of  project  activities  in  which  beneficiary  feedback  will  be  an 
important element  
5. 
Accountability  and  transparency  will  be  ensured  through  allocation  of  funds 
against  specified  expenditures  (from  project  accounts)  which  themselves  are  justified  by 
reference  to  particular  activities.  Control  and  accountability  at  the  level  of  implementing 
agency including the PCU will be ensured through capacity building, annual external audit 
as well as regular supervisions missions by the GoM and IFAD. 
1.2    First Annual Work Plan Focus 
6. 
Since this plan is being prepared before the approval and effectiveness of the grant 
is  declared  by  both  the  IFAD  and  the  Government,  the  plan  should  focus  among  other 
things on the following: 
  The recruitment of the PCU key staff such as (i) Project Coordinator, (ii) a M&E/ 
Knowledge  Management  specialist,  (iii) a  finance  manager,  (iv) a  procurement 
officer, (iii) an accountant and other supporting staff; 
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
  Ensuring that the designated account shall have been opened; 
  Concentrate  effort  mainly  on  consolidating  and  advancing  in  capacity  building 
through  creating  awareness  among  staff,  the  public,  stakeholders  and 
beneficiaries about the project, including the start-up workshop activities 
Implement procurement plan  
 
7. 
Nevertheless,  an  attempt  has  been  made  so  as  to  avoid  an  ambitious  plan.  It  is 
hoped  that  for  the  subsequent  AWPB,  the  PRODAPE  will  work  hard  as  to  improve  and 
move along with the implementation once the systems have been put in place. 
1.3    Description of the Work Plan 
Component 1: Development of small-scale aquaculture production capacity 
8. 
The  aim  of  this  component  is  to  increase  the  capacity  for  production  and 
productivity  of  small-scale  aquaculture.  The  component  is  served  by  four  sub-
components: 
Subcomponent 1.1: Develop fish seed production capacity.   
9. 
The sub-component aims to support upgrading and establishment of  hatcheries in 
the  project  area,  by  targeting  medium-level  private  enterprises  and  establishing,  public 
private partnerships (PPPs), as relevant.  Key activities include: conducting an inventory 
of existing fingerlings producers and determining the supply and demand for fingerlings, 
investor  sensitization  /  exposure  forums,  building  the  capacity  of  small-and  medium 
scale  fingerling  production  enterprises,  access  to  financial  services  and  identifying  the 
role  to  be  played  by  CEPAQ  and  CEPAM  in  relation  to  fingerling  production  and  related 
demand-driven  research  to  support  the  aquaculture  industry  nationwide.  In  summary 
the following activities will be carried under this sub-component during the PY1 and PY2. 
1.1.1 Carry out the recruitment of TA to design the hatchery unit & Technical 
drawings 
1.1.2  Initiate  the  tendering  process  for  a  construction  and  installation  of 
hatchery facilities  
1.1.3 Carry out the civil works for construction of modern fish hatcheries units 
1.1.4 Carry out the purchase of hatchery equipment  
1.1.5 Carry out rehabilitation/ expansion of hatcheries co-financed by private 
hatchery operators 
1.1.6  Carry  out  training  of  hatchery  operators  and  value  chain  actors 
(capacity building for seed production) 
Subcomponent 1.2: Develop fish feed production capacity.  
10.  The  sub-component  addresses  the  need  to  develop  the  fish  feed  production 
capacity at all levels and for different  client needs in the project areas.  Intervention on 
feed  can  have  significant  impacts  on  project's  viability  since  fish  feed  constitutes 
between 60-70 per cent of total production costs. PRODAPE will support the development 
of  "cottage"  micro-enterprises  and  medium-scale  enterprises  in  fish  feed  production, 
based  on  assessment  of  demand  and  supply  for  their  services  by  smallholders.  In 
summary the following activities will be carried under this sub-component during the PY1 
and PY2.  
1.2.1  Carry  out  the  recruitment  of  TA  for  the  preparation  of  technical 
specification of fish feed machinery/housing 
1.2.2  Carry  out  the  recruitment  of  TA  for  the  preparation  of  tendering 
documents for feed machinery/housing 
2 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
1.2.3 Carry out the civil work for the construction of housing and installation 
of feed mill machinery 
1.2.4 Carry out the tendering and supply process of feed ingredients 
1.2.5 Purchase of fish input supplies 
1.2.6  Carry  out  a  support  for  the  provision  of  matching  grants  and  other 
financing mechanisms for the development of cottage feed industries 
1.2.7  Carry  out  training  of  feed  producer  and  value  chain  actors  (capacity 
building for seed production) 
Sub-component 1.3: Develop smallholder aquaculture production capacity.  
11.  The  sub-component  aims  to  improve  smallholder  aquaculture  production  capacity 
with  three  production  technologies:  a)  smallholder  aquaculture  production  consisting  of 
earthen  ponds  for  low  income  beneficiaries  organized  in  clusters;  b)  small-scale  pond 
aquaculture  producers  linked  to  medium  level  private-sector  entrepreneurs  for  inputs 
and market access e.g. in aqua-parks model; and c) cage culture systems in large inland 
water  bodies  that  involve  high  level  management  of  seeds  and  feeds.    Key  activities 
include:  organizing  farmers  into  clusters,  training  farmers  on  viable  aquaculture 
technologies,  facilitating  access  to  quality  extension  services,  sustainable  access  to 
inputs  and  adequate  water  for  aquaculture  investments.  In  summary  the  following 
activities will be carried under this sub-component during the PY1 and PY2. 
1.3.1 Carry out the training of extension agents 
1.3.2  Carry  out  training  of  fish  farmers  on  pond/cage  construction  and  fish 
production, fish handling and business development 
1.3.3 Carry out training of fish traders on fish handling and business development 
1.3.4  Carry  out  provision  support  for  reconstruction  and  recovery  of  assets  for 
farmers affected by the IDAI storm 
Sub-Component 1.4: Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social risks 
12.  The  sub-component  aims  to  contribute  to  good  nutrition  through  consumption  of 
fish  and  fish-based  value-added  products  as  an  entry  point  to  improved  and  diversified 
family diet. It addresses other social risks such as lack of adequate planning and use of 
resources  at  household  level,  gender  inequality  and  HIV  and  AIDS.    Key  activities 
include:  capacity  building  to  mainstream  nutrition  along  the  aquaculture  value  chain, 
facilitate  access  to  energy  and  labour-saving  technologies  and  the  provision  of  Social 
Mentoring  support  to  rural  aquaculture  producer  households  organized  in  groups.  In 
summary the following activities will be carried under this sub-component during the PY1 
and PY2 within the output 1.4.1: Basic knowledge on nutrition education and consumer 
awareness improved 
1.4.1 Carry out the recruitment of TA to produce the Social Mentoring Manual for 
PRODAPE  on  the  basis  of  GALS,  Stepping  Stones  and  nutrition  information  from 
GoM 
1.4.2  Carry  out  training  sessions  for  farmer  clusters  and/or  the  PCR  group 
nutrition education 
 1.4.3 Carry out the recruitment of TA on Social behaviour change communication 
(SBCC) to support market Place (Fish fairs, radio shows, radio, television etc) 
1.4.4  Carry  out  training  of  PRODAPE  team  and  other  key  stakeholders  (PCU, 
P/DMIMAIP,  extension  teams  (Capacity  building  on  nutrition  mainstreaming 
approaches,  social inclusion) 
            1.4.5.  Participation  in  CODSAN,  COPSAN  and  SETSAN  training  (P/DMIMAIP 
team) 
3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
1.4.6  Undertake  consumer  awareness  studies  on  nutrition  assessment  and 
evaluation 
           1.4.7 Undertake baseline studies (KAP, MDDW, MDDYC) on nutrition 
Component 2: Development of aquaculture as a business.  
13.  Aims  to  nurture  the  entrepreneurial  capacity  of  farmers  and  promote  a  conducive 
environment for the development of aquaculture as a business. The component is served 
by four sub-components:  
Sub-component 2.1: Support to development of aqua parks:  
14.  Aims to support the Government's new aquaculture development strategy focused 
on  consolidation  and  centrality  of  production  through  sustainable  and business  oriented 
small  and  medium  scale  aqua-parks.  The  project  will  support  preparation  of  feasibility 
studies,  business  plans  and  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plans  (ESMPs)  for 
aqua-parks;  and  the  development  of  key  infrastructure  e.g.  "last  mile"  feeder  roads, 
small water canals, electricity supply (off-grid or connection to the main grid, whichever 
is  cost-effective)  and  cold  chain  facilities.  In  summary  the  following  activities  will  be 
carried under this sub-component during the PY1 
2.1.1 Carry out Regional Exchange visits/workshops for input suppliers 
2.1.2  Carry  out  Regional  Exchange  visits/workshops  for  IDEPA  staff  on  aqua-
parks  
2.1.3 Carry out Regional Exchange visits/workshops for DPMAIP staff 
2.1.4 Carry out Local Exchange visits/workshops for extension workers 
2.1.5 Carry out Local Exchange visits/workshops for fish farmers 
Sub-component 2.2: Develop market linkages and business partnerships.  
15.  Aims to develop market linkages for improved handling, collection, marketing and 
distribution  of  cultured  fish  and  associated  products  (spinoffs  of  some  interventions  are 
expected  to  benefit  retailers  of  non-cultured  fish).  A  second  focus  is  the  creation  of  a 
conducive  environment  for  aquaculture  business  to  thrive,  by  linking  smallholders 
organized  in  clusters  or  engaged  in  aqua-parks  in  business  partnerships  with  private 
entrepreneurs.  The  sub-component  will  facilitate  the  development  of  frameworks  for 
effective  partnerships  and  the  establishment  of  business  partnerships  between 
smallholders and private entrepreneurs to improve smallholder access to inputs, markets 
and  other  services.  In  summary  the  following  activities  will  be  carried  under  this  sub-
component during the PY1 
2.3.1 Undertake market and product development study and follow-up 
2.3.2 Carry out civil works for improvement of fish markets 
2.3.3 Carry out spot improvement of access road 
2.3.4 Carry out the process of purchasing renewable energy equipment 
2.3.5  Carry  out  civil  works  for  the  construction  of  water  canals  for  aquaculture 
clusters 
2.3.6 Carry out the process of production of training material and organization of 
fish fairs 
Sub-component 2.3: Develop financial services. 
16. 
 Aims to facilitate access to  financial services in unserved target  communities and 
to players across all levels of the aquaculture value chain, through the Rural Enterprise 
4 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Finance Project (REFP). This includes promotion of PCRs to raise smallholder capacity to 
invest in aquaculture, a Crowding in Fund (CiF) with co-participation from beneficiaries, a 
Line  of  Credit  (LoC)  and  also  produce,  fund  and  deliver  differentiated  business 
development packages to PRODAPE beneficiaries across the value chain. In summary the 
following activities will be carried under this sub-component during the PY1 
2.3.1  Carry  out  the  recruitment  of  financial  liaison  officer  who  will  link 
PRODAPE with REFP opportunities. 
2.3.2 Carry out an assessment of PRODAPE beneficiaries requiring the access 
to financial services in the form either CIF or LoC from REFP 
Sub-component 2.4: Support to youth aquapreneurship. 
17.  The  sub-component  enhances  opportunities  for  youth  through  investments  in 
business-oriented  activities  that  match  the  interests;  energy  and  skills  of  young  people 
in, or linked to, the aquaculture value chain. It will support vocational training of youth, 
preparation of business plans and linking them with the REFP for tailored financing.   In 
the first year of activities the following activity is envisioned: development of a Support 
Your Own Business Manual for PRODAPE by a specialist in the methodology. 
Component 3: Project management, institutional and policy development.   
18.  The  component  aims  to  establish  appropriate  arrangements  and  support 
mechanisms for PRODAPE management, the development of relevant sector institutions 
for  the  assumption  of  their  core  mandates  together  with  the  development  of  the 
aquaculture  sector  policy  and  regulatory  framework.  This  will  include  the  provision  of 
administrative  and  technical  leadership  to  the  planning  of  the  above  mentioned  two 
technical  components  and  Knowledge  Management  activities,  reporting,  financial 
management,  and  procurement  support.  These  activities  will  be  undertaken  by  the 
Project  Coordination  Unity  (PCU)  in  collaboration  with  IDEPA  that  will  be  appropriately 
staffed to  ensure that planned activities are timely and effectively undertaken.  This will 
all be  done  under  the  oversight  of  the  IDEPA  and  PSC;  the  PSC  will  also  provide  policy 
direction and coordination between key government institutions. Under this component, 
PRODAPE  planned  activities  during  the  first  (PY1)  and  second  (PY2)  Project  Years  are 
presented under the following subcomponents below:  
Sub-component 3.1: Project management  
19.  The  sub-component 
intends  to  establish  appropriate  project  management 
structures,  systems  and  procedures  and  support  relevant  institutions in  the  assumption 
of  their  roles.    Key  activities  include:  the  establishment  of  a  functional  Project 
Coordination  Unit  (PCU),  identification  of  focal  points  for  PRODAPE  subordinated  to 
sector  provincial  directorates,  together  with  the  establishment  of  effective  M&E  and  KM 
systems. Thus, in summary the following are main activities for year 1 and 2 under this 
sub-component: 
3.1.1  Recruit all key PCU staff as specified in the PDR; 
3.1.2  Identify office space for the PCU; 
3.1.3  MIMAIP in coordination with IDEPA to appoint the Project Steering Committee; 
3.1.4  organize a start-up workshops; 
3.1.5  Undertake baseline survey; 
3.1.6  Procure and install the Financial Management/Accounting software; 
3.1.7  Fine tune the Project Implementation Manual (PIM); 
3.1.8  Develop and set up M&E Systems; 
5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
3.1.9  Develop and set up Knowledge Management System; 
3.1.10 Procure all first batch vehicles for the Project; 
3.1.11 Procure furniture and equipment for the PCU and implanting agencies; 
3.1.12 Preparation of implementation progress reports; 
3.1.13 Fine tuning of the 2020 and 2021 AWPB; 
3.1.14 Undertake at least two Project Steering Committee meetings; 
3.1.15 Participate in the IFAD Regional Implementation Workshop; 
3.1.16 Participation in/facilitation of the joint IFAD-GoM Supervision Missions; 
3.1.17 Preparation of ToR for the TAs; 
3.1.18 Hiring of Senior Sociologist; 
3.1.19 Undertake Special Study Targeting, Gender and Youth; 
3.1.20 Carry  out  “implementation  support”  to  the  process  of  building  staff  and 
partner capacity in the areas of targeting, gender and youth 
3.1.21 Carry  out  “implementation  support”  for  PPPs  to  help  the  project  start 
developing specific strategies for this area. 
20.  Sub-component  3.2:  Institutional  capacity  building.  The  sub-component  aims  to 
strengthen the institutional and technical capacity of IDEPA and other sector institutions 
involved  in  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  small-scale  aquaculture, 
including  bio-safety  and  bio-security.   Key  activities  include:  hiring,  training  of  relevant 
technical  and  extension  staff  and  provision  of  key  resources,  production  and 
consolidation  of  training  materials,  the  provision  of  support  to  planning,  coordination, 
implementation and monitoring activities, as well as to priority research activities directly 
relevant to small-scale aquaculture; setting aquaculture statistical database and system 
for data collection. In summary the following are key activities to undertaken during year 
1 and 2 under this sub-component: 
3.2.1  Undertake  the  integration  of  the  technical  specialists  in  the  departments  of 
IDEPA; 
3.2.2  Establish  a  small-scale  aquaculture  integrated  into  the  SDAE/  district 
administration; 
3.2.3  Production of Social Inclusion Manual and national level training; 
3.2.4  Printing and distribution of PRODAPE Social Inclusion Manual; 
3.2.5  Carry  out training at sub-national level of relevant stakeholders  on PRODAPE 
Social Inclusion (to be given by sociologist); 
21.  Sub-component  3.3:  Policy  development.  The  sub-component  aims  to  strengthen 
the  policy  and  regulatory  framework  governing  aquaculture  activity  in  Mozambique, 
including issues pertaining to environmental and social safeguards, operating guidelines 
for  cage culture and for the establishment of PPPs, and set up for appropriate statistics 
systems,  among  others.  Key  activities  include:  the  provision  of  technical  support  to 
facilitating  workshops  and  other  consultation 
relevant  government  authorities, 
processes; including the formulation of policy and related studies. 
3.3.1  Preparations of ToR for the envisaged studies 
3.3.2  Undertake a study on ESMF and detailed climate risk analysis, which includes, 
an agro-ecological map of suitable zones for aquaculture; 
3.3.3  Undertake  regulations  studies  on  aquaculture  and  aquaculture  produce,  cage 
aquaculture,  aqua-parks  and  development  plans  /  projects  on  small  scale 
aquaculture; 
6 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Budget ESTMATES AND FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS 
2.1   Summary  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  for  year  1  (2020)  and  year  2 
(2021) 
22.  Presented  in  this  section  are  summary  tables  giving  an  overall  picture  of  financial 
resources required and key summary activities for the 2020-2021 PRODAPE AWPB. The 
budget information is presented by component, financier and categories of expenditure. 
The  first  year  of  project  implementation  is  2020  and  for  the  AWPB,  the  total  budget  is 
estimated  at  USD  8.9  million.  The  corresponding  allocations  by  components  are:  USD 
4.4 million (about 49% of the budget) allocated to Component 1; USD 1.5 million (17% 
of  the  budget)  allocated  to  component  2;  and  USD  3  million  (34%  of  the  budget) 
allocated  to  Component  3.  In  year  2021,  the  total  budget  is  estimated  at  USD  9.5 
million.  The  corresponding  allocations  by  components  are:  USD  5  million  (54%  of  the 
budget)  allocated  to  Component  1;  USD  3.0  million  (32%  of  the  budget)  allocated  to 
component 2; and USD 1.4 million (14% of the budget) allocated to  Component 3. For 
the two years (2020 and 2021) the total budget is estimated at USD 18 million. In terms 
of  corresponding  allocations  by  components  are:  USD  9.5  million  (about  52%  of  the 
budget)  allocated  to  Component  1;  USD  4.5  million  (25%  of  the  budget)  allocated  to 
component 2; and USD 4.4 million (24% of the budget) allocated to Component 3. The 
total budget will be financed by IFAD grant. 
Table 1: PRODAPE 2020 Annual Work Plan & Budget (US$) by Components and 
Subcomponents 
Component & Sub-Component  
 Component 1: Development of small-scale aquaculture production 
capacity 
 Sub-component1.1 (SC1.1). Develop Fish Seed Production Capacity  
 Sub-component 1.2 (SC1.2). Develop Fish Feed Production Capacity 
 Sub-component1.3 (SC1.3). Develop Smallholder Aquaculture Production 
Capacity  
 Sub-component 1.4 (SC1.4). Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social 
risks  
Component 2. Development of aquaculture as a business  
 Sub-component 2.1 (SC2.1). Support to Development of Aquaparks  
 Sub-component 2.2(SC2.2).Develop Market Linkages and Business 
Partnership 
 Sub-component 2.3 (SC2.3). Develop financial services  
 Sub-component 2.4 (SC2.4). Support to youth aquapreneurship 
 Component 3:  Project management, institutional development and 
policy 
 Sub-component 3.1(SC3.1). Policy Development   
 Sub-component 3.2 (SC3.2). Institutional Capacity Building  
 Sub-component 3.3 (SC3.3). Project Management  
 Grand Total  
Year 1 (2020) 
(USD)  
% 
4,411,000.00 
1,663,000.00 
1,543,000.00 
49% 
38% 
35% 
863,000.00 
20% 
342,000.00 
1,487,000.00 
380,000.00 
8% 
17% 
26% 
1,065,000.00 
42,000.00 
0.00 
3,014,443.00 
259,100.00 
1,325,000.00 
1,430,343.00 
72% 
3% 
0% 
34% 
9% 
44% 
47% 
8,912,443.00  100% 
7 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 2: PRODAPE 2021 Annual Work Plan & Budget (US$) by Components and 
Subcomponents 
Component & Sub-Component  
 Component 1: Development of small-scale aquaculture production 
capacity 
 Sub-component1.1 (SC1.1). Develop Fish Seed Production Capacity  
 Sub-component 1.2 (SC1.2). Develop Fish Feed Production Capacity 
 Sub-component1.3 (SC1.3). Develop Smallholder Aquaculture Production 
Capacity  
 Sub-component 1.4 (SC1.4). Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social 
risks  
Component 2. Development of aquaculture as a business  
 Sub-component 2.1 (SC2.1). Support to Development of Aquaparks  
 Sub-component 2.2(SC2.2).Develop Market Linkages and Business 
Partnership 
 Sub-component 2.3 (SC2.3). Develop financial services  
 Sub-component 2.4 (SC2.4). Support to youth aquapreneurship 
 Component 3:  Project management, institutional development and 
policy 
 Sub-component 3.1(SC3.1). Policy Development   
 Sub-component 3.2 (SC3.2). Institutional Capacity Building  
 Sub-component 3.3 (SC3.3). Project Management  
 Grand Total  
Year 2 (2021) 
(USD)  
% 
5,062,000.00 
1,650,000.00 
1,530,000.00 
54% 
33% 
30% 
955,000.00 
19% 
927,000.00 
3,007,000.00 
0.00 
2,965,000.00 
42,000.00 
0.00 
1,346,413.00 
186,900.00 
245,000.00 
914,513.00 
18% 
32% 
0% 
99% 
1% 
0% 
14% 
14% 
18% 
68% 
9,415,413.00  100% 
Table 3: PRODAPE 2020 and 2021 Annual Work Plan & Budget (US$) by 
Components and Subcomponents 
8 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 4. Overall Budget for 2020 and 2021 by Components and Subcomponents 
by Financier 
9 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 5: Overall PRODAPE Summary Procurement Plan for 2020 and 2021 by 
Planned Expenditure Categories 
Procurement Categories 
I - Civil Works 
II - Vehicles 
III - Equipment and Material 
IV - Consultancies, TA and 
Studies 
V - Training & Workshops 
VI - Credit & Fund 
VII - Salaries & Allowances 
VIII - Operating Costs 
Grand Total 
Planned budget in USD  by 
Year  
2020 
2021 
3,987,000.00 
375,000.00 
453,310.00 
4,152,000.00 
1,941,680.00 
% by Year  
Overall (2020 and 
2021) 
2020  2021 
44% 
0% 
21% 
45% 
4% 
5% 
USD 
8,139,000.00 
375,000.00 
2,394,990.00 
% 
44% 
2% 
13% 
1,634,000.00 
1,171,933.00 
750,000.00 
403,500.00 
107,700.00 
15% 
18% 
11% 
13% 
8% 
8% 
4% 
5% 
1% 
1% 
8,882,443.00  9,445,413.00  100%  100%  18,327,856.00  100% 
1,158,000.00 
924,733.00 
750,000.00 
403,500.00 
115,500.00 
2,792,000.00 
2,096,666.00 
1,500,000.00 
807,000.00 
223,200.00 
12% 
10% 
8% 
4% 
1% 
Table 6: Overall PRODAPE Budget for 2020 and 2021 by Components and 
Subcomponents by Planned Expenditure Categories 
3.1   Detailed  Activities  and  Budget  by  Components/  Subcomponents  and 
Category Indication 
23.  As  it  can  be  depicted  below  are  the  detailed  cost  tables  presented  in  the  form  of 
landscape  giving  an  overall  picture  of  financial  resources  required  for  the  2020-2021 
period and corresponding activities on which funds will be utilised. 
10 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
2 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex 7: First Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
1.
IFAD  procurement  guidelines  require  an  assessment  of  national  procurement 
systems  as  part  of  project  design.    During  the  project  design  mission,  the  IFAD  team 
undertook a comprehensive assessment of: (i) the degree of practical implementation of 
the Mozambican public procurement framework, and (ii) the procurement capacity of the 
project implementing agency IDEPA, MIMAIP and other stakeholders (DPMAIP, oversight 
institutions:  the  General  Inspection  of  Finance  (IGF),  UFSA).    IFAD  met  with  the  World 
Bank  (WB)  and  reviewed  recent  reports  and  assessments  of  the  African  Development 
Bank,  the  World  Bank  within  the  framework  of  their  work  in  Mozambique  in  the 
procurement domain. 
This Appendix outlines the results of the procurement assessment and presents an 
2.
indicative procurement plan for the first 18 months of PRODAPE operations.  
I.  PROCUREMENT ASSESSMENT 
a.  Public Procurement Environment in Mozambique 
3. 
Public procurement in Mozambique is regulated by Decree N. 5/2016 of 8th March 
(Regulations for Contracting of Public Works, Supply of Goods and Consultancy and Non-
Consultancy Services).  The Decree approves the regulations for public works contracts, 
supply of goods and consultancy and non-consultancy services, for all procurement using 
national  budget  funds.  The  decree  is  enshrined  in  the  State  Financial  Management 
System  (SISTAFE)  Law.  Two  Ministerial  Orders  lay  out  the  institutional  arrangements 
following  the  Decree.  Ministerial  Order  N.  141/2006  of  5th  September  establishes  the 
Public  Procurement  Authority  (UFSA)  within  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF),  while 
Ministerial  Order  N.  142/2006  of  5th  September  approves  the  structure  of  procuring 
units.  Standard  bidding  documents  were  approved  with  ministerial  orders.  However, 
these documents are not updated to accommodate provisions of the new Decree.  
The  existing  legal  framework  for  public  procurement  in  Mozambique  is  currently 
4. 
governed  by the  Public  Procurement  Decree  (PPD)  N.  5/2016  that  establishes  the 
principles  and  procedures  to  be  applied  in  any  procurement  held  by  public  authorities 
and institutions  governed  by  public law,  under  public  control  or  using  public  funds.  The 
overriding  principles  stipulated  by  the  legislation  are:  (i)  legality;  (ii)  purpose;  (iii) 
reasonableness;  (iv)  proportionality;  (v)  public  interest;  (vi)  transparency;  (vii) 
publicity; (viii) equality; (ix) competition; (x) fairness; (xi) good will;  (xii) stability; (xiii) 
motivation;  (xiv) responsibility;  (xv)  sound  financial  management;  (xvi)  diligence;  and 
(xvii)  other  applicable  principles  of  public  law.    The  existing  legal  framework  for  public 
procurement  in  Mozambique is  assessed  to  be  broadly  in  compliance  with  international 
standards.  
b.  Donors and development partners’ overall view of the current status of 
public procurement in Mozambique 
5. 
According  to  an  independent  assessment  of  public  procurement  system  carried 
out  by  the  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB),  the  public  procurement  system  in 
Mozambique  faces  challenges  both  in  terms  of:  i)  national  public  procurement  legal 
framework  and  regulatory  institutions  performance;  and  ii)  procurement  practices 
(assessment as a high risk). 
c.  Main findings of the procurement capacity assessment. 
6. 
The  capacity  assessment  conducted  during  PRODEPA  design  indicates  that 
overall,  the  Mozambican  public  procurement  system  is  deemed  to  be  moderately 
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
consistent  with  the  IFAD’s  procurement  guidelines,  in  particular,  and  with  the 
the  national 
international  donor  community  requirements, 
procurement  system  will  be  used  to  undertake  the  programme-funded  procurement 
activities subject to the implementation of the risk mitigation plan detailed below. 
in  general.  Hence, 
7. 
It  must  however  be  noted  that  weaknesses  that  may  negatively  affect  project 
efficiency, include the complexity of the GoM’s electronic financial administration system 
e-SISTAFE  and  complex  procedures  for  approving  contracts  and  procurement-related 
activities  and  potential  associated  delays.    Also,  UFSA  does  not  have  the  necessary 
resources  to:  (i)  handle  complaints;  (ii)  conduct  or  contract  out  annual  independent 
procurement audits; and (iii) publish contract awards. 
8. 
IDEPA has proven capacity to implement successful IFAD-funded projects. For the 
implementation  of  the  latest  PROPESCA  project,  IDEPA  team  demonstrates  good 
knowledge  of  procurement  for  IFAD  projects.  Small  procurement  activities  are  handled 
by  the  (IFAD-funded)  PROAQUA  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU).  The  contracts  register 
shows  good  IDEPA  follow  up  of  execution,  including  contracts  under  the  direct 
supervision  of  the  Roads  Administration  Authority  (ANE)  within  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Works (MOPH).   
The  procurement 
9. 
implementation risks/gaps and proposed the following mitigation measures:  
capacity  assessment 
identified  overall  procurement 
Issues / Risks 
Mitigation Measures 
Analysis of Procurement 
Capacity 
1. Organization 
Management of the project 
involves IDEPA. This unit will 
ensure the overall 
coordination of the project 
and assume PRODAPE 
fiduciary responsibilities 
During the assessment, it 
was not possible to ascertain 
that IDEPA is committed for 
the PRODAPE the fiduciary 
responsibility and the tasks 
that it entails. 
It is recommended to 
nominate the team 
members and to make the 
fiduciary arrangements 
clear in the legal agreement 
and in the Programme 
Implementation Manual 
(PIM) for IDEPA and the 
entities involved in the 
project at the provincial 
level. 
(i) Conduct an induction 
training to brief and update 
MIMAIP/ IDPA staff who will 
be involved in project 
procurement on the main 
procurement procedures -- 
to be used in project 
implementation -- before the 
start of project operations;  
(ii) Hire a senior 
procurement specialist and a 
fiduciary officer to help in the 
preparation of the 
documents for procurement 
and selection of consultants; 
and  
(iii) Train staff and 
consultants involved in the 
project, on IFAD procedures 
and guidelines, as required. 
2. Facilities, Support 
Capacity and Staff 
Experience 
The project implementation 
would involve, in addition to 
the PCU other 
structures/departments of 
the MIMAIP such as ANE and 
provincial entities 
There are some doubts 
about the availability of 
support staff and capacity to 
undertake project-related 
procurement and produce 
adequate documentation in 
a timely manner. 
2 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Issues / Risks 
Mitigation Measures 
Analysis of Procurement 
Capacity 
3. Record Keeping and Filing 
System 
Procurement records will be 
kept under the custody of the 
procuring entity with the ANE 
4. Procurement Planning 
It is not sure that the IDEPA 
will have the capacity to 
cope with the project volume 
of transactions since some 
procurement transactions 
are handled by other 
departments. 
It is uncertain that IDEPA 
will update the project’s 
Procurement Plan; it appears 
that the institution does not 
perceive the instrument as a 
management and monitoring 
tool. 
. 
5. Monitoring/Control 
Systems 
6. Capacity to meet IFAD’s 
Reporting Requirements 
While the existing legal 
framework for public 
procurement in Mozambique 
is deemed to be almost in 
compliance with 
international standards, it 
still presents certain 
shortcomings at operational 
level.  
Register of contracts and 
annual reports on statistics 
for the overall procurement 
transactions are not 
provided in a timely manner 
and in an adequate format. 
Ensure that instructions and 
training are given to ensure 
that project specific files are 
kept for all procurement and 
related transactions and 
recorded contract by 
contract. Storing documents 
using e-archiving system can 
ease access to 
documentation. 
(i) Prepare a detailed Annual 
Work Plan and Budget 
(AWPB) with full costing 
consistent with an Annual 
Procurement Plan; 
(ii) Ensure proper 
coordination between IDEPA 
and other relevant units and 
departments at MIMAIP 
especially with respect to 
procurement planning;  
(iii) Use the procurement 
plan as a monitoring tool for 
processing timely activities, 
not only as a reporting tool. 
Update the procurement 
section in the IFAD “Code of 
Practice” to reflect new PPD 
provisions. 
(i) Ensure that the Project 
Coordinator is assigned with 
the responsibility of 
reporting; 
(ii) Clearly define the content 
of reports and contributions 
of all entities involved in the 
project; 
(iii) Involve UFSA in project 
supervision missions and 
associated reports.  
7. Conclusions.  The executing agency MIMAIP/IDEPA has the capacity to carry out and 
manage the procurement under this financing, provided that the above-recommended 
actions are effectively carried out. This does not apply to the Procurement Plan, which 
should be provided before the approval of the financing. 
3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
B.  Procurement arrangements under PRODAPE 
Institutional arrangements.  The PRODAPE will be integrated into the Ministry 
10. 
of  Sea,  Interior  Waters  and  Fisheries  (MIMAIP)  that  will  be  responsible  for  providing 
overall policy guidance and oversight.  Day-to-day oversight will be assigned to IDEPA as 
the  lead  project  agency  implementing  the  project  through  a  PCU.  The  Ministry´s 
Provincial  Directorates  (DPMAIPs)  will  coordinate,  implement  and  monitor  procurement 
activities at provincial level.  
11. 
All procurement for the project will be under the oversight of the MIMAIP/IDEPA. 
The  IDEPA  Financial  /  Contracts  Manager  will  oversee  and  carry  out  all  PRODAPE 
procurement  activities  in  coordination  with  specialised  and  technical  units.  At  the 
provincial  level,  procurement  would  be  limited  to  small  works  and  locally  available 
service providers for issues such as transport and subject to the close supervision by the 
IDEPA  Fiduciary  team.  Procurement  processes  will  be  carried  out  as  stated  on  the 
procurement  manual,  the  procurement  plan  and  monitor  contracts  using  the  e-archive 
and the contracts’ register. 
12.  While  MIMAIP/  IDEPA  staff  are  knowledgeable  on  national  procurement 
procedures to be used  under PRODAPE, training will however be provided on applicable 
IFAD  procedures  and  guidelines.  A  joint  induction  training  should  be  conducted  with 
IFAD,  UFSA  and  staff  from  the  Administrative  Tribunal  to  explain  the  different  roles 
within the project and provide guidance for smooth implementation. UFSA should publish 
all  PRODAPE  calls  for  tender  and  contract  awards.  All  relevant  documentation  will  be 
stored in the e-archive system. Joint annual audits will be planned with the participation 
of IFAD, UFSA and the IGF. 
15.  Overriding  procurement  principles.  As  provided  in  Section  7.05  of  IFAD´s 
General  Conditions,  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  shall  be  carried  out  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Borrower/Recipient’s  procurement  regulations,  to 
the  extent  such  are  consistent  with  the  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  by  observing 
the following specific principles:  
  Procurement  will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  Financing  Agreement  and 
any duly agreed amendments thereto;  
  Procurement  will  be  conducted  within  the  project  implementation  period, 
except as provided under Article 4.10(a) (ii) of IFAD´s General Conditions;  
  The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated 
funds established in the Financing Agreement;  
  Procurement  is  to  be  consistent  with  the  duly  approved  AWPB  including  a 
procurement plan;  
  Procurement is to result in the best value of money and fit for purpose.  
13. 
Public, open and competitive procurement processes will be used, as relevant, to 
warrant  transparency  and  safeguard  project  resources.  Templates  will  be  provided  for 
every step of the procurement cycle. 
14. 
As  required  by  the  PPD, bidding  documents  will  be  submitted  to  the 
Administrative  Tribunal  for  approval.  The  PCU  will  also  provide  the  necessary  technical 
support  in  the  preparation  of  technical  specifications,  bills  of  quantities  and  ToRs  to 
project participating provinces, as required.  
15. 
Procurement of goods. The goods to be financed under the project include but 
are not limited to the following: office equipment (computers, printers, photocopiers and 
other equipment), accounting software and vehicles. Contracts for procurement of goods 
costing  USD  200,000  or  more  will  be  awarded  based  on  International  Competitive 
Bidding  (ICB);  those  costing  USD  10,000  or  more,  but  less  than  USD  200,000  will  be 
4 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
based on National Competitive Bidding (NCB); while those costing less than USD 10,000 
will be based on National Shopping/Request for Quotations (RfQ).  
16. 
Procurement  of  works.  Works to be financed under the PRODAPE include, but 
are  not  limited  to,  the  construction  of  irrigation  schemes  /  ponds.  The  procurement  of 
works  estimated  to  cost  more  than  USD  50,000  and  less  than  USD  1  million  will  be 
carried out under NCB; ICB will be applied for contracts to cost USD 1 million and above. 
National Shopping/RfQ will be applied for contracts with values estimated at USD 50,000 
or  below,  as  long  as  they  are  clearly  identified  in  the  relevant  AWPB  and  procurement 
plan.  
17. 
Procurement  of  consulting  services.  The  consulting  services  to  be  financed 
under the project include but are not limited to the following: the selection of individual 
consultants, a market study and other qualitative studies on social issues relevant to the 
project. These studies will be under the responsibility of MIMAIP/IDEPA, using one of the 
following methods: 
(i)  Quality and Cost Based Selections (QCBS);  
(ii)  Least-Cost Selection (LCS);  
(iii)  Selection Based on the Consultants’ Qualifications (CQS);  
(iv)  Single Source Selection (SSS); and,  
(v)  Selection of Individual Consultants (SIC).  
19. 
Direct Contracting. Direct contracting might be used, if duly justified, for some 
expenses, which could include hiring venues for training, community based events such 
as awareness raising and sensitization activities, beneficiary exchange visits and visits to 
demonstration sites.  
20. 
Prior Review Thresholds. The following shall be subject to prior review: 
(i)  Award  of  any  contract  for  goods  and  equipment  to  cost  USD 50,000  or 
equivalent or more; 
(ii)  Award of any contract for works estimated to cost USD 100,000 or equivalent 
or more; 
(iii)  Award  to  a  firm  of  any  contract  for  consulting  services  estimated  to  cost 
USD 50,000 or equivalent or more; 
(iv)  Award  to  an  individual  of  any  contract  for  consulting  services  estimated  to 
cost USD 30,000 equivalent and more;  
(v)  All  contracts  awarded  through  direct  contracting  and/or  single  source 
selection; and 
(vi)  Award of and the first two contracts regardless of the contract amount. 
The  above  thresholds  may  be  modified  by  IFAD  unilaterally  or  upon  MIMAIP 
21. 
request  as  a  result  of  experience  in  the  field  during  the  course  of  PRODAPE 
implementation. 
22. 
All contracts will be listed in the Register of Contracts maintained by the procuring 
entity with the date of IFAD approval, irrespective of the contract having been approved 
by IFAD or not. As this report facilitates the review and approval of payment requests for 
contracts, it is to be updated and submitted to the IFAD Country Programme Manager on 
a  quarterly  basis.  It  would  also  be  necessary  that  the  PCU  at  IDEPA  prepare  annual 
statistics for all procurement transactions carried out under the project.  
23. 
Bidding Documents. All bidding documents for the procurement of goods, works 
and services will be prepared by IDEPA Procurement Officer as required. At the provincial 
5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
level,  procurement  assistants  under  the  overall  guidance  of  the  IDEPA  procurement 
officer. All procurement documents will be cleared by MIMAIP and IFAD before any action 
is  taken.  As  per  IFAD  Procurement  Handbook,  where  ICB  is  used,  the  World  Bank  ICB 
procedures, as set forth in their Procurement Guidelines, will apply. 
II.  PROCUREMENT PLAN 
A.  Procurement Plan. 
24. 
A  full  version  of  the  procurement  plan  covering  the  first  18  months  of 
operations  will  be  prepared  by  MIMAIP/IDEPA  before  project’s  effectiveness.  The 
procurement  plan  will  be  updated  at  least  semi-annually  in  agreement  with  IFAD  or  as 
required to reflect actual project implementation needs and progress. 
A.1.  Goods, Works and Non-consulting services 
Procurement methods  and prior  review thresholds.   Procurement decisions 
25. 
subject to Prior Review by IFAD are as follows: 
Procurement 
Method 
Method Threshold 
Prior Review Threshold 
1. 
ICB 
≥ $200 000 – goods 
≥ $1 000 000 – works 
2. 
3. 
4. 
NCB 
Shopping/RfQ 
Direct 
Contracting 
< $ 200 000 – goods 
< $ 1 000 000 – 
works 
< $ 10 000 – goods 
< $ 50 000 -  works 
Not applicable 
≥ $50 000 – goods 
≥ $100 000 – works 
and first two contracts regardless of the 
contract amount 
≥ $10 000 – goods 
≥ $50 000 – works 
and first two contracts regardless of the 
contract amount 
First two contracts regardless of the contract 
amount 
All 
26. 
Procurement items with methods and time schedule.  The following goods, 
works  and  non-consulting  services  will  be  procured  in  the  first  18  months  of  PRODAPE 
operations: 
Attached as a excel separate file 
A.2   Selection of Consultants 
6 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
27. 
Selection methods and prior review thresholds.  Selection decisions subject to Prior Review by IFAD are as follows: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Competitive Methods  (Firms)  
Single Source (Firms) 
Individual Consultant (IC) 
Single Source (IC) 
Selection Method 
Prior Review Threshold 
≥ $50,000 
All 
≥ $30,000 
All 
28. 
months of PRODAPE operations: 
Consultancy  assignments  with  selection  methods  and  time  schedule.    The  following consulting services  will be  procured in the first 18 
Attached as a separate Excel file 
1 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Mozambique 
Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
May 2019 
Table of Contents 
Introduction 
PART ONE: BRIEF PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
PART TWO: IMPLEMENTATION OF PRODAPE TECHNICAL COMPONENTS13 
PART THREE: IMPLEMENTATION OF PRODAPE TARGETING STRATEGY33 
42 
PART FOUR: PRODAPE SUPPORTIVE FUNCTIONS 
8 
9 
FLOW OF FUNDS 
THE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CYCLE 
Step 1: Budgeting and budget control 
Step 2: Committing funds 
Step 3: Treasury function including the accounting system 
Step 4: Withdrawal Applications 
Step 5: Financial reports and auditing 
GRANT COMPLETION AND CLOSURE 
Annex 1: Sample Annual Workplan and Budget Templates 
Annex 2: Sample Templates for Monthly Report for Management Use 
Table 2: Designated Account Reconciliation Form 
Table 3: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Table 4: Monthly DSA report 
52 
55 
55 
59 
59 
68 
70 
73 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
Annex 3: Sample Periodic Financial Progress Report 
90 
Table 2: Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component) 
91 
Table 6: STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES –  Error! Bookmark not defined. 
96 
WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT 
Annex 4: Fixed Asset Register 
Annex 5: Vehicle Log 
Annex 6: Vehicle History Record 
Annex 7: Sample Recovery Plan  
Annex 8: Procurement Manual 
Goods and Works and Non-consulting services 
Procurement methods and Prior review thresholds 
98 
99 
100 
101 
102 
111 
111 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
USD1.0 
= 
= 
Mozambique Metical (MZN) 
60.0 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram 
1 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
National Fisheries Administration 
National Roads Administration 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
National Investment Bank 
Aquaculture Research Centre in Chókwè 
Crowding In Fund 
District Steering Committees for Food and Nutrition Security 
Provincial Steering Committees for Food and Nutrition Security 
Single Treasury Accounts 
Department for Studies, Planning and Infrastructure 
Provincial Directorates of Sea, Inland Waters and Fisheries 
Daily Subsistence Allowance 
Electricity of Mozambique 
Fisheries School 
ADNAP 
ANE 
AWPB  
BNI 
CEPAQ 
CIF 
CODSAN 
COPSAN 
CUT 
DEPI 
DPMAIP 
DSA 
EDM 
EP 
e-SISTAFE  State Financial Management Information System 
ESAN II 
FAO 
FFP 
GALS   
GIS 
GoM 
HH 
HIV/AIDS  Human Immunodeficiency Virus / Acquired Immunodeficiency 
National Strategy for Food Security and Nutrition Policy 
Food and Agriculture Organisation  
Fund for the Promotion of Fisheries 
Gender Action Learning System 
Geographic Information System 
Government of Mozambique 
Household 
Syndrome 
International Competitive Bidding 
National Institute for the Development of Fisheries and Aquaculture 
The General Inspection of Finance 
Institute for Fisheries Research 
National Meteorological Institute 
National Institute for Disaster Management 
National Institute of Fish Inspection 
National Institute for Normalization and Standards 
International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
Knowledge Management 
Line of Credit 
Lead Programme Agent 
Letter to Recipient 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security 
Ministry of Economy and Finance 
Ministry of Sea, Inland Waters and Fisheries 
ICB 
IDEPA  
IGF 
IIP 
INAM  
INGC   
INIP 
INNOQ 
INTOSAI 
IPSAS  
KM 
LoC 
LPA 
LTR 
M&E   
MASA  
MEF 
MIMAIP 
MIREME  Ministry of Mineral Resources and Energy 
MISAU 
MITADER  Ministry for Land, Environment and Rural Development 
MOPH  
Ministry of Housing and Public Works 
Ministry of Health 
MoF 
MoU 
NCB 
NPSC   
NSB 
PADA 
PARMDC  Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Malnutrition in 
Ministry of Finance 
Memorandum of Understanding 
National Competitive Bidding 
National Project Steering Committee 
Mozambique´s National Standards Body 
Aquaculture Development Action Plan 
PCRs   
PCU 
PEFA   
PPD 
PTC 
REFP   
RfQ 
SBCC   
SDAE   
SETSAN 
SISTAFE 
SUN 
UFSA   
USD 
WATTS 
WHH   
WFP 
Mozambique  
Community Level Savings and Credit Groups 
Project Coordination Unit 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Public Procurement Decree 
Permanent Tender Committee 
Rural Enterprise Finance Project 
Request for Quotations 
Social Behaviour Change Communication 
District Services for Economic Activities 
Technical Secretariat for Food Security and Nutrition 
State Financial Management System 
Scaling Up Nutrition 
Public Procurement Authority 
United States Dollar 
IFAD’s Withdrawal Application Tracking System 
Woman Headed Household 
World Food Programme 
Map of the Project Area 
●  Introduction 
to 
The  Small-scale  Aquaculture  Development  Project  (PRODAPE)  aims 
1. 
contribute to poverty reduction and enhancement of food security and nutrition among 
rural households in the project area. 
The project will do so by addressing supply and demands constraints encountered 
2. 
in  Mozambique´s  young  aquaculture  value  chain.  Given  IFAD´s  mandate  of 
contributing  to  poverty  alleviation,  the  project  will  strive  to  enable  small-scale 
producers to increase the production, productivity and profitability of their aquaculture 
production  activities  from  subsistence  level  to  small-scale  commercially  viable 
enterprises.    To  reach  this,  PRODAPE  design  has  integrated  a  number  of  strategies, 
which  align  with  key  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  and  sector  plans,  strategies 
and  policies,  including:    the  concept  of  centralities  for  focused  aquaculture  related 
investments  and  associated  activities,  the  establishment  of  aquaparks  (locations  in 
which aggregated production units, required inputs and markets are located in proximity 
and linked).   Also,  the  project  integrates  a robust  social  inclusion approach to  ensure 
that community level beneficiaries targeted are not only those easiest to reach.  
The  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  sets  forth  the  guidelines  and 
3. 
procedures  to  guide  project  operations.    The  PIM  complements  PRODAPE´s  Project 
Design  Document  (PDR),  or  other 
the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), such as the Procurement and 
Disbursement  Guidelines,  and  implementation  instructions  as  contained  in  the  IFAD 
letter to the Borrower/Recipient.  Because of its purpose, the PIM should be adapted to 
changes in circumstances over the course of PRODAPE implementation. 
implementation  guidelines 
issued  by 
The  primary  target  audience  of  this  PIM  is  PRODAPE´s  Project  Coordination 
4. 
Unit (PCU) core team members and other long and short-term technical specialists to be 
financed by PRODAPE, who will be placed within the Ministry of Sea, Inland Waters 
and  Fisheries  (MIMAIP).      The  document  will  also  be  instrumental  for  the  National 
Project  Steering  Committee  (NPSC)  to  understand  the  implementation  logic  and 
mechanisms put in place for project implementation. 
Users of this manual should refer to and use the following documents/guidelines 
at 
listed 
5. 
(the 
http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm): 
documents 
available 
generic 
below 
IFAD 
are 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
The PRODAPE Financing Agreement 
IFAD Disbursement Handbook 
Letter to the Borrower/ Recipient 
IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits 
Guidelines  for  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  and  Progress 
Reporting (IFAD) 
GoM Finance and Audit Act and the related Treasury Instructions; and 
PRODAPE Project Design Report and corresponding appendices 
The  PIM  is  divided  into  four  sections.  Part  One  provides  a  brief  description  of 
6. 
the  project.  Part  Two  describes  the  implementation  of  PRODAPE  technical 
components.  Part  Three  provides  step-by-step  guidance  on  the  implementation  of 
PRODAPE´s  targeting  strategy.  Part  Four  describes  how  supportive  functions  to  the 
project will function.  
a.  PART ONE: BRIEF PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Project  Rationale.  A  number  of  bottlenecks  were  identified  during  the  design 
7. 
mission  in  the  aquaculture  value  chain.  PRODAPE  design  has  benefitted  from  the 
lessons  and  experiences  of  PROPESCA  and  PROAQUA  and  aquaculture  projects  in 
other countries. The proposed design of PRODAPE aims to address these challenges to 
enable  the  engagement  of  commercial  and  smallholder  producers,  entrepreneurs  and 
businesses  to  prove  that  aquaculture  can  be  viable  and  sustainable.      The  project  will 
stimulate production, the development of aquaculture as a business and the development 
of the aquaculture policy framework.  
Inclusive  poverty  reduction,  the  promotion  of  food  and  nutrition  security, 
8. 
transformative gender equality and women and youth´s empowerment interventions and 
building resilience towards climate change among smallholders are common threads in 
the  GoM´s  policy  framework,  IFAD´s  corporate  mainstreaming  priorities  towards 
inclusive  and  sustainable  development  and  have  been  duly  integrated  in  PRODAPE 
design.      
Approach.  The  project  will  provide  technical  assistance  and  specific  support 
9. 
packages to  beneficiaries  of different  socio-economic groups to  engage in aquaculture 
production activities, consisting of:  (i) facilitating access  to  one earthen  pond or cage; 
(ii)  feed  and  seed  for  one  entire  production  cycle;  (iii)  technical  mentoring;  and  (iv) 
facilitating  access  to  markets.    It  will  also  provide  support  to  input  producers.    Core 
aquaculture interventions will be complemented by: (i) financial inclusion services; (ii) 
participatory processes to empower beneficiaries throughout  the project  cycle;  (iii) the 
establishment  of  water  resource  management  structures  and  systems  governing 
aquaculture  pond  and  cage  transfer  conditions  and  ownership  /  use  rights  and 
obligations; (iv)  interventions  to  address  common  social  risks  faced  by  small-scale 
producers; and (v) the integration of an effective community grievance mechanism. 
10.  Partnership  with  the  Rural  Enterprise  Finance  Project  (REFP).  To  address 
financial inclusion gaps faced in the aquaculture value chain, the PRODAPE will work 
together  with  the  Rural  Enterprise  Finance  Project  (REFP).    The  range  of  financial 
services  to  be  offered  by  REFP  to  PRODAPE  have  been  integrated  in  PRODAPE´s 
Component 2.   
11.  Private  sector  players  have  been  contemplated  in  PRODAPE  design  and 
integrated  in  the  “rural  entrepreneurs”  group  of  beneficiaries  along  with  smallholders 
that  wish  to  engage  in  activities  along  the  aquaculture  value  chain  beyond  fish 
production.  All  private  sector  players  benefiting  from  PRODAPE  support  will  be 
subject to stringent due diligence prior to final approval (as part of components 1 and 2). 
Finally,  the  project  will  also  remain  open  to  the  possibility  of  employing  financing 
mechanisms  beyond  those  offered  by  REFP,  under  models  such  as  those  used  by  the 
International Finance Corporation (yet to be determined). 
Project  Goal.  The  Project  Goal  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and 
12. 
enhancement of food security and nutrition among rural households in the project area.  
Project  Development  Objective.  The  specific  Project  Development  Objective 
13. 
(PDO)  is  to  increase  production,  consumption,  sales  and  income  levels  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The PDO will be achieved through two interlinked investment components and a 
14. 
third  component  of  project  management,  institutional  and  policy  development.    A 
Component  0  has  been  integrated  in  PRODAPE  design  as  a  response  to  the  proved 
vulnerability of the country to climatic hazards.  The component does not include any 
budgetary allocations at design. 
Component  0:  Disaster  risk  reduction  and  response.    The  component  will 
15. 
aim to reduce project and beneficiary vulnerability to climatic hazards.  The Component 
recognises that different PRODAPE target areas are – as is much of the country – to the 
advent  of cyclones, floods and droughts.   Also,  temperatures are expected to  continue 
rising.    The  component  constitutes  a  programmatic  window  for  the  integration  of 
preventive  and  response  measures,  yet  to  be  defined  and  corresponding  allocation  of 
additional dedicated funding.  
Component 1: Development of small-scale aquaculture production capacity.  
16. 
Aims to sustainably increase small-scale aquaculture production and productivity using 
climate  smart  technologies,  best  practices  and  environmentally  sustainable  forms  of 
production. Particular attention will be given to water needs and quality, as well as to 
the suitability of different agro-ecological zones for different aquaculture technologies. 
The component is served by four sub-components: 
Subcomponent 1.1: Develop fish seed production capacity. Aims to upgrade and 
17. 
establish hatcheries by targeting medium-level private enterprises.  
Subcomponent 1.2: Develop fish feed production capacity. Addresses the need to 
18. 
develop fish feed production capacity at all levels for different clients. It will encourage 
the  development  of  industrial  fish  feed  production  lines,  support  the  development  of 
"cottage"  industries,  as  needed  and  on-farm  feed  formulation,  based  on  demand  from 
smallholders.  
Sub-component  1.3:  Develop  smallholder  aquaculture  production  capacity. 
19. 
Aims  to  improve  smallholder  production  and  productivity  using  climate  smart 
aquaculture technologies and practices: earthen ponds, ponds integrated with livestock 
and crops, and cage culture in large inland water bodies. Small-scale producers will be 
organized  in  clusters  or  integrated  in  aquaparks.  Comprehensive  support  will  be 
provided to smallholder beneficiaries meeting pre-established criteria in line with their 
needs.   
Sub-component 1.4: Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social risks. Aims 
20. 
to  enhance  nutrition  through  consumption  of  fish  and  fish-based  products  to  improve 
and diversify the HH diet. The sub-component also addresses pressing social risks such 
as  lack  of  adequate  planning  and  use  of  resources  at  HH  level,  gender  inequality  and 
HIV and AIDS.  
Component 2: Development of aquaculture as a business. Aims to nurture the 
21. 
entrepreneurial  capacity  of  farmers  and  promote  a  conducive  environment  for  the 
development  of  aquaculture  as  a  business.  The  component  is  served  by  four  sub-
components:  
Sub-component 2.1: Support to development of aquaparks: Aims to support the 
22. 
Government's  new  aquaculture  development  strategy  focused  on  consolidation  and 
centrality  of  production  through  sustainable  and  business  oriented  small  and  medium 
scale  aquaparks.  The  project  will  support  preparation  of  feasibility  studies,  business 
plans and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for aquaparks; and the 
development  of  key  infrastructure  e.g.  "last  mile"  feeder  roads,  small  water  canals, 
electricity supply (off-grid or connection to the main grid, whichever is cost-effective) 
and cold chain facilities. 
Sub-component 2.2:  Develop  market  linkages and business  partnerships.  Aims 
23. 
to  develop  market  linkages  for  improved  handling,  collection,  marketing  and 
distribution of cultured fish and associated products (spinoffs of some interventions are 
expected  to  benefit  retailers  of  non-cultured  fish).  A  second  focus  is  the  creation  of  a 
conducive  environment  for  aquaculture  business  to  thrive,  by  linking  smallholders 
organized  in  clusters  or  engaged  in  aquaparks  in  business  partnerships  with  private 
entrepreneurs.  The  sub-component  will  facilitate  the  development  of  frameworks  for 
the  establishment  of  business  partnerships  between 
effective  partnerships  and 
smallholders and private entrepreneurs to improve smallholder access to inputs, markets 
and other services.  
Sub-component  2.3:  Develop  financial  services.  Aims  to  facilitate  access  to 
24. 
financial services in unserved target communities and to players across all levels of the 
aquaculture  value  chain,  through  the  Rural  Enterprise  Finance  Project  (REFP).  This 
includes  promotion  of  PCRs  to  raise  smallholder  capacity  to  invest  in  aquaculture,  a 
Crowding  in  Fund  (CiF)  with  co-participation  from  beneficiaries,  a  Line  of  Credit 
(LoC) and also produce, fund and deliver differentiated business development packages 
to PRODAPE beneficiaries across the value chain.  
Sub-component  2.4:  Support  to  youth  aquapreneurship.  The  sub-component 
25. 
enhances opportunities for youth through investments in business-oriented activities that 
match the interests, energy and skills of young people in, or linked to, the aquaculture 
value chain.  It  will support vocational  training of  youth,  preparation of business plans 
and linking them with the REFP for tailored financing.   
Component  3:  Project  management,  institutional  and  policy  development. 
26. 
Aims  to  establish  appropriate  arrangements  and  support  mechanisms  for  PRODAPE 
management,  support  sector  institutions  in  the  assumption  of  their  mandates,  together 
with the development of sector policies and associated regulatory framework, to create 
the  foundations  for  the  aquaculture  value  chain  in  Mozambique.    The  component  is 
served by three sub-components:  
Sub-component 3.1: Project management. Aims to establish appropriate project 
27. 
management  structures,  systems  and  procedures  for  the  effective  development  of  the 
aquaculture value chain in line with project targets. 
Sub-component  3.2:  Institutional  capacity  building.  Aims  to  strengthen  the 
28. 
institutional  and  technical  capacity  of  sector  institutions  (the  National  Institute  for  the 
Development  of  Fisheries  and  Aquaculture  (IDEPA),  and  others)  as  well  as  staff 
involved in planning, implementation and monitoring of small-scale aquaculture in the 
assumption of their roles, including issues related to adequate environmental & climate 
adaptation  and  mitigation  practices,  biosafety  and  biosecurity. Linkages  will  be 
established  with  the  Brazilian  Aquaculture  Parks  system  to  learn  from  their  long 
experience  with  establishment  and  management  of  environmentally  sustainable 
aquaculture parks. 
Sub-component  3.3:  Policy  development.  Aims  to  strengthen  the  policy  and 
29. 
regulatory  framework  for  the  aquaculture  sector,  including  aspects  related  to 
environmental  and  social  safeguards.    Specific  activities  include  the  production  and 
adoption  of  operating  guidelines  for  pond  and  cage  culture  as  well  as  PPPs  and  the 
establishment  of  an  appropriate  aquaculture  data  system  and  management,  among 
others.   
Project  Area  /  Geographic  Targeting.    The  project  area  is  defined  by  the 
30. 
project´s geographic targeting strategy.  The project will be implemented in 23 districts 
of the country, as follows: 
Niassa Province: Lago, Lichinga and Mecanhelas Districts. 
Cabo Delgado Province: Metuge, Mueda and Balama Districts. 
Nampula Province: Mossuril, Ribáue and Larde Districts. 
Zambézia Province: Milange, Nicoadala and Mocubela Districts. 
Tete Province: Cahora Bassa, Magoé and Marávia Districts. 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
●  Manica Province: Sussundenga, Vanduzi, Gondola and Mossurize Districts. 
● 
Sofala Province: Beira, Dondo, Gorongosa and Buzi Districts 
31.  The  project  will  adopt  a  progressive  implementation  approach,  whereby 
operations  will  start  in  key  locations  established  by  sector  authorities  (in  bold  above) 
chosen as strategic to enhance the aquaculture value chain performance. Interventions in 
all of the seven districts except Beira will aim to strengthen all value chain levels, while 
in  principle,  the  focus  in  Beira  will  be  placed  on  stimulating  fish  feed  production. 
Expansion to other target districts will only occur if and when the value chain is fully 
operational in these districts and will be determined by demand.   
It is possible that targeting locations and interventions undergo modifications once 
32. 
the full impacts of cyclones Idai and Kenneth in the central and northern regions of the 
country on the aquaculture value chain are known.  
33.  Activities  will  be  implemented  only  in  locations  with  the  right  conditions  for 
aquaculture of each target district.  Lessons will inform demand driven expansion. The 
implementation of activities at community level will also follow a progressive approach 
through the incremental reach of beneficiaries in communities targeted.  The first round 
of  support  in  each  target  community  will  include  financial  inclusion  activities  and 
engagement of easier to reach beneficiaries.   
34.  Target  Groups.  The  project  aims  to  reach  88,900  people  within  communities, 
along  the  aquaculture  value  chain  and  in  relevant  sector  institutions.  PRODAPE  was 
designed under an inclusive targeting approach.   Specific measures were  integrated to 
ensure that poor and vulnerable groups, such as HHs severely affected by HIV and the 
disabled  can  access  project  opportunities.  At  community  level,  beneficiaries  will 
participate  in  project  activities  based  on  self-selection  within  project-supported  areas, 
based on pre-established eligibility criteria.   
target  groups 
35.  Project 
include  smallholder  aquaculture  farmers  and  rural 
entrepreneurs – including private sector businesses; a special window will be offered to 
youth  entrepreneurs  based  on  best  practices  with  a  Sustain  Your  Own  Business 
coaching model used by the International Labour Organization (ILO).  The project will 
also  target  extensionists  and  young  graduates.  Finally,  project  interventions  will  also 
reach broader community members in target communities. Targeting quotas have been 
established to ensure that women are granted the opportunity to participate.  
Social  and  Environmental  Impacts.    The  PRODAPE  is  expected  to  provoke 
36. 
manageable and/or reversible social and environmental impacts.  As such, the project is 
classified  as  Category  “B”  both  by  the  GoM  and  IFAD´s  Social,  Environmental  and 
Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). Activities will be limited to freshwater and 
will exclude operations on sensitive ecosystem areas (i.e. special reserves, conservation 
areas,  wetlands,  reserves  and/or  their  buffer  zones).    An  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, which sets out relevant criteria to 
be  used  during  implementation.  The  Project  will  also  ensure  the  timely  elaboration  of 
site-specific  Environmental  Impact  Assessments  (EIAs)  thus  adopting  a  precautionary 
approach  for  activities  requiring  attention  (i.e.  cage  culture).    In  addition,  adequate 
resources will be available to: i) develop / strengthen national regulations and guidelines 
to reduce potential negative impacts of aquaculture activity (particularly cage culture); 
ii)  elaborate  site  specific  studies  required  to  comply  with  national  environmental 
regulation  and  IFAD’s  SECAP;  and  iii)  monitor the  implementation  of  the  latter.  The 
SECAP  review  note  integrated  in  this  Project  design  identifies  several  potential  risks 
and proposes corresponding mitigation measures. 
Organizational Framework.  PRODAPE will be integrated into MIMAIP with 
37. 
a  dedicated    Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU).  The  Ministry´s  Provincial  Directorates 
(DPMAIPs)  will  coordinate,  implement  and  monitor  PRODAPE  activities  in  close 
collaboration  with  the  district  services  for  the  promotion  of  economic  activities 
(SDAEs) and relevant service providers.  
Financial Management. Financial management arrangements will, to the extent 
38. 
feasible,  be  mainstreamed  within  GoM  systems  providing  adequate  controls  and 
ensuring  proper  management  of  funds.  The  PRODAPE  will  capitalize  on  significant 
progress made in recent years in the development and rollout of sub-systems within the 
integrated State Financial Management Information System (e-SISTAFE).  
Procurement.  Robust procurement systems and procedures will be put in place 
39. 
and  used  at  all  times  during  project  implementation.    Public,  open  and  competitive 
procurement processes will be used, as relevant, to warrant transparency and safeguard 
project resources.  
Project  Financing.    PRODAPE  will  be  financed  by:  an  IFAD  loan  on  highly 
40. 
concessionary  terms  (USD 8.6 million,  17.5%  of  total  project  costs),  an  IFAD  grant 
(USD 34.4  million,  70.2%  of  total  project  costs)  under  the  2018-2021  PBAS  cycle, 
Government  of  Mozambique  (USD 3.1 million,  6.4%  of  total  project  costs),  and  the 
project beneficiaries (USD 2.9 million).  Additional resources will be made available by 
the  REFP  for  the  promotion  of  financial  inclusion.  Possibilities  for  co-financing  by 
other  development  partners  are  being  explored  so  as  to  have  greater  outreach  and 
impacts. 
b.  PART TWO: IMPLEMENTATION OF PRODAPE TECHNICAL 
COMPONENTS 
This  section  of  the  PRODAPE  PIM  provides  basic  information  to  guide 
41. 
implementation  of  project  components  and  sub-components.    The  structure  of  the 
project follows four components, namely, a Component 0 which leaves a window open 
to address issues related to the climatic vulnerability faced by Mozambique, in support 
of  project  aims  to  develop  a  robust  aquaculture  value  chain.    The  component  has  not 
been designed.  This section of the PIM will focus on the two technical components of 
the  PROJECT  and  a  third  component  dedicated  to  PRODAPE  management,  and 
institutional and policy development. 
Implementation and coordination of all project activities will be underpinned by 
42. 
the establishment of a robust management structure (Project Coordination Unit, PCU), 
PRODAPE  provision  of  financial,  material  and  training  support  to  sector  and  other 
relevant  staff,  integrating  senior  specialists  into  relevant  sector  departments  and  the 
provision of implementation support in areas required, among others.  The project will 
also be overseen by IFAD, the MIMAIP and Steering Committees at different levels. 
Component 1: Development of small-scale aquaculture production capacity. 
Objectives.    The  objective  of  Component  1  is  to:  a)  develop  the  capacity  of 
43. 
private  sector  to  produce  high  quality  fish  seeds  in  enough  quantities  to  meet  the 
demand of small, medium and large scale fish production; b) develop fish feed capacity 
among large scale and cottage industries; and c) develop the capacities of small holder 
aquaculture producers.  
The  implementation  of  Component  1  will  entail  building  the  capacity  of 
44. 
MIMAIP /  IDEPA and  relevant  partners on project  management, development  quality 
standards,  standard  operating  procedures,  policy  formulation  and  strengthening  the 
sector´s regulatory framework. 
Organization  and  Coordination  for  Implementation.  The  PRODAPE  PCU 
45. 
will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  organization  and  coordination  of  component  1  at 
national  level.    Respective  provincial  directorates  (DPMAIPs)  will  operationalize  and 
coordinate  interventions  in  the  respective  target  provinces.  This  will  include  the 
identification  and  selection  of  service  providers,  training  of  all  relevant  implementing 
agencies, supportive supervision and oversight.  
Table 1: Matrix of key players involved in the implementation of PRODAPE Component 1. 
Area of Intervention  
Production of fish seed 
Implementing 
Leader 
IDEPA 
Production of fish feed 
IDEPA 
Facilitation of PPPs (likely for 
feed production) 
Smallholder fish production 
through aquaparks / clusters 
IDEPA   
SDAEs 
Nutrition and social risks 
IDEPA 
Implementing partners 
●  CEPAQ 
●  DPMAIP 
●  SDAEs 
●  MFIs / FFP 
●  IDEPA 
●  INNOQ 
●  DPMAIPs 
●  SDAEs 
●  NSB 
●  MFIs / FFP 
●  DPMAIPs 
●  DPAMAIPs 
●  MFIs  
●  Local district administrations 
●  DNGRH / ARAs 
●  Cadastre representations at 
sub-national level  
●  Private sector operators present 
in the aquaparks / aquaparks 
near clusters 
●  Other private sector operators 
supporting input provision, 
technical assistance or access 
to markets 
●  INAM 
●  INGC 
●  Service Providers 
implementing Social 
Mentoring intervention 
●  DPMAIPs 
●  SDAEs 
●  CODSANs and COPSANs 
Subcomponent  1.1:  Develop  fish  seed  production  capacity.  Fish  seed 
46. 
production  capacity  will  be  enhanced  by  the  project  by  encouraging  private  sector 
investment with matching project financial and technical support.  The aim would be to 
strengthen  fish  seed  production  capacity  in  all  project  target  provinces,  as  required, 
aiming for one player per target province. In line with sector vision, fish seed will strive 
to follow quality standards for certification. 
It  will  be  important  that  the  Project  establishes  the  degree  to  which  the 
47. 
Aquaculture Research Centre in Chókwè would be able to assume the role of primary 
research and broodstock producer to feed the growing aquaculture value chain.   
Activities and associated expenditures under this sub-component could include: 
48. 
a)  pre-selection  by  PRODAPE  and  micro-finance  institution,  and  screening  of  private 
sector  players;  b)  due  diligence  of  pre-selected  candidate;  c)  production  of  strong  but 
realistic  business  plans  and  layout  specifications;  d)  design,  tendering  and  award  of 
contracts for construction new / rehabilitation of existing hatcheries and civil works; e) 
acquisition  of  equipment  for  constructed  /  rehabilitated  hatcheries;  f)  technical 
assistance  to  train  hatchery  owners  /  staff;  g)  certification  costs;  and  h)  the 
establishment of linkages between fish seed producers existing / emerging clients; and i) 
establishment of simple and viable logistical distribution systems. 
49.  Criteria  for  the  selection  of  private  sector  players  will  be  based  on  existing 
operations  for  fish  seed  production,  the  selection  of  suitable  species  and  the  use  of 
production  processes  that  ensure  safety,  environmental  safeguards  and  capacity  to 
provide  matching  grants.  Existing  microfinance 
institutions  will  be  used  for 
administering suitable credit and grants products to private hatchery operators. Some of 
the existing Microfinance Institutions to engage will include the Fisheries Development 
Fund (Fundo de Fomento Pesqueiro) (FFP), Small Industry Development Fund (Fundo 
de  Fomento  de  Pequena  Industria)  (FFPI)  and  Sociedade  de  Gestão  e  Financiamento 
para  a  Promoção  de  Pequenos  Projectos  de  Investimento  Sarl  (GAPI).  There  are  a 
number  of  other  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (MFIs)  with  potential  to  provide  financial 
services to aquaculture value chain actors, some of which will be engaged by BNI under 
the REFP to serve PRODAPE clients.  
Financial products will be developed especially for the aquaculture value chain 
50. 
in  close  coordination  between  REFP/BNI/MFIs  and  PRODAPE.    Support  to  private 
hatchery operators will involve: a) provision of matching grants for machinery; and b) 
operational costs. Private sector operators qualifying for this support would be expected 
to  provide  at  least  20%  of  the  costs  of  establishing  the  hatcheries  as  cost  share  or 
matching grants.  
In  all  cases,  PROPADE  will  provide  technical  assistance  for  private  hatchery 
51. 
operators to assist to strengthen the operational capacity and quality of hatcheries where 
they  exist  and  to  establish  new  ones  where  they  do  not  exist.  Support  to  expansion, 
operations  and  improvement  of  exiting  private  hatcheries  will  be  based  on  a  sound 
business  plan  while  new  installations  will  be  based  on  adequate  proof  of  matching 
financial resources to access matching grants.  Private sector hatchery operators will be 
expected  to  provide  evidence  of  land  ownership  or  lease  in  order  to  qualify  for 
assistance.  IDEPA  will  oversee  the  activities  of  the  private  hatchery  operators  and 
provide both regulatory services and quality control of the fingerling produced.  
PRODAPE  /  IDEPA  will  develop  both  guidelines  and  standard  operating 
52. 
procedures for all private hatcheries. 
The project will use criteria for identification of new suitable hatchery sites the 
53. 
availability  of  water  in  enough  quality  and  quantity  to  serve  the  facility,  access  to 
infrastructure such as electricity, road network and other services.  
Subcomponent 1.2: Develop fish feed production capacity. The development of 
54. 
fish feeds will be based on both Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) and on private sector 
driven initiatives. The project will meet the costs of the design and construction of feed 
mills in strategically located areas. 
The private sector operators who wish to engage in fish feed production will be 
55. 
required to have existing animal feed production business and install additional lines of 
production  for  fish  feeds  or  to  be  located  in  aquaparks.  In  the  first  case,  they  will  be 
supported  by  matching  grants  and  credit  lines  based  on  their  existing  capacity,  sound 
business plans and their ability to supply a given number of farmers in specified areas.  
For  feed  producers  wishing  to  establish  themselves  in  aquaparks,  the  running  of  such 
facilities will be leased to private sector operators in order to guarantee mutual benefits 
to local producers. The centrality and concentration of aquapark-based feed mills could 
also  service  small-scale  producer  clusters  within  their  catchment  areas.  As  a 
complement  to  seed  production  facilities,  the  initial  construction  of  feed  mills  will  be 
located  at  the  sites  already  earmarked  for  aquapark  development.  In  both  cases, 
matching grants will be offered through the partnership between PRODEPA and REFP.   
56.  When  necessary,  IDEPA  will  lease  facilities  through  competitive  bidding 
processes but provide both regulatory and quality assurance services either individually 
or  in  association  with  competent  authorities  for  quality  control  in  Mozambique´s 
National  Standards  Body  (NSB),  and  the  National  Institute  for  Normalization  and 
Standards (INNOQ). 
Cottage  industry  feed  producers  will  be  supported  by  the  project  in  areas  not 
57. 
reached by the private sector with the use of simple technologies.  These producers will 
be  provided  with  technical  support  to  meet  target  production  volumes  and  established 
quality standards.  It is recognised that the feed produced by these local players is likely 
to  be  inferior  to  the  one  produced  by  medium  /  industrial  ones.    However,  both  are 
expected  to  feed  the  local  market  and  its  diverse  clientele  with  different  economic 
capacity. 
PRODAPE  will  meet  the  costs  of  developing  National  Fish  Feed  Quality 
58. 
Standards (NFFQS)  and  publication of such standards for public use. The project  will 
further  enhance  the  capacity  of  INNOQ  to  conduct  fish  feed  proximate  analysis  and 
nutrient profiles to support extension and also for regulatory purposes. 
Subcomponent  1.3:  Develop  smallholder  aquaculture  production  capacity.  
59. 
PRODAPE  will  meet  the  cost  of  construction  of  fish  earthen  ponds  and  fish  farming 
cages among smallholders.  The establishment of small-scale aquaculture production in 
earthen ponds will be supported by PRODAPE through the construction of one 500m3 
earthen  pond  per  beneficiary  with  different  levels  of  co-participation  of  project 
beneficiaries in pre-determined locations suitable for farmer clustering or in the context 
of  aquaparks,  as  outlined  in  part  three  of  this  document  (operationalization  of  the 
targeting  strategy).    In  the  case  of  aquaculture  farmers  supported  to  establish  earthen 
ponds  technical  support  will  be  provided  both  to  integrated  smallholder  and  non-
integrated smallholder ponds.   
Small-scale cage farming will be supported by the project by providing the funds 
60. 
to  construct  a  standard  cage  of  125m3  for  organized  members  of  groups  who  can 
provide  labour,  security  and  management  of  the  cages.  Suitable  water  bodies  to  be 
considered  will  include  Cahora  Bassa,  Niassa  Lake  and  other  smaller  water  bodies 
meeting pre-defined technical criteria and any additional requirement established by the 
national  legislative  framework.  This  will  include  the  elaboration  of  carrying  capacity 
studies  and  site-specific  guidelines  for  cage-culture  to  be  elaborated  prior  to  the 
activities to commence.  
Both  cage  and  pond  construction  and  siting  should  be  guided  by  the  criteria 
61. 
specified  within  the  ESMF  as  well  as  by  the  adaptation  practices  and  solutions 
identified  within  the  Climate  Risk  Analysis  (CRA)  study  undertaken  during  design 
phase. Adequate adaptation solutions will be established and construction methods will 
be  adopted  according  to  site-specific  climate  challenges.  To  further  improve  the 
resilience  of  PRODAPE  beneficiaries,  the  PCU  will  liaise  with  both  the  National 
Meteorological  Institute  (INAM)  and  the  National  Institute  for  Disaster  Management 
(INGC) to guarantee the effective delivery of climate and weather information and early 
warning  systems  through  the  existing  channels,  thus  strengthening  and  improving  the 
climate  and  weather  information  packaging  and  delivery  as  required  by  the  project’s 
interventions  and  needs.  Climate  and  weather  services  are  intended  to  support  the 
decision-making  process  by  providing  farmers  with  information  on  the  upcoming 
season accompanied by advisories for their livelihood decision-making.  
The provision of weather/ climate services to inform livelihood decision-making 
62. 
among  smallholder  fish-farmers  is  intended  to:    (i)  support  the  development  of 
advisories  to  accompany  the  dissemination  of  the  seasonal  forecasts;  (ii)  support 
extension  officers  to  access,  interpret,  and  disseminate  the  climate  services;  and  (iii) 
disseminate  climate  services  through  telephone  SMS  and  radio  platforms.  Besides 
working  on  the  basis  of  a  seasonal  forecast,  in-season  updates  will  be  provided  to 
further  inform  the  fish-farmers.  To  optimize  the  use  of  the  climate  information  in 
decision-making, the provision of climate services will be integrated into the extension 
support  offered  at  the  district  level.  In  this  context,  the  training  manual  for  extension 
officers will be integrated with a module on collection, interpretation, and dissemination 
of  climate  services.  The  use  of  SMS  and  radio  platforms  used  to  disseminate  market 
information  will  be  instrumental  to  also  broadcast  updated  weather  information  and 
allow to reach farmers beyond the extension services. 
In  all  cases,  producers  will  receive  project  support  through  the  supply  of  fish 
63. 
seeds and feed to support one production cycle. Integrated smallholder farmers will be 
expected to meet the costs of other inputs in the farm beyond fish farming. 
The project will provide extension services and necessary training to effectively 
64. 
carry out fish farming activities in integrated systems. In such cases, extension staff will 
work closely with both livestock and agriculture extension service providers to  ensure 
that  the  systems  complement  each  other  and  become  more  efficient.    Integrated 
smallholder beneficiaries will be selected on the basis of possessing at least 20-30 local 
poultry (birds), sheep, cows, goats or pigs to provide manure to fertilize the ponds (to be 
confirmed in each target district). Integrated small-holder farmers must also be growing 
one of the high value and nutritious horticultural crops such as tomatoes, kales, spinach, 
onions, cabbage, carrots so as to benefit from nutrient rich effluent waters from the fish 
ponds. 
It  is  expected  that  approximately  40%  of  already  existing  or  new  small-scale 
65. 
aquaculture farmers will expand their production capacity to 2-3 ponds at their own cost 
or  by  accessing  financial  services  over  the  life  of  the  project.    In  those  cases  and 
beyond, beneficiaries will be assisted by PRODAPE to expand their production capacity 
by providing technical support.  
PRODAPE will meet the costs of water reticulation in designated aquapark sites. 
66. 
With  adequate  water  reticulation,  the  aquapark  model  will  be  used  to  extend  the 
production  to  small-scale  agricultural  and  aquaculture  farmers  in  the  surrounding 
vicinity  so  as  to  benefit  from  the  common  public  services  such  as  water,  electricity, 
roads network, marketing infrastructure and extension services. 
The PRODAPE will procure motorcycles for extension staff, provide equipment 
67. 
for  water  quality  assessment  and  facilitate  accurate  collection  of  data  on  inputs, 
smallholder  management  and  production  levels  in  order  to  determine  the  economic 
returns from fish farming at individual, local, regional and national levels. The project 
will  provide  the  necessary  technical  assistance  to  assist  in  capacity  building  for 
production.    Specifically  ensuring  the  aquaculture  extension  workers  are  adequately 
trained  on  both  climate  smart  aquaculture  technologies  and  good  environmental 
practices  for  aquaculture  production.  Also,  the  PCU  in  coordination  with  INAM  and 
INGC will address extension service training needs on climate and weather information 
packaging and dissemination for PRODAPE’s beneficiaries needs. 
The  choice  of  location  for  the  establishment  of  both  ponds  and  cages  will 
68. 
determined by compliance with criteria already established in the PDR and the ESMF. 
69. 
Subcomponent 1.4: Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social risks 
70.  Mainstreaming nutrition.   The PRODAPE will improve nutrition  outcomes by 
using nutrition-sensitive impact pathways and nutrition-sensitive strategies that increase 
supply,  add  nutritional  value  and  increase  demand  of  aquaculture  fish  and  associated 
products.  Social  behaviour  change  communication  (SBCC)  and  consumer  awareness 
activities  will  be  designed  in  coordination  with  national  level  players  working  on 
nutrition  and implemented at  different  levels.    Institutional  capacity building activities 
on  nutrition  mainstreaming  approaches  will  also  be  implemented  in  the  context  of 
PRODAPE,  as  well  as  activities  to  support  to  food  and  nutrition  security  policy,  as 
relevant.  
71.  The project will also use the nutrition governance structures in place to engage in 
sector coordination and collaboration with the health, education, agriculture sectors and 
relevant  programmes 
(NPF) 
implementing agencies.  The PRODAPE will provide 2,000 women,  youth and men at 
community level with targeted support to improve their nutrition.  Overall however, it is 
expected  that  13,000  beneficiaries  from  the  23  target  districts  benefit  from  nutrition 
related activities. 
the  Nutrition  Partners  Forum 
implemented  by 
72.  SBCC  activities  will  be  implemented  across  the  different  impact  pathways 
embedded in PRODAPE, as follows: 
(a)   Consumption pathway (among producers). The PRODAPE will introduce nutrition 
and  consumer  awareness  around  fish  as  a  driver  for  diet  diversity  among 
producers (individually or organized in groups constituted in clusters / aquaparks 
and encourage fish consumption planning among smallholder fish farmers vis-à-
vis  channelling  fish  into  markets.    Also,  diversified  production  systems  will  be 
encouraged  among  beneficiaries  engaged  in  aquaculture  (fish  production  and 
agriculture activities) to increase the quantity and nutrient-rich quality of diverse 
foods  available  to  the  HH  year-round.  The  intention  is  for  them  to  also  become 
change agents within their communities and use the marketing of their produce to 
increase  demand,  consumption  and  utilisation  of  fish  at  community  level.  This 
will be done by extension workers already interacting with smallholder farmers. 
(b)    Income  pathway.  The  PRODAPE  will  support  the  strengthening  /  emergence  of 
credit  and  savings  groups  (PCRs)  in  all  communities  targeted  by  aquaculture 
production  activities.    These  activities  will  also  include  HH  budgeting  and 
business planning. The project will encourage use of associated profits to address 
malnutrition by addressing health, nutrition and care necessities. This activity will 
be  done  in  the  context  of  REFP  supported  PCRs  in  PRODAPE  target 
communities. 
(c)  Market pathway. The PRODAPE will work all across the aquaculture value chain 
to address supply and demand constraints. This is expected to increase availability 
of  and  access  to  aquaculture  fish  in  markets.  A  consumer  awareness  study  on 
cultured  fish  and  other  products  will  be  conducted  as  part  of  the  initial  market 
survey  to  establish  consumer  awareness  levels.  On  the  basis  of  that,  the  project 
will  delineate  effective  strategies  for  demand  creation  for  the  purchase  of 
aquaculture fish in the target districts.  
    The project team shall develop linkages with the World Food Programme (WFP) 
for the fish farmers and cottage fish industries to explore the possibility of tapping 
into the diversified diets food  baskets  e-voucher scheme  for emergency response 
and  school  feeding  programs,  so  create  yet  another  market  for  aquaculture 
producers.  
    In  addition,  fish  farmers  with  support  from  the  project  can  benefit  from  the 
Mozambique Scaling-Up Nutrition Business Network platform to access technical 
assistance  /  services  on  nutrition  marketing  including  safe  food  handling  and 
packaging that preserves the nutritional value of fish, frameworks for adherence to 
mandatory minimum requirements for nutrition labelling and market place support 
activities for demand generation. 
 SBCC  content  to  be  used  at  producer    and  PCR  level  could  include:  a) 
73. 
nutritional value of fish; b) fish safety; c) fish benefits for the family, especially for the 
1,000-days  group1;  and  d)  demonstration  of  improved  recipes  for  preparing  cultured 
fish2.  
74.  Marketplace awareness  and communication content and materials, on the other 
hand,  should  consider  issues  related  to  aquaculture  fish  acceptability  in  coastal  areas 
and address cultural habits that inhibit the consumption of fish in inland areas, as well as 
promote fish production and overall fish consumption. In this context, the project will:  
(a)      Develop,  multimedia  messages,  creative  print  materials  such  as  scripts,  stories, 
lyrics, agendas, discussion guides and slide shows tailored to rural communities;  
(b)    Take  advantage  of  local  fish  fairs  to  promote  tilapia  and  establish  promote  fish 
processing and value addition;  
(c)      Add  to  the  on-going  marketplace  communication  activities  to  emphasize  the 
prevention of chronic malnutrition through community drama / theatre, interactive 
storytelling,  music  and  road  shows.  National  events  such  as  health  and  nutrition 
weeks  and  the  SETSAN  “Month  Dedicated  to  Feeding”  (Mês  da  Alimentação) 
offer  a  wider  geographical  and  thematic  focus  opportunity  for  community 
awareness on the use of aquaculture fish and associated products to improve HH 
diet. The project team will contribute on the production of content and the social 
mobilization activities for the events in target districts;  
(d)    Explore use of the district and provincial community radios that benefited from the 
Millennium Development Goals program (MDG1c)3 radio station training support 
and the MISAU “One Minute on Nutrition” (Um Minuto de Nutrição) initiatives 
to convey the fish-related nutrition messages. 
75.  To support wider coverage and dissemination of information on aquaculture fish 
consumption, the project team could explore the provision of tilapia and catfish related 
content  on  production,  consumption  and  marketing  to  community  mother,  infant  and 
young  child  nutrition  extension  teams  at  the  District  Services  for  Women  and  Social 
Action (SDMAS) to use during home visits and to the Nutrition Partners Forum (NPF) 
organisation  working  on  nutrition-specific  and  nutrition-sensitive  intervention  in  the 
districts to integrate health, school and community nutrition activities. 
76.  To facilitate quality extension services within the sector a nutrition specialist will 
be  hired  to  support  the  PCU  in  planning,  implementing  and  monitoring  nutrition 
outcomes within PRODAPE. An overall capacity assessment planned for the extension 
team and provincial and district directorates will also elaborate on the nutrition capacity 
gaps.  In collaboration with  SETSAN, Ministry of Agriculture National  Directorate for 
Agriculture  Extension  Department  of  (DNEA),  and  MISAU,  specific  content  for  the 
aquaculture sector will be developed and included in the overall aquaculture extension 
services  training  plans.  A  nutrition  focal  point  will  join  the  extension  master  training 
team that will train target DPMAIPs and extension staff at district levels and the project 
team.  The  training  will  be  done  at  the  district  level  to  avoid  the  cascading  training  of 
trainer  model  to  avoid  the  potential  loss  of  technical  knowledge  and  skills  along  the 
training chain. 
1
 Adolescents, pregnant, lactating women and children 6-23 months. 
2
 Nutrient-dense recipes that use fish as base ingredient and or fish value added products.  
3
 Accelerating progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals1c in Mozambique 
(MDG1c) 2013-2018. 
77.  Food and nutrition policy support. The DPMAIPs and district level nutrition focal 
points  will  monitor  and  manage  the  data  collection  and  utilisation  of  the  routine 
nutrition  outcome  data.  The  data  will  then  be  reported  and  monitored  against  the 
aquaculture planned activities within the Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of 
Chronic  Malnutrition  in  Mozambique  (PARMDC)  at  district,  provincial  and  national 
level.  In  this  regard  the  project  will  support  districts  and  provincial  directorates  to 
engage  in  the  food  and  nutrition  policy  alignment.    This  is  in  line  with  planning  and 
monitoring activities stipulated for the recently decreed provincial and district steering 
committees for food and nutrition security (CODSAN and COPSAN)4. The project will 
also  engage  with  the  food  and  nutrition  evaluation  assessment  and  surveys  working 
group chaired by SETSAN department of evaluation.  
78.  Do  no  harm  considerations.    The  time  spent  by  women  participating  in  project 
activities  could  have  a  negative  effect  on  breastfeeding  and  other  childcare 
responsibilities assumed by women. The project will mitigate these harms by ensuring 
that the organisation of the PRODAPE activities are well coordinated and take place at 
times  which  are  convenient  for  women.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  timesaving 
technologies  for  food  processing,  such  as  solar  dryers  and  cool  boxes,  as  well  as  for 
marketing, including mobile phone marketing, will be explored by PRODAPE.  
79.  The contributions of PRODAPE interventions will be monitored through periodic 
project-specific  monitoring  activities  as  well  as  SETSAN  biannual  surveys.  The 
baseline  survey  on  knowledge,  attitudes  and  practices  and  diet  diversity  surveys  will 
provide  benchmark  data  to  measure  changes  related  to  nutritional  outcomes  in  the 
project target areas.  IFAD Mozambique´s Nutrition Community of Practice will enable 
sharing  information,  best  practices  and  networking  within  IFAD  funded  programs 
(PROMER5 and PROCAVA6) as well as establishing linkages with nutrition specific / 
sensitive programmes. 
80.  Planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  social  behaviour  change  from  the 
multimedia  and  marketplace  campaigns  will  be  done  in  collaboration  with  the 
Ministries of Health, Agriculture, Education, Commerce and Industry, SETSAN, SUN 
business network and community activists. 
Addressing Social Risks.   Information collected during the PRODAPE  design 
81. 
mission  indicated  that  potential  project  beneficiaries  face  two  distinct  sets  of  social 
challenges  that,  if  unaddressed,  will  limit  impact  at  HH  level  and  maintain  weak 
cohesion among smallholder aquaculture farmers.  Concretely, social risks which could 
undermine primary beneficiary engagement in  project  supported activities and/or limit 
beneficiary HH socio-economic progression led the identification of the following:  
(a) Individual HHs seek individual solutions to common problems; 
(b) Lack of joint planning at HH level; 
(c)  Potential increase of HH tensions and gender inequality with increased income 
flows among married beneficiaries; 
(d)  Increased  risk  of  HIV  acquisition  by  women;  limited  health  seeking  behaviour 
among  HIV  positive  pregnant  women,  youth  and  men.    Threat  of  poor  health 
with deteriorating health if treatment is not initiated and sustained; 
(e)  Food insecurity and malnutrition associated with lack of production of food for 
consumption by participating households and an increase in food prices. 
 December 6th, 2017, the Council of Ministers (through Decree No. 69/2017) approved the creation of 
the National Council for Food and Nutrition Security (CONSAN). 
4
5
 The Rural Markets Promotion Programme. 
6
 Inclusive Agri-food Value-chains Development Programme. 
82.  Whether  organized  under  cluster  models  or  around  aquaparks,  smallholder 
aquaculture farmers face greater challenges than the rest of the actors in the value chain 
due  to  their  socio-economic  vulnerability.    Engagement  in  aquaculture  will  require 
organization  to  address  challenges  and  take  advantage  of  opportunities.    The  Social 
Mentoring intervention aims to support farmers in this respect by working at two levels: 
(i)  Aquaculture  producer  groups  (in  clusters  or  aquaparks).    Activities  will  instil 
joint planning, collaboration and equip them to identify common problems and 
joint solutions.  
(ii)    Individual  aquaculture  producers  receiving  PRODAPE  support.    Activities 
would aim to address social risks that could hinder beneficiary ability to sustain 
engagement  and  limit  socio-economic  progression:  (a)  absence  of  joint  HH 
plans; (b) gender inequality; (c) malnutrition; and (d) HIV and AIDS. 
83.  Whether  organized  under  clusters  or  around  the  aquapark  model,  smallholder 
aquaculture farmers face greater challenges than the rest of the actors in the value chain 
due  to  their  socio-economic  vulnerability.    Engagement  in  aquaculture  will  require 
organization  to  address  challenges  and  take  advantage  of  opportunities.    The  Social 
Mentoring  intervention  aims  to  support  farmers  in  this  respect  by  working  at  the  two 
levels.  The Social Mentoring package to be produced by PRODAPE will be based on 
different  sources,  namely,  the  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)  successfully 
used  by  IFAD7  and  other  agencies  with  inspiring  results.  This  methodology  will  be 
merged  with  best  Stepping  Stones  practice,  also  widely  used  at  international  level  – 
including  Mozambique  in  the  context  of  HIV  /  AIDS  interventions  implemented  at 
community level. Finally, the Social Mentoring package will include relevant nutrition 
messages disseminated in the country under nutrition related authorities.    
It is important to note however, that the overall approach to be used in the Social 
84. 
Mentoring  intervention  will  be  that  guiding  GALS.    As  such,  the  Social  Mentoring 
intervention could be regarded as being an expanded version of GALS including issues 
related  with  HIV/AIDS  and  nutrition.  (All  information  related  to  the  prevention, 
treatment and discrimination of HIV, as well as nutrition included in Social Mentoring 
activities will be aligned with GoM guidance documents and duly coordinated at local 
level with other players working towards common goals.) 
85.  PRODAPE will contract an independent consultant to produce the project´s Social 
Mentoring manual and train key staff.  Together with the PRODAPE PDR and this PIM, 
the  Social  Mentoring  manual  will  guide  trainings  at  various  levels  and  the 
implementation of activities among smallholder aquaculture farmers in line with yearly 
implementation plans. 
86.  Table  19  outlines  what  have  been  identified  as  key  social  challenges  and 
opportunities in relation to the main risks and opportunities identified at design for the 
project.   
7
 IFAD, October, 2014.  Case Study: Gender Action Learning System in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone 
and Uganda.  Gender, Targeting and Social Inclusion. 
Table 2: Key information in relation to four key social risks faced by project 
beneficiaries at HH level to be addressed by the Social Mentoring intervention 
Lack of joint 
household 
plans 
Gender inequality  HIV and AIDS8 
Malnutrition 
43% chronic 
malnutrition  
54% maternal 
anaemia, iron, iodine 
and vitamin A10 
Challenges: 
Limited physical 
and economic 
access to diverse, 
nutritious diets  
Limited diversified 
protein and 
micronutrient  
Cultural influence 
on diets/caring 
practises  
High disease burden  
C 
H 
A 
L 
L 
E 
N 
G 
E 
S 
- 
- 
H
i
g
h
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
t
e
n
d
t
o
b
e
s
c
a
t
t
e
r
e
d
a
n
13.2% HIV prevalence9  
- 
        Challenges: 
- 
Enrolment in and 
adherence to 
treatment  
Stigma / 
discrimination  
Vulnerability of 
women, and 
children 
HIV disclosure 
affects women 
          Food availability 
and consumption 
patterns  
W
a
v
e
D
e
c
i
s
i
o
n
m
a
k
i
n
g
i
s
p
r
i
m
a
r
i
l
y
b
y
m
8
9
10
 Instituto Nacional de Saúde, Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE), ICF Internacional, 2015. Inquérito 
de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em  Moçambique  2015.  Relatório  Preliminar  de 
Indicadores de HIV.   
  Mozambique  recently  adopted  the  HIV  Test  and  Treat  Strategy,  which  entails  getting  HIV  positive 
patients into anti-retroviral treatment as soon as diagnosed.  As is the case in other HIV high-burden 
countries, treatment is considered to be the prime prevention strategy. 
 In-Depth Review 2018 of the ‘Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Under-nutrition in 
Mozambique 2011 – 2015 (2020)’. 
- 
e
n 
L
a
c
k
o
f
c
o
n
t
r
o
l
o
f
r
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
/
b
e
n
e
f
i
t
s 
d
p
o
o
r
l
y
c
o
o
r
d
i
n
a
t
e
d
a
n
d
n
o
t
s
t
r
a
t
e
g
i
c
a
l
l
y
u
s
e
d
f
o
r
H
H
p
r
o
g
r
e
s
s
i
o
n 
- HH members 
analyse the 
impacts of gender 
inequality on 
individual 
benefits and HH 
progression and 
identify 
corrective 
measures to 
issues deemed 
relevant 
- Sensitization on 
HIV testing, 
treatment and 
adherence 
- Sharing information 
on existing HIV 
services  
- Tearing down 
barriers to 
disclosure / 
discrimination 
- HIV/AIDS & 
gender inequality 
- Nutrition in the 
context of HIV and 
AIDS 
- Targeted nutrition 
education on 
nutritional value of 
fish, fish safety, 
consumption 
benefits especially 
the 1,000 days 
group11 
- Demonstration of 
improved 
aquaculture fish 
recipes12 
- Partnerships with 
relevant sectors  
P
- Empower HHs to 
produce HH 
R
plans and 
O
identifying 
P
solutions to the 
O
four social risks 
S
identified herein 
E
(and others) 
D
S
O
L
U
T
I
O
N
S 
87.  Issues to be included in the Social Mentoring intervention will include:  
a. Development of joint HH / producer group vision; 
b. HH / producer group planning making effective use of resources and opportunities 
available; 
c.  Identifying  and  addressing  common  barriers  for  progress  (including  common 
areas of gender inequality);  
11
 Adolescents, pregnant and lactating mothers and children aged 6-23 months. 
12
 Nutrient dense recipes that use fish as base ingredient and or fish value added products.   
d. Provision of basic information on HIV prevention and clinical HIV services close 
to communities, including, as relevant: HIV testing and counselling, HIV care and 
treatment, community services and support groups (if any), and use of services; 
e. Importance  of  pregnant  women,  youth  and  men  testing  and  using  clinical  HIV 
services and adhering to anti-retroviral treatment; 
f.  Couple disclose of sero-prevalence; overcoming HIV stigma and discrimination; 
g. Provision  of  basic  information  to  prevent  malnutrition  and  linkages,  as 
appropriate. 
 Social  Mentoring  activities  will  be  implemented  by  trained  Mentors.  Social 
88. 
Mentoring activities will be imparted to  smallholder farmers  receiving project  support 
to  establish  their  production  units,  through  the  producer  groups  into  which  they  are 
organized for the purposes of accessing project opportunities related to fish production.  
It  is  expected  that  groups  will  consist  of  20-25  members.    However,  more  focused 
attention  will  be  given  to  "more  at  risk  beneficiaries",  considering  that  these  will 
primarily be the poorest HH (those receiving the highest level of support to engage in 
fish production), but it could also include beneficiaries that are not among the poorest 
but 
in  overcoming  challenges  and  capitalizing 
opportunities due to enhanced exposure to (a) given social risk(s).  These beneficiaries 
will receive additional support, which will be provided at HH level.  It is expected that 
the  proportion  of  beneficiaries  requiring  this  level  of  additional  support  will  represent 
approximately  20%  of  the  total  number  of  beneficiaries  targeted  by  the  Social 
Mentoring package. 
require  additional  assistance 
 Service  providers  will  be  contracted  to  implement  all  Social  Mentoring 
89. 
activities.    These  service  providers  must  be  experienced  in  facilitating  empowerment 
processes in poor rural communities.  The service providers will be selected according 
to  pre-established  criteria  and  trained,  in  the  use  of  delivery  of  the  Social  Mentoring 
intervention, as relevant.  The Sociologist / Social Inclusion Specialist at the PRODAPE 
PCU  will  play  an  important  role  in  selecting,  supporting  and  overseeing  the  technical 
performance standards and ensuring that expected results are met among those targeted 
with  the  intervention.    Additional  expertise  will  be  brought  in  by  PRODAPE,  as 
required, through targeted implementation support. 
 Evidence shows that when GALS is implemented correctly, the impact is such 
90. 
that  there  is  a  multiplier  effect  at  community  level  as  beneficiaries  themselves  target 
others  community  members  spontaneously.      As  such,  the  project  will  target  all 
producer    groups  in  each  community  to  work  on  group  level  issues  (see  above),  and 
50%  of  individual  beneficiaries  within  these,  including  those  requiring  additional 
support  at  HH  level.    The  idea  is  for    beneficiaries  targeted  directly  by  Mentors  until 
they  "graduate".    Then,  these  “Social  Mentoring  graduates”  will  be  asked  to  replicate 
the  same  process  among  the  remaining  50%  of  PRODAPE  beneficiaries  within  their 
organised producer groups and any other community members they wish to share their 
experience with. 
Activities at group and HH level will be implemented for a period of 12 months.  
91. 
It is expected that after this time groups and individuals targeted will "graduate" out of 
Social  Mentoring.    Each  Mentor  will  cover  three  groups  (and  the  estimated  20%  of 
group members requiring HH level support, i.e., five people in each group, totalling 15 
HHs) in this 12-month period. 
Component 2: Development of aquaculture business 
Objectives.  The  component  will  focus  on  addressing  needs  to  ensure  that  all 
92. 
participants  in  the aquaculture value chain  – including smallholders  -  can do so  under 
commercial  terms.  As  such,  the  component  will  work  on:  (i)  supporting  the 
development of aquaparks; (ii) improving practices for aquaculture products to maintain 
their  value  in  markets  and  supporting  an  environment  that  facilitates  business 
partnerships,  especially PPPs / outgrower schemes; (iii) promoting financial inclusion; 
and (iv) supporting the engagement of youth as aquapreneurs. Some of the key activities 
to  be 
technical  assistance, 
demonstrations,  exchange  visits,  the  provision  of  equipment,  the  improvement  of 
market facilities and the provision of financial services.  
include  market 
implemented 
training, 
surveys, 
for  Implementation. 
Organization  and  Coordination 
  The  overall 
93. 
organization and coordination of this multi-faceted component will be assumed by the 
PCU,  who  will  liaise  and  coordinate  closely  /  support  the  respective  DPMAIPs.    The 
component  will  entail  the  establishment  of  numerous  innovative  linkages  and 
partnerships, commercial in nature, with public and community partners, and potentially 
between private sector players. The DPMAIPs will oversee service providers engaged in 
the  context  of  related  activities  and  support  a  conducive  environment  for  the 
development of aquaculture as a commercial activity in their province.  
Table 3: Matrix of players involved in the implementation of PRODAPE Component 2. 
Area of Intervention  
Support to the physical 
development of aquaparks  
Implementing 
Leader 
DPMAIPs 
Establishment of PPPs in the 
context of aquaparks 
IDEPA 
Provision of financial services 
to relevant players in the 
aquaculture value chain 
Development of other market 
linkages across the aquaculture 
value chain 
Implementation of 
aquapreneurship activities with 
youth (“Start Your Own 
Business”) 
BNI 
DPMAIPs 
DPMAIPs 
Implementing partners 
●  SDAEs 
●  Cadastre 
●  DNAs / DNGRH / ARAs 
●  Existing / emerging private 
sector players producing feed, 
seed or fish 
●  ANE 
●  FUNAE 
●  DPMAIPs 
●  MFIs / FFP 
●  Private sector operators 
●  MFIs 
●  DPMAIP 
●  SDAEs 
●  SDAEs 
●  Specialised service providers 
●  Existing businesses 
●  SDAEs 
Subcomponent 2.1: Support the development of aquaparks. The PRODAPE is 
94. 
interested  in  supporting  the  development  of  aquaparks,  as  a  vehicle  to  integrate 
smallholder farmers in rural communities to the aquaculture value chain.   
The  concept  of  aquaparks  has  been  and  is  likely  to  continue  evolving  with 
95. 
experience and exposure to the experience and success stories of other countries, such 
as Brazil, with which PRODAPE intends to carry out an exchange / learning visit.  At 
present,  the  sector  considers  two  models  of  aquapark:  industrial  aquaparks  (of  which 
there are none in the country as of yet) and small / medium sized aquaparks (of which 2 
are functioning in Inhambane and over a dozen others underway / in construction / close 
to  becoming  operational.  The  PRODAPE  will  not  to  engage  in  the  development  of 
industrial  aquaparks,  but  to  plan  investments  in  support  of  smaller  aquaparks  in  the 
targeted districts.  
96.  The  PRODAPE  will  provide  support  for  the  development  of  aquaculture  parks 
through mainly: (i) carrying out public awareness campaigns to alert potential investors 
and  entrepreneurs  and  negotiating  with  the  public  and  private  sectors  to  establish 
funding  commitments;  (ii)  provision  of  technical  assistance  (assessment  of  sites 
suitability  for  aquaculture,  development  of  site  specific  ESMP/ESIAs,  carrying 
capacity, biosecurity planning and disease control, business plans, etc., as required); (iii) 
facilitate  the  identification  of  sources  of  finance  and  the  arrangements  for  acceptable 
PPPs; and (iv) the provision of enabling and critical key infrastructure including feeder 
roads,  water  canals,  hatcheries/nurseries  canals,  electricity  systems  and  markets, 
warehouse with cold storage and ice production at key marketing points. 
Subcomponent  2.2:  Develop  market  linkages  and  business  partnerships.  The 
97. 
general approach of the sub-component is to develop market linkages oriented towards 
improving  fish  handling;  the  establishment  of  fish  collection  systems  and  centres; 
marketing  and  distribution  within  the  context  of  the  overall  development  of  target 
communities;  and  the  establishment  of  business  partnerships  between  smallholder 
farmers and private sector players under  what in agriculture are considered “outgrower 
schemes”. 
This  sub-component  will  complement  component  1,  through  the  following 
98. 
activities:  a)  carry  out  a  detailed  market  and  product  development  study;  b)  provide 
training  /  technical  assistance  on  good  practices  for  fish  handling  /  processing 
preservation  /  marketing;  c)  product  and  business  development,  for  both  fish  farmers 
and technical staff; d) facilitate proper equipment (drying racks; cool boxes and bicycles 
/ motorcycles for small-scale processors and traders in rural areas; e) small-scale market 
outlet or “peixarias” ; f) improve some fish markets at district and provincial level by 
setting  up  minimal  hygiene  requirements  (tap  water  and  toilets);  g)  sensitization  of 
sellers and buyers / consumers on hygiene and nutrition; h) facilitate spot improvement 
of access roads; and i) facilitate acquisition of some solar equipment.    
Finally,  the  subcomponent  would  entail  sensitization  activities  of  existing 
99. 
private  sector  operators  engaged  in  aquaculture  production  to  work  with  local 
smallgrower  farmers  to  create  win-wins  for  the  operators  and  smallholders.    Such 
arrangements enable smallholders to access inputs, technical assistance (as needed) and 
markets for their fish and supports private sector operators in increasing their production 
capacity without substantial additional investment. 
100.  Business  partnership  between  commercial  fish  farms  and  small-scale  fish 
producers  will  be  enhanced  through:  i)  the  provision  by  the  former  of  quality  inputs 
(fingerlings  and  feed)  and  technical  assistance  (pond  /  cage  construction  and 
management);  and  ii)  the  purchase  by  the  former  of  fish  produced  by  small-scale 
farmers.  
101.  Business partnerships will be promoted through exchange visits, carried out for 
fish farmers, technical staff and input suppliers both at regional level (e.g. Kenya and / 
or  Uganda)  and  local  level  (within  the  same  province  or  in  other  provinces).  These 
exchange visits (group composition, frequency, places and costings) are detailed in the 
PROPADE Cost Tables.  
102.  Subcomponent 2.3: Develop financial services.  The goal of this subcomponent is 
to contribute to rural HH livelihood improvements by facilitating access to appropriate, 
affordable and sustainable financial and business development services that enable HHs 
to start / strengthen engagement in aquaculture activities. Expected outcomes of the sub-
component include: (i) increased savings by beneficiaries; and (ii) increased income and 
assets  through  the  establishment  of  profitable  enterprises  facilitated  by  access  to 
financial  services.    The  project  also  aims  to  demonstrate  that  aquaculture  has 
commercial potential, which should attract mainstream financing instruments including 
venture  capital,  working  capital  loans,  asset  financing,  insurance,  etc.    Specific  funds 
will  be  ring-fenced 
to  support  youth 
entrepreneurship  intervention  (sub-component  2.4)  based  on  the  successful  experience 
of the ILO (Support Your Own Business).   
this  sub-component 
the  context  of 
in 
Financial  services  to  PRODAPE  beneficiaries  will  be  made  available  through 
103. 
REFP and the BNI, who will engage MFIs as financial service providing agencies and 
other specialised service providers to reach PRODAPE beneficiaries.  Financial services 
will  be  designed  to  meet  the  needs  of  various  existing  and  incoming  actors  in  the 
aquaculture value chain. Activities will start at community level with the establishment 
of  PCRs;  this  will  be  one  of  the  first  activities  that  will  be  implemented  in  target 
communities as, the experience of previous IFAD-supported projects shows, it provides 
rural  dwellers  the  opportunity  to  accumulate  small  sums  of  money  for  productive 
investment purposes. 
104.  Other  financial  products  to  be  made  available  through  the  collaboration  of 
PRODAPE  and  REFP  are  the  mixed  grant-based  product  called  Crowding  in  Fund 
(CIF) and the Line of Credit (LoC).   These products will be made known in community 
and  wider  project  mobilization  processes  on  aquaculture  value  chain  development,  so 
that  smallholders,  emerging  rural  entrepreneurs  and  local  /  aspiring  business  people 
know of their existence and the possibilities conferred to participating in it.   
Table 4: Financing to be made available through PRODAPE and REFP for the aquaculture 
Enterpris
e activity Financing requirements 
value chain 
Value of 
financing 
(min)   Financing instrument 
Provider 
● 
● 
Machinery  
Raw materials 
for fish feed 
● 
Packaging 
materials 
● 
Storage 
material / equipment 
Labour  TBD 
● 
● Hatchery equipment 
● Fish Feeds 
● Labour 
TBD 
● Labour or hiring 
machinery for pond 
construction  
● Purchase of 
fingerlings 
● Purchase of fish 
feed 
● Labour for stocking, 
feeding & 
harvesting fish 
● Security services USD 7,000 
Fish feed 
producers 
Fingerling 
producers 
Small-scale 
aquaculture 
farming 
(Earthen 
Pond) 
● 
Full grant to 
experiment in formulation 
and production of fish feed 
(cottage industry) 
Project 
● 
● 
CIF for scale up 
BNI 
Full grant towards 
the establishment of small-
scale community level 
producers 
Project 
CIF for producers 
● 
who want to scale up  BNI 
● 
Different levels of 
support for investment  
costs and 100% project 
support for inputs needed 
for the first production 
cycle  
Project 
LoC for inputs for 
● 
second production cycle BNI 
● 
CIF for opening new 
ponds (maximum 3)  BNI 
After the second BNI 
● 
● Purchase of cage 
● Purchase of 
fingerlings 
● Purchase of fish 
feed 
● Labour for stocking, 
feeding & 
harvesting fish 
● Security services USD 12,000 
Small-scale 
aquaculture 
farming 
(Cage 
Farming) 
Distributors  Refrigerated truck 
TBD 
Traders  
Motor cycles 
Cooler boxes 
TBD 
Fish processors Small scale processing units TBD 
cycle, the farmer should 
graduate to the normal 
loans under the LoC 
● 
CiF for investment 
and the first cycle 
BNI 
● 
LoC for inputs for 
second production cycle BNI 
● 
CIF for the 
establishment of new cages 
BNI 
(maximum 3) 
● 
After the second 
cycle, the farmer should 
graduate to the normal 
loans under the LoC 
BNI 
● 
● 
● 
LoC 
CIF 
LoC 
BNI 
BNI 
BNI 
105. 
access financial services made available through REFP. 
Table 21 illustrates the steps to be followed by PRODAPE beneficiaries to 
Table 5:  Institutional framework to link PRODAPE beneficiaries to the REFP 
Targeting and Selection 
Step 1:   Targeting, selection and profiling of PRODAPE beneficiaries undertaken 
by PRODAPE project  staff.  
Step 2:   Information on beneficiary location and profiles and funding requirements 
is sent to Regional REFP project management unit. 
Step 3:   Regional REFP project management unit provides information to business 
development and participating financial service providers. 
Step 4:   On the basis of the information provided the participating business 
development and financial service providers prepare work plans for 
providing services to PRODAPE beneficiaries. 
Phase 2: Financing Process 
Step 1:   Participating business development service providers and financial service 
providers conduct outreach and sensitization campaigns in project areas. 
Step 2:   Business development service providers provide training to PRODAPE 
beneficiaries and assist to prepare business plans and funding proposals for 
submission to financial service providers. 
Step 3:   Financial service providers receive loan applications from beneficiaries.  
Step 4:   Financial service providers appraises applications using its internal criteria. 
Step 5:   Financial service providers disburse funds to successful applicants. 
Step 6:   Loan beneficiaries repay loan-using modalities established by financial 
service providers. 
Subcomponent  2.4:  Support  to  youth  aquapreneurship.    The  sub-component 
106. 
will  integrate  into  PRODAPE  a  specific  methodology  to  use  with  youth  in  target 
communities, targeted through component one, or who wish to engage in other activities 
in  support  of  the  aquaculture  value  chain.    The  approach  involves  a  comprehensive 
package  involving  the  provision  of  technical  assistance,  support  to  prepare  business 
plans  and  support  in  establishing  linkages  with  the  REFP  for  tailored  financing  and 
others, in pursuit of their business endeavours. In the process, youth champions inspire 
and support other peers in their communities  through coaching.      The methodology is 
expected  to  play  an  important  element  in  the  transformative  approach  to  youth 
involvement integrated in PRODAPE. 
The methodology has been successfully used by the ILO.  The PRODAPE will 
107. 
contract  a consultant to  develop  a Youth Aquapreneurship  Manual  for the project  and 
train  key  staff  at  national,  provincial  and  district  level  in  its  use.    It  is  envisaged  that 
implementation  will  start  with  a  couple  of  pilots  from  which  to  learn,  identify  best 
practices and use as a basis for roll out to other target locations in subsequent years. 
Component 3: Project management, institutional and policy development 
Objectives.  The  component  provides  the  overall  framework  for  project 
108. 
management, strengthening sector institutions responsible for small-scale aquaculture in 
the  country  to  fulfil  their  roles,  as  well  a  support  sector  policy  and  regulatory 
development.  
Organization and coordination for implementation. The component will 
109. 
be led by the PCU.  While requiring the participation of players at  sub-national  level, 
this  is  the  component  in  which  the  PCU  will  assume  most  responsibilities  given  the 
nature of the issues it encompasses. It will be important however,   
Table 6: Matrix of players involved in the implementation of PRODAPE Component 3. 
Area of Intervention  
Project management 
Institutional capacity building 
at national level 
Institutional capacity building 
at sub-national level 
Development of policy and 
regulatory framework for 
aquaculture 
Implementing 
Leader 
MIMAIP 
PCU 
PCU 
PCU 
Implementing partners 
●  PCU  
●  Selected service providers  
●  Consultants 
●  PCU staff 
●  Selected service providers 
●  Consultants 
●  DPMAIPs 
●  Relevant sector departments 
(depending on specific topic)  
●  PCU staff 
●  Selected service providers 
●  Consultants 
●  DPMAIPs 
Subcomponent  3.1: Project  management.    MIMAIP  and  IFAD are committed 
110. 
towards  the  establishment  of  a  dedicated  PCU  that  can  implement  and  assume  full 
responsibility for all management functions of the project and deliver expected results.  
The  PCU  will  be  staffed  by  a  core  management  team  comprising  a  coordinator,  a 
financial manager, a procurement officer, financial assistants, an M&E specialist and a 
KM  and  communications  specialist.      In  addition,  the  PRODAPE  will  hire  senior 
specialists  who  will  be  integrated  in  relevant  sector  departments  to  strengthen 
institutional  capacity,  by  means,  especially,  of  supporting 
technical  project 
management.    Specialists  will  be  integrated  in  the  areas  of  aquaculture,  value  chain 
development, nutrition, social inclusion as well as a financial liaison officer.     
111.  All central level specialists will work closely with sector staff at central level to 
ensure that project objectives are met.   Given that a large majority of activities will be 
implemented at sub-national level, a focal point for the project will be assigned within 
DPMAIPs  in  target  provinces.  The national  level  specialists will support and oversee 
progress and results in activities implemented at sub-national level, primarily under the 
responsibility  of  DPMAIPs.    In  turn,  DPMAIPs  will  plan,  liaise,  coordinate,  support, 
monitor  and  evaluate    the  extension  service  (SDAEs)  in  target  districts,  contract  and 
manage local service providers and seek partnerships / synergies which could enhance 
project  progress  and  results.    The  DPMAIP  will  also  be  responsible  for  liaising  with 
other government institutions at provincial level. 
In addition, best IFAD and GoM management practices and procedures will be 
112. 
used for in all project management aspects (some of which will be covered in part four 
of this document, namely, those dedicated to support functions).  
Steering Committees will be created for the project at National, Provincial and 
113. 
District levels and will have representatives from relevant sector institutions and other 
sectors as well as civil society representatives.  Steering Committees play a key role in 
“steering”  project  direction,  in  this  case,  to  ensure  that  PRODAPE  remains  loyal  and 
relevant to its purpose and at the same time adapt to any emerging circumstances. 
The project will also be jointly supervised on a regular basis (at least once per 
114. 
year) by IFAD and sector representatives. Mid-term review will provide an opportunity 
to assess progress made towards results and integrate any additional strategy changes to 
increase the possibility of project success.  A Project Completion Report will document 
degree of success achieved by the project. 
Subcomponent  3.2:  Institutional  capacity  building.    To  support  aquaculture 
115. 
production  and  the  fish  value  chain  in  the  areas  covered  by  PRODAPE,  the  project 
envisages  the  following  activities  to  contribute  to  building  sector  capacity  towards 
quality project management, overall sector performance improvement and sustainability 
of project interventions:  
●  Setting up of a dedicated project PCU; 
●  Integration of relevant technical specialists in IDEPA departments; 
●  The provision of implementation support; 
●  Increasing  the  number  of  extension  agents  in  target  districts,  as  required, 
adequately  training  them  in  relevant  topics  and  ensuring  that  their  resource 
requirements  are  met  to  effectively  carry  out  planned  activities  at  desired 
frequency, timing and quality; 
●  Training of provincial-based technical staff in business / marketing / value chain / 
nutrition / targeting, social analysis and social risk management; 
●  Improving  institutional  systems  in  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  (specific  activities 
include: provision of assistance to institutions engaged in aquaculture through the 
establishment  of  licensing  and  enforcement  functions  at  SDAE  level,  reviewing 
the role of institutions involved in small-scale aquaculture, including their organic 
statutes  and  regulations,  staff  tables  and  professional  progression;  together  with 
the design of a pilot statistical system for small-scale aquaculture to be tested and 
scaled  up  in  the  project  area  and  subsequently  rolled  out  to  the  rest  of  the 
country).  
Subcomponent 3.3: Policy development.  Subcomponent 3.3 aims to contribute 
116. 
to  the  improvement  of  the  policy  /  legislative  /  regulatory  framework,  advocacy  and 
governance efforts in support of aquaculture, with a specific focus on the involvement 
of  small-scale  producers.    To  achieve  this,  the  sub-component  has  considered  the 
following areas of intervention:  
●  The development of frameworks towards climate smart aquaculture, including: 
-  Detailed  agro-ecological  map  (supported  by  the  findings  of  the  ESMF  and 
CRA  developed  during  design)  of  suitable  zones  for  aquaculture  production 
that provides the basis for the identification of areas which could be considered 
by the project in (target) districts identified at design stage;  
-  Specific guidelines for cage culture to be elaborated before activities to 
commence;  
-  Specific guidelines for biosecurity 
-  Protocols to mitigate risks and establish appropriate remedial actions 
●  Strengthening the policy / legislative framework, including: 
-  Regulations  on  aquaculture  production  and  aquaculture  produce  and 
aquaparks)  
-  Update  and  improvement  of  the  small-scale  aquaculture  policy,  strategy  and 
plan 
The  project  will  consider  carrying  out  additional  studies  and  initiatives  to 
117. 
strengthen  the  policy  /  legislative  /  regulatory  environment  for  aquaculture  to  meet 
needs  identified  over  the  project´s  lifetime.    Also,  a  relevant  output  for  planning 
purposes,  will  be  the  elaboration  of  a  detailed  map  (i.e.  GIS)  identifying  the  location, 
size  and  typology  of  aquaculture  activities  in  Mozambique.  This  will  be  an  evolving 
map  which  will  serve  IDEPA,  both  at  central  and  provincial  level,  to  immediately 
identify  the  various  actors  operating  in  the  sector,  the  operation  areas,  the  size  of 
investments and detailed characteristics for each aquaculture activity. At the same time, 
the Project will support a KM database which will include all relevant studies produced 
under PRODAPE as well as similar projects both public and private. The database will 
possibly  include  a  set  of  useful  documentation  to  be  used  by  IDEPA  to  simplify  both 
public  and  private  investments  in  the  sector  such  as  guidelines,  environmental  and 
social assessments, productivity studies etc. 
c.  PART THREE: IMPLEMENTATION OF PRODAPE 
TARGETING STRATEGY 
Figure 1: Map of Mozambique indicating 
PRODAPE target districts 
This  section  of  the  PRODAPE  PIM 
118. 
provides step- by- step information on how to 
implement  the  project´s  targeting  strategy  as 
considered at project design. It starts by laying 
out  the  overall  logic  of  the  targeting  strategy.  
Derails  are  then  provided  to  understand  rural 
community  level  beneficiaries,  i.e.  the  largest 
number of PRODAPE beneficiaries, especially 
fish  production  activities. 
in 
Understanding  the  diversity  of  this  group  and 
the  different  sub-groups  that  configure  it  is 
important 
intended  social 
inclusion.    Finally,  this  part  of  the  PIM 
presents  information  related  to  the  procedures 
to  be  put  in  place  to  mobilize,  select  and 
organize beneficiaries at community level. 
to  warrant 
respect 
the 
to 
A.  Logic of PRODAPE´s Targeting 
Strategy 
The  implementation  of  PRODAPE´s 
119. 
targeting strategy will follow a two level logic: 
(i) selecting the geographic locations in which 
the  project  will  be  implemented  over  time 
(provinces, district  and specific communities / 
sites  within  these);  and  (ii)  selecting  actual 
project beneficiaries. 
120.  Geographic Targeting.   PRODAPE interventions towards the development  of 
the  aquaculture  value  chain  are  expected  to  be  implemented  in  23  districts.  Figure  10 
illustrates  the  location  of  target  districts  throughout  the  country.  The  choice  of  target 
districts  and  locations  within  these  was  defined  by  the  sector  following  pre-defined 
technical criteria, namely: (i) favourable natural conditions for aquaculture in ponds; (ii) 
the  existence  of  water  bodies  capable  of  providing  sufficient  water  for  aquaculture 
activity;  (iii)  the  existence  of  potential  markets;  (iv)  unfavourable  socio-economic 
conditions among local populations (high poverty levels), food and nutrition insecurity; 
and  (v)  the  existence  of  access  roads,  which  could  be  subject  to  improvements  to 
warrant  access  throughout  the  year.    Excluding criteria were also  included to  ensure 
that inappropriate sites  are ruled out,  with  prominence to  areas with  marine water and 
“protected areas”.  
The  districts  chosen  in  which  to  initiate  activities  chosen  by  the  sector  being: 
121. 
Lago, Baloma, Ribaue, Milange, Cahora Bassa, Sussundenga and Beira. Interventions in 
six  of  the  seven  initial  districts  (all  except  Beira,  will  include  a  fish  production 
component).  Expansion into other districts listed herein will occur once the aquaculture 
value chain in these districts is operational. Lessons drawn in these districts will inform 
expansion on the basis of local demand.  
122.  However,  once  the  results  of  final  assessments  of  damage  caused  by  cyclones 
Idai and Kenneth to aquaculture infrastructure are available, target areas of intervention 
could be adjusted. 
123.  Also,  in  the  event  that  communities  affected  by  large  scale  economic  activities, 
including  extractive  industry  projects,  whose  livelihood  strategies  have  largely 
deteriorated as a result of these projects, and in so far as such communities also comply 
with  all  technical  criteria  stipulated  above,  they  will  be  given  priority  over  other 
communities in target districts. 
Implementation will be guided by a phased geographic implementation approach 
124. 
aiming  to  consolidate  supply  and  demand  factors  towards  effective  and  efficient 
production  and  market  functionality  of  the  aquaculture  value  chain  in  strategically 
identified  locations  of  the  country.  The  selection  of  districts  to  be  targeted  each  year 
will  be  determined  by  IDEPA  /  PCU  taking  into  consideration  demand  from  target 
provinces.   
125.  Direct  Targeting  of  Beneficiaries.    The  project  will  be  reaching  88,900 
beneficiaries  along  the  entire  value  chain  in  target  geographic  locations  (individuals 
directly  targeted  and  their  direct  family  units).  Project  support  will  span  from  the 
establishment  of  conditions  for  aquaculture  production  to  marketing  of  cultured  fish. 
The  comprehensive  approach  adopted  by  PRODAPE  aims  to  address  supply  and 
demand constraints towards value chain functionality, competitiveness and profitability 
with  the  engagement  of  smallholders  and  rural  entrepreneurs.  Staff  from  government 
institutions  will  also  benefit  from  capacity  building  activities  (for  a  summarised 
description of the different types of project beneficiaries refer to Figure 2 below). 
126.  Consistent  with  IFAD  and  GoM  poverty  alleviation  objectives,  smallholder 
aquaculture  farmers  constitute  the  largest  group  of  PRODAPE  beneficiaries  (13,000).  
Of  these,  the  majority  will  be  receiving  direct  support  to  initiate  fish  production 
activities  (7,000),  60%  will  do  so  with  recourse  to  earthen  ponds  and  40%  to  cages 
introduced in suitable large water bodies.  PRODAPE will also support players engaged 
/  to  be  engaged  at  other  levels  of  the  aquaculture  value  chain  (2,500).    Young 
aquapreneurs will be chosen from all levels of the value chain. The PRODAPE will also 
target young graduates and extensionists wishing to become active commercial players 
in  the  aquaculture  value  chain  (280  people).    Finally,  community  members  in  which 
direct  project  beneficiaries  live  will  also  benefit  from  PCR  promotion  and  nutrition 
education activities project (approximately 2,000 people).     
Figure 2:  Summary of PRODAPE beneficiaries at community and institutional level 
B.   Socially Inclusive Targeting 
127.  PRODAPE  was  designed  under  a  comprehensive  socially  inclusive  approach  to 
enable people of different socio-economic characteristics, gender and age to have access 
to project opportunities.   Understanding these specific groups and how to target them 
deserves specific attention and will be expanded on in the paragraphs that follow. 
128.  Understanding  the  diverse  characteristics  of  beneficiaries  to  receive  PRODAPE 
support to engage in aquaculture production is paramount for the project to be socially 
inclusive.    Failing  to  do  so  will  result  in  the  project  only    targeting  the  “low  hanging 
fruit”,  many  of  which  do  not  actually  require  the  level  of  support  that  has  been 
contemplated for poor people.   
129.  Secondly,  failing  to  recognise  that  community  members  have  different  socio-
economic condition often results in projects claiming that they have lifted people out of 
poverty,  when  in  fact  many  beneficiaries  did  not  live  under  the  poverty  line.   
PRODAPE  aims  to  be  socially  transformative,  to  effectively  reach  poor  HHs  out  of 
poverty,  to  enable  women  and  youth,  who  generally  do  not  partake  in  equal  terms  in 
development processes or enjoy the benefits of development in terms equal to men, to 
progress.  Table  11  below  provides  key  characteristics  of  the  different  types  of 
smallholder  farmers  identified  in  rural  Mozambique  during  the  PRODAPE  design 
mission,  according  to  their  socio-economic  condition.    Understanding  the  differences 
between them is necessary to understand the logic driving the selection of beneficiaries 
and their characteristics.  
Table 11: Characterization of rural smallholder HHs in Mozambique 
Source: developed by PRODAPE design mission member on the basis of broad 
bibliographic consultation and information obtained from interviewees 
In further analysing these four (socio-economic) categories of smallholders from 
130. 
the  perspective  of  their  capacity  to  engage  in  aquaculture  farming,  it  was  possible  to 
establish  two  distinct  groups  of  smallholders  to  receive  project  support  to  engage  in 
aquaculture production activities:  
●  Poor subsistence smallholders who would NOT be able to open an earthen pond 
by their own means, but who are interested and able to engage in fish production.  
By  the  same  token,  given  that  engagement  in  cultured  fish  with  cages  is  more 
costly than in ponds because of the higher volume of fish one production unit as 
considered in PRODAPE design involves (approximately 2.5 times more in a cage 
than  in  an  earthen  pond),  poor  subsistence  farmers  have  not  been  considered  as 
PRODAPE beneficiaries for the establishment of cages in large water bodies.  
●  Economically active / entrepreneurial smallholders.  These are people who are 
capable of opening earthen ponds to engage in aquaculture production but require 
additional  support  to  ensure  that  their  investments  in  pond  construction  actually 
results  in  actual  production  of  fish  for  consumption  and  sale.        Economically 
active  /  entrepreneurial  smallholders  will  also  be  able  to  put  together  the  20% 
contribution  required  to  access  the  REFP  supported  CIF  for  PRODAPE 
beneficiaries that will enable access to cages fish production.  
131.  Figure  8  below  shows  how  the  smallholder  types  identified  based  on  socio-
economic characteristics actually translate into PRODAPE beneficiary groups. 
Figure 3: Primary beneficiaries to receive PRODAPE support to start aquaculture 
production activity vis-à-vis smallholder categories 
132.  Reaching  out  to  poor  /  subsistence  smallholders  and  economically  active  / 
entrepreneurial  smallholders  to  engage  in  aquaculture  farming  will  not  be  done 
arbitrarily, but rather following the targeting quotas that follow:  
●   40% of all individuals supported to establish aquaculture production  ponds will 
/ 
/  subsistence  smallholders  and  60%  economically  active 
be  poor 
entrepreneurial smallholders.  
●   Also, within each of the two groups and also among all beneficiaries using cages 
for fish production: 
-  20% of beneficiaries will be women headed households (WHHs)13;  
-  10% youth aged 18-24; and  
-  30% youth aged 25-35.    
The  targeting  quota  thus  comes  to  a  total  of  60%.    Quotas  were  established 
especially for youth and WHHs as experience shows that without such measures 
these  specific  groups  are  likely  to  be  left  out  or  only  marginally  targeted  in 
beneficiary  selection  processes.    The  remaining  40%  of  beneficiaries  to  be 
reached can be either married men or women over 35 years of age.   
133.  Table 13 provides details of the number of people that each group translates into 
for earthen ponds and aquaculture cage farming. 
Table 13: Number of beneficiaries to be targeted with PRODAPE support to engage 
in fish production, by targeting quotas 
134.  Further, to ensure that poor / subsistence smallholders and the economically active 
/  entrepreneurial  smallholders  receive  the  support  they  need  to  establish  a  fish  pond, 
irrespective of their age or gender, specific support packages were produced to cater to 
their specific socio-economic capacities, as illustrated in Table 14. 
Table 14: Packages developed for HHs of different socio-economic conditions to 
enable engagement in aquaculture production in earthen ponds 
13
  In  the  context  of  PRODAPE,  WHHs  are  defined  as  HHs  in  which  a  woman  is  solely  responsible  for  the 
sustenance of the HH.  As such this could include unmarried women, widows and also women who are 
married but whose husbands do not live with them and do not provide any resources for sustaining the 
HH. 
C.   Implementation of the Targeting Strategy among new aquaculture farmers 
135.  Given  the  large  number  of  beneficiaries  to  be  targeted  to  engage  in  aquaculture 
production, it is important to stagger them across the operational lifetime of the project.  
Table 15 illustrates the expected number of individuals to be reached per year.  It must 
be  noted  that  PRODAPE  will  only  start  support  to  production  activities  in  the  second 
year of operations, as conditions for production need to be established in year one, at a 
minimum, fish and feed need to be available, and robust mobilization and participatory 
selection  processes  used  to  identify  beneficiaries.    All  of  this  requires  time.    By  the 
same token, no activities of this type are expected to be implemented in the last year of 
operations  given  that  activities  in  year  five  should  be  focused  on  approaching  closure 
and handover, not construction.  
136.  At design, it is expected that approximately 1,900 people will be supported to start 
aquaculture farming in year 2; 2,550 in year 3; and another 2,550 in year 4.    
Table 15: Beneficiaries who will receive PRODAPE support to open earthen ponds or 
establish cages for aquaculture production, per year 
Identifying  smallholder  beneficiaries  to  receive  PRODAPE  support  to  
137. 
establish  aquaculture-farming  units. 
/  subsistence  smallholders  and 
  Poor 
economically active /  entrepreneurial smallholders will  be selected through previously 
established  and  agreed  criteria.    The  criteria  will  enable  project  implementers  and 
community members alike, to “recognize” if a given beneficiary falls in one category or 
the other or if he /  she is not  eligible.  Correctly identifying beneficiaries in  line with 
PRODAPE  criteria  is  especially  important  to  avoid  any  risk  of  people  categorizing 
themselves  or  being  categorised  as  poorer  to  access  higher  project  support  packages 
offered  by  PRODAPE.  The  criteria  presented  in  Table  16  should  be  considered  after 
consultation with a few potential communities upon project launch. 
Table 16: Criteria for identification of poor / subsistence smallholders and 
economically active / entrepreneurial smallholders 
Poor / subsistence smallholders 
-  Regularly food insecure  
-  Not all children are enrolled at school 
even if they could 
-  Livelihood activities are not stable and 
can include a range of activities 
including providing labour to others to 
meet minimal food needs on a daily 
basis 
-  Has access to land for aquaculture 
farming 
-  Aquaculture constitutes an opportunity 
to engage in a stable and profitable 
farming activity and move away from 
reliance on livelihood activities that 
rely on the provision of labour to 
Economically active / entrepreneurial 
smallholders 
-  Can meet basic HH food consumption 
needs, but not necessarily all other 
HH needs 
-  All children in primary school age are 
enrolled in schools (up to the grade 
available to the community) 
-  Livelihood activities are relatively 
stable – even if not very profitable, 
which can include agricultural 
production.  In the case of the latter, 
the beneficiary has surplus which is 
regularly sold to markets / 
intermediaries / others 
-  Has access to land for aquaculture 
farming 
others  / high levels of vulnerability  
-  Commitment to dedicate the necessary 
effort for success  
-  Resident in the community for at least 
five years, with no plans to leave14 
-  Applicant age is between 18 and 55 
-  Aquaculture production constitutes a 
means to diversify livelihood 
activities and improve livelihood 
outcomes 
-  Commitment to dedicate the 
necessary effort for success  
-  Resident in the community for at least 
five years, with no plans to leave 
-  Applicant age is between 18 and 55 
138.  Progressive outreach. The number of beneficiaries / HHs to be targeted in each 
district  should  be  relatively  consistent,  so  as  to  build  a  critical  mass  of  producers  to 
channel  fish to  markets  in  each location.  PRODAPE recognizes that this could  differ 
slightly  between  districts  due  to  the  characteristics  of  each  location.    For  planning 
purposes, it is expected that between 250 – 400 beneficiaries be reached in each district. 
139.  Outreach  to  beneficiaries  could  be  done  in  two  ways  either  by  increasing  the 
number of communities within a given district over the project´s lifetime or expanding 
the  number  of  beneficiaries  in  each  community  targeted  over  time.    The  choice  over 
how to approach this should be made at local level according to what works best in each 
district.    Table  17  provides  an  example  of  how  the  progressive  beneficiary  outreach 
could be implemented.  Final decisions in this respect should be made at the start of the 
project and confirmed on a yearly basis. 
Table 17: Potential outreach approach for PRODAPE beneficiaries at district level 
14
 The exception to this criteria is having been relocated through a resettlement scheme or relocation due to 
family reasons.    Seasonal workers or people who are not permanent residents of the community cannot 
apply for project support for engagement in aquaculture farming. 
140.  Determining  the  number  of  beneficiaries  at  community  level.  At  community 
level PRODAPE targeting efforts will be operationalized as follows: 
141.  The  number  of  beneficiaries  to  be  supported  in  each  community  will  be 
determined  at  district  level  on  the  basis  of  the  total  number  of  beneficiaries  to  be 
reached in the district, the number of HHs in the community interested in participating 
in the project  and stipulated technical criteria already referred to in this document.  
142.  Table 18 provides easy to follow formulas to determine the number of people to 
be chosen in each community from each socio-economic category.  It also indicates the 
age and gender that these beneficiaries need to align with for the PRODAPE targeting 
approach to be effectively implemented. 
Table 18: Number of new fish farmers to be reached by group, gender and age per 
POOR / SUBSISTANCE 
SMALLHOLDERS  
community 
ECONOMICALLY ACTIVE / 
ENTREPRENEURIAL 
SMALLHOLDERS  
Total beneficiaries in community 
Total beneficiaries in community 
*40% = a 
Youth 
ag
ed 
18-
24 
*60% = b 
Youth 
ag
ed 
25-
25  WHHs 
Youth 
ag
ed 
18-
24 
Youth 
aged 
25-25 
TOTAL 
WHHs 
a*20%  
a*10% 
a*30%  
b*20%  
b*10% 
b*30%  
No quotas as such have been established for people with disabilities; rather 
143. 
than establishing a rigid number or proportion, PRODAPE will ensure that people with 
disabilities who would have the necessary cognitive and physical capacity to engage in 
activities supported by the project  are considered and given priority in  the beneficiary 
selection process. 
D.  Community mobilization and beneficiary selection. 
144.  The  information  presented  up  to  now  constitutes  the  basis  to  implement  the 
targeting  strategy.    This  section  presents  information  in  relation  to  community 
implementing  actually  selecting  beneficiary, 
mobilization  and 
highlighting the important role played by community members in the process. 
the  process  of 
145.  Community  mobilization.  A 
team  comprised  of  PRODAPE 
selected 
representatives authorised to work in each specific district will be in charge of the initial 
community  mobilization  activities.    Project  related  mobilization  activities  will  be 
implemented in close coordination with local and sector authorities, as well as the PCU. 
The  mobilization  phase  will  start  with  community  meetings  with  leaders  and  will  be 
followed  by  large  community  meetings,  and  the  establishment  of  “PRODAPE 
Community Committee”, as described below: 
●  Meetings with community leaders. Information is disseminated among community 
structures  and  other  influential  people  within  the  community,  with  the  objective 
getting  buy-in  is  for  the  project,  its  strategies  and  inclusive  and  participatory 
management approaches (this will include agreeing on the process to be followed 
to establish a “PRODAPE Community Committee”;  
●  Large  community  meetings.  Community  meetings  will  be  held  in  target 
communities to disseminate information about:  
-  Project objectives, targets, strategies and activities 
-  Project socially inclusive targeting strategy  
-  Number of people to be targeted in the community 
-  Details related to sub-groups to be targeted and associated targeting quotas  
-  Application process and selection criteria 
-  Participatory management approach 
-  PRODAPE grievance mechanism15 
-  The establishment of a Community Committee for PRODAPE with wide social 
representation 
-  Identifying  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  project  related  information  reaches 
people who do not usually participate in community meetings (likely to include 
people  who  are  ill,  older  people,  people  with  disabilities  and  the  poorest 
members of the community) 
-  Clarify any questions arising in relation to the project 
Establishment of PRODAPE Community Committees.  PRODAPE Community 
146. 
Committees  will  be  established  in  each  community  in  which  ponds  are  built  or  cage 
farming promoted.  The Committee will be established at the beginning of the project 
under the facilitation of project staff, ensuring that those elected represent the interests 
of  all  social  groups  and  that  people  are  selected  truly  represent  their  peers.  The 
Committee  will  host  an  uneven  number  of  members  (to  facilitate  decision-making), 
between 9 to 15 people, of which half should be men and half women and roughly 40% 
should  be  aged  18-35.    Box  1  provides  some  guidance  on  how  the  group  could  be 
structured. 
The  Community  Committee  will  be  the  point  of 
147. 
contact  between  the  project  and  the  community  and  will 
the  project´s 
represent  community 
interests 
participatory  management  approach. 
the 
Committee  will:  receive  individual  applications  for  project 
support, assess and select applications, announce results to the 
wider community, participate in regular PRODAPE planning 
and  reporting  meetings  organized  at  local  level.    Additional 
mandates can be established on a case by case basis.   
  Concretely, 
through 
The Committee will receive special guidance and any 
148. 
required  clarifications  in  relation  to  the  project´s  inclusive 
targeting  approach,  will  be  sensitized  on  the  benefits  of  a 
socially  inclusive  project  and  the  need  for  proportionate 
representation  and  participation  of  all  social  groups  in  the 
Committee.  Committee  members  will  be  selected  with  the 
frequency deemed convenient by the group. 
Box 1: Structure of 
PRODAPE Community 
Committee 
2-3 leaders 
2 WHHs (of different 
socio-economic groups) 
1 person with 
disabilities 
1 older person 
3-4 poor smallholders 
3-4 economically active 
smallholders 
15
 In addition to existing grievance mechanisms, which may be in place in the community, it is beneficial for a 
formal Project grievance mechanism to be in place, functioning and known by all.  Generally, this would 
entail  presenting  a  concern  /  grievance  to  the  PRODAPE  Community  Committee  or  one  of  its 
representatives under clauses of confidentiality. Should this mechanism prove ineffective for the person 
submitting the grievance, a second level should be involved, which could be a contact person at district, 
provincial  or  national  level.  The  PCU  should  constitute  the  third  level  of  recourse.    All  communities 
targeted will be made aware of the existence and functioning of this grievance mechanism. 
Submission  of  applications  from  community  members  and  selection  of  actual 
149. 
beneficiaries.  Following mobilization, community members of all social groups will be 
asked  to  submit  their  applications  for  participation  in  the  project  in  line  with  agreed 
eligibility criteria, within the specified timeframe. Applications will be submitted to the 
PRODAPE Community Committee.  
150.  Once  the  application  period  has  closed,  an  after  an  initial  screening  of  all 
applications  received  by  the  PRODAPE  Community  Committee,  a  list  of  all 
applications  processed  will  be  produced,  classifying  the  applications  in  line  with 
established  groups  (a.  poor  /  subsistence  smallholders;  b.  economically  active  / 
entrepreneurial smallholders; and c. not eligible applications).     The list will be shared 
in a community meeting to establish if all applications were indeed duly considered and 
any omissions or misclassifications addressed.   
Following, the PRODAPE Community Committee will attribute points to each 
151. 
application in line with the degree of compliance with established criteria and proceed 
with actual beneficiary selection. 
The participation of trusted community leaders and representatives of all social 
152. 
groups  in  this  process  is  expected  to  be  the  primary  pillar  for  transparency.    The 
establishment  and  sensitization  of  a  formal  “Grievance  Mechanism”  will  enable 
applicants to voice any concerns related to the way in which the process is conducted.   
The  list  of  selected  beneficiaries  will  be  announced  publicly  and  posted  in 
153. 
visible locations within the community.  Once announced, beneficiaries will be asked to 
constitute  groups  of  approximately  15-25  people,  in  line  with  local  preferences  (i.e. 
mixed groups, youth specific groups, gender-segregated groups) and model to be used 
locally (cluster or aquaparks).   
The  same  cycle  will  be  repeated  in  the  event  that  the  progressive  beneficiary 
154. 
outreach  mechanism  of  progressive  beneficiary  outreach  chosen  to  be  of  incremental 
support to beneficiaries in the same community (as opposed to targeting all beneficiaries 
in a given village and then moving to the next one.  
Screening and approval  of potential private sector beneficiaries.  Private sector 
155. 
players  participating  as  PRODAPE  beneficiaries  will  be  dealt  with  in  completely 
separate  fashion  and  through  different  processes  that  will  be  defined  in  the  course  of 
project  implementation.        What  is  important  to  highlight  here  is  that  private  sector 
players  applying  for  PRODAPE  support  will  be  subject  to  an  initial  project  screening 
process  and once pre-selected in  line  with  pre-established criteria, undergo a stringent 
due diligence process which for final project approval.    The due diligence process will 
involve  the  assessment  of  issues  such  as  professional  trajectory  and  reputation; 
institutional  capacity  and  commitment  to  reach  stipulated  objectives;  financial 
trajectory, capacity and integrity, among other issues.  PRODAPE reserves the right to 
refuse  any  private  sector  players  suspected  of  or  actually  found  to  be  engaged  in 
suspicious,  unethical  or  illegal  practices  or  whose  commitment  to  abide  to  pre-
determined technical, environmental and social standards cannot be assured. 
d.  PART FOUR: PRODAPE SUPPORTIVE FUNCTIONS  
A.  Planning, Monitoring & Evaluation, Learning and Knowledge Management 
   The  PRODAPE  integrates  participatory  M&E  processes,  learning  and  KM 
156. 
systems  and  the  development  and  use  of  communication  plans  in  accordance  with 
government frameworks and IFAD guidelines. Through these, PRODAPE will seek to 
steer  project  implementation;  support  economic  decisions;  contribute  to  policy 
implement 
development;  share  knowledge  and  scale  up  good  practices;  and 
communication strategy / plans that cater to the needs of project audiences. 
Planning  and  production  of  AWPBs.    Planning  is  necessary  for  good 
157. 
management.  The  PRODAPE  AWPBs  are  the  outcome  of  the  planning  process  to  be 
carried out by the project on a yearly basis. Through annual work planning, the project 
decides what activities will be carried out over a period of 12 months, attribute specific 
responsibilities  for  implementation,  allocate  resources  and  determine  the  timeframes 
within  which  they  will  be  implemented.  The  AWPB  is  therefore  a  planning  and 
management  tool  that  specifies  what  should  be  done  during  a  project  year,  how  they 
should  be  implemented  and  costs  involved.  It  is  also  an  essential  tool  to  guide  and 
coordinate interventions between various institutions and stakeholders. The AWPBs are 
also useful for monitoring and evaluation, as well as reporting purposes.  
141. 
   The PRODAPE AWPBs will be produced through participatory processes that 
start at the level of target communities, moving up to the district level, then provincial 
level and finally to national level.  In preparing the AWPB the Project will ensure that 
enough time is planned for consultation of relevant stakeholders at all levels.  
142. 
    A  draft  consolidated  AWPB  will  be  prepared  by  the  PCU  based  on  district 
and  provincial  level  plans  for  each  fiscal  year.  AWPBs  will  be  prepared  by  each 
DPMAIP,  Focal  Point  and  service  providers.  In  preparing  AWPBs,  narrative 
descriptions  should  be  concise  and  precise;  spreadsheets,  tables  and  figures  should  be 
used  to  illustrate  targets,  achievements,  costs  and  financing.  In  producing  the  overall 
AWPB  each  year,  the  PRODAPE  PCU  will  ensure  coordination  between  government 
agencies, IFAD funded projects, and other externally financed projects in the project´s 
target area. 
Figure 4: Process for the production PRODAPE AWPBs and reports 
143.  In preparing the AWPB, the PRODAPE PCU should: 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Be  aware  of  the  budget  available  to  identify  and  prioritize  critical 
investments;  
Anticipate the following project fiscal  year’s budget to avoid a shortage of 
funds for the succeeding year;  
Use the Project Logical Framework a key reference, to create clear linkages 
between  planned  activities,  proposed  budgets,  expected  outputs,  outcomes 
and impacts (annual targets vs. achievements);  
Consider  other  PRODAPE  resource  documents,  including  the  detailed 
project cost tables, financing rules - as defined in the financing agreement, 
together with annual progress and outcome reports; 
Include  a  detailed  description  of  planned  activities  and  an  updated 
procurement  plan,  which  clearly  identifies  the  respective  funding  sources 
and categories. 
144. 
   An AWPB primarily consists of the following chapters, which first update the 
past achievements in the preceding year, then address the projections for the upcoming 
fiscal year: 
● 
Introduction,  background  and  summary  with  projections  for  the  upcoming 
fiscal year; 
● 
Summarized project description, including implementation arrangements; 
● 
Summary of physical  and financial achievements /  progress  (not applicable 
for the AWPB to be produced for the first year of project operations); 
●  Assessment  of  the  degree  of  implementation  of  the  precedent  AWPB, 
indicating proposed implementation focus for the upcoming year; 
●  Outline of the project´s strategic direction for the year, activities planned by 
component and resources required; 
● 
● 
Implementation schedule; activities should be presented in a logical manner; 
Implementation support needs, and summarised information on training and 
technical assistance schedules; 
●  Budget and financing plan; 
●  Annual procurement plan; 
● 
Summarised  information  on  expected  benefits  and  project  outreach  for  the 
year; 
●  M&E plan. 
145. 
     Overall,  the  project  planning  cycle  and  calendar  will  be  led  by  the  PCU 
hosted  in  the  MIMAIP  in  collaboration  with  the  IDEPA  as  the  Lead  Implementing 
Agency  in  coordination  with  relevant  DPMAIPs.    The  planning  cycle  will  follow  the 
GoM´s  planning  and  budgeting  cycle.  Table  3  provides  indicative  information  on  the 
planning calendar to be followed to ensure that AWPBs can be approved both the GoM 
and IFAD within expected timeframes. 
Table 19: Schedule to guide PRODAPE planning towards AWPB production and 
approval 
N
º 
1 
Planning Activity 
Needs assessment and 
selection of activities with 
reference to preceding 
AWPB, overall project 
plans and expected outputs / 
outcomes, progress made 
and trends observed at the 
level of implementing 
agencies  
Participatio
n / 
Responsibili
ty 
Completio
n Date 
Remarks 
Beneficiaries 
and 
participating 
agencies 
1st to 15th 
May (of 
current year 
to plan for 
following 
year) 
Allows for proper 
consultation with target 
communities, relevant 
institutions at district, 
provincial and national 
level. 
2 
Production of broad 
planning based on activities 
identified and cost estimates 
Participating 
agencies and 
PCU 
16 to 30th 
May  
Preparation and drafting of 
AWPB by implementing 
institutions and agencies  
3 
Participating 
agencies and 
PCU 
1st to 7th 
June  
Provides time for the 
plans to be aggregated 
and presented in the 
required format. 
(District/SDAEs + 
DPMAIP/FP, 
DEPA/PCU). 
Provides time for the 
plans to be produced and 
presented in the required 
format 
(District/SDAEs + 
DPMAIP/FP, 
IDEPA/PCU). 
Completio
n Date 
Remarks 
8th to 21st 
June  
During this two-week 
period, the PCU 
consolidates the AWPB. 
N
º 
Planning Activity 
4 
Consolidation of 
PRODAPE AWPB 
Presentation of consolidated 
PRODAPE AWPB in the 
Annual Review Workshop  
5 
6 
Submission of PRODAPE 
AWPB through IDEPA / 
DEPI to National 
Directorate of Planning and 
Budget, DNPO (at MEF) 
for inclusion into National 
Budget 
Participatio
n / 
Responsibili
ty 
PCU – PC, 
M&E 
Specialist / 
IDEPA, 
Department 
for Studies, 
Planning and 
Infrastructur
e, (DEPI) 
PCU / 
IDEPA / 
DEPI 
22nd to 
30th June  
IDEPA/DEP
I 
1st to 31st 
July   
7  
MEF submits to the Council 
of Ministers 
MEF 
Early 
September 
8  
The Council of Ministers 
submits budgets to the 
Parliament 
MEF 
Early 
October  
9 
The PCU submits the first 
draft of the AWPB to IFAD 
for comments and / or 
provisional ‘No Objection’ 
PRODAPE 
PCU  
by 1st 
week of 
November 
10 
Preparation of final AWPB 
by PCU incorporating 
IFAD comments (if any) 
PRODAPE 
PCU  
December 
11 
The GoM National Budget 
is deliberated in Parliament 
National 
Assembly 
by 
December 
All implementing 
agencies participate in 
this yearly planning 
meeting. 
The MEF / DNPO 
receives and examines 
the proposed AWPB, 
raises queries or needs 
for clarification from 
IDEPA / PCU as 
required.  The 
PRODAPE PC provides 
immediate feedback 
when solicited. 
The MEF ensures that 
all Departments have 
submitted their budget 
through recommended 
procedures. 
The Council of 
Ministers reviews 
budgetary allocations 
and makes formal 
recommendations to be 
tabled in Parliament. 
The drafts submitted 
may require changes in 
anticipation of 
Parliamentary approval. 
IFAD review, comments 
and ´No Objection´ 
should be expected by 
the end of November. 
The National Assembly 
passes GoM budget, and 
by inference the IDEPA 
PRODAPE Budget is 
N
º 
Planning Activity 
Participatio
n / 
Responsibili
ty 
Completio
n Date 
Remarks 
approved 
 1
2 
The revised budget ceiling 
for IDEPA / PRODAPE is 
indicated  
 MIMAIP 
(of the year 
that the 
AWPB 
correspond
s to) 
January                      
The Council of 
Ministers re-defines 
budgetary allocations to 
Ministries, Departments 
and Programmes (at 
varying levels) but 
reflects the overall 
Parliamentary ceiling. 
146. 
     The  AWPB  is  disaggregated  into  quarters  for  project  monitoring 
purposes.  If  required,  the  PCU  may  propose  adjustments  in  the  AWPB  during  the 
project  year,  which  will  become  effective  upon  approval  by  the  NPSC  and  IFAD. 
Figure 1 outlines the general process for the production of AWPBs. 
147. 
    AWPB  Deadline  for  Submission.  The  PCU  will  submit  a  draft 
consolidated AWPB to IFAD for comments and approval by November of each year. If 
no  further  requests  are  presented  by  IFAD  on  the  draft  AWPB  within  30  days  after 
receipt, the AWPB shall be deemed approved. Once approved the PCU will submit the 
AWPB to the Technical Council at MIMAIP for its final approval or endorsement.  
148.  As  stated  above,  annual  stakeholder  review  and  planning  workshops  will  be 
organized  at  different  levels  every  year  to  assess  progress  and  support  the  AWPB 
preparation  process.  This  process  shall  however  not  be  carried  out  in  the  first  year  of 
operations as the first AWPB and procurement plan for the first 18 months of operations 
have been prepared by the design mission team as a part of PDR.  
B.  Monitoring and Evaluation   
149.  The key functions to  be  assumed by PRODAPE  in  relation  to  M&E will be to 
support  project  management  in  ensuring  critical  performance-oriented  reflection, 
integrating lessons  learnt to  maximize impact  and presenting results for  accountability 
purposes16.  The main purpose of M&E activities is to keep track of day-to-day progress 
to identify shortcomings promptly in relation to the delivery of inputs, implementation 
of  activities  and  the  achievement  of  outputs,  so  as  to  adopt  corrective  measures  on  a 
timely  manner.  As  such,  M&E  will  be  an  integral  part  of  PRODAPE  implementation 
responsibilities  under  the  PCU,  specifically  by  the  M&E  Specialist.    However,  data  / 
information  will  be  fed  into  by  implementers  at  all  levels.  The  PRODAPE  M&E 
Framework  will  function  on  the  basis  of  systematically  collecting,  analysing  and 
reporting information at three levels:  
●  Outputs.  PRODAPE  will  measure  outputs  based  on  the  measurement  of  output-
level  indicators.    Data  will  be  obtained  from  the  project´s  activity  monitoring 
system,  GoM  records  and/or  audits.  The  output  level  monitoring  will  look  at 
physical  and  financial  progress  as  laid  out  in  the  AWPB,  as  well  as  component 
and activity-based technical action plans formulated by the PCU. 
●  Outcomes.  Outcome  monitoring  will  measure  the  immediate  changes  resulting 
from  PRODAPE  interventions.  Data  for  outcome  monitoring  will  be  collected 
through  annual  impact  /  outcome  surveys  starting  from  the  third  year  of 
16
 The IFAD Guide for Project M&E is to be referred to while developing the Project M&E Framework:  
http://www.ifad.org/evaluation/guide/index.htm.  
operations.  These  annual  surveys  may  also  be  carried  out  for  specific  topics,  as 
required by the project.  Further, PRODAPE´s M&E Framework will explore the 
use  of  innovative  models  of  data  collection  and  monitoring  of  HH-level 
satisfaction and participation for outcome indicators for (technical) Components 1 
and 2. These may include mobile phone and tablet based monitoring exercises. 
●  Impacts.  Measuring  impacts  entails  ascertaining  PRODAPE  contributions  in  the 
achievement of the overall project goal and project development objectives. This 
involves  measuring  changes  in  the  beneficiary  livelihood  activities  related  to 
activities  implemented  by  the  project.  Impact  evaluations  also  attempt  to  reveal 
the  efficiency,  effectiveness,  relevance,  sustainability  and  targeting  performance 
of  project  activities,  and  consider  replicability,  identify  lessons  learned  and 
knowledge  up-take  over  the  project´s  lifetime.  Such  evaluations  will  focus  on 
PRODAPE outcome and impact level indicators.  Data will be collected through 
periodic  surveys  (three  times  for  the  Project:  namely  at  beginning  /  baseline,  at 
mid-term and completion).  
150.  M&E  Framework  and  Strategy.    The  alignment  of  output,  outcome  and  impact 
level indicators to PRODAPE components, subcomponents and activities will serve as 
the  basis  for  the  project´s  comprehensive  M&E  Framework  and  Strategy  guiding  the 
project´s monitoring, evaluation and reporting system. This system will be in line with 
GoM  requirements,  IFAD´s  Country  Strategic  Opportunity  Programme  (COSOP), 
IFAD Operational Results Management System (ORMS-CIs) and PRODAPE´s Logical 
Framework. The PRODAPE M&E Framework and Strategy will include: 
●  The  Logical  Framework.  The  project  M&E  framework  will  be  designed  to 
measure project indicators specified in the Logical Framework; to track and verify 
the levels of achievement of project outputs, associated outcomes, and the success 
in achieving project objectives and development goal. This will be possible given 
the  causal  linkages  intrinsic  to  the  project´s  hierarchy  of  objectives  and  results. 
The  agreed  output  /  outcome  /  impact  measures  will  constitute  the  basis  for 
reporting  by  service  providers,  DPMAIP  /  FP  and  the  PRODAPE  PCU  to 
MIMAIP´s Technical Council and IFAD.  
●  Disaggregated  HH  data  and  indicators.  Special  attention  will  be  given  to  the 
project´s performance in terms of targeting effectiveness. Data will be collected at 
HH  level  will  be  disaggregated  by  socio-economic  strata  /  beneficiary  group, 
vulnerability  factors,  gender  and  age  of  the  HH  head.    Other  parameters  will  be 
considered, as required. 
●  ORMS. As per IFAD’s guidelines, the PRODAPE PCU will prepare and report on 
the  ORMS-CIs  at  output,  outcome  and  impact  levels.  Lower  level  indicators 
correspond  to  project  activities  and  respective  outputs  (included  in  the  logical 
framework); which measure financial and physical progress in quantitative terms. 
After mid-term, the PRODAPE will start reporting on what the “old IFAD RIMS” 
called “second level indicators” corresponding to project outcomes, which assess 
the  effectiveness  and  sustainability  of  project  interventions  in  a  qualitative 
manner.  Various  tools,  including  case  studies,  interviews  /  questionnaires,  focus 
group discussions, and other data collection methods can be used to measure and 
report on PRODAPE outcome indicators.  
●  M&E  Matrix  /  Plan.  A  Project  M&E  Matrix  /  Plan  will  be  used  to  elicit 
PRODAPE  data  and  information  needs  against  each  indicator,  potential  data 
sources that  can be used, frequency  and methods for data collection, monitoring 
and  reporting  responsibilities,  as  well  as  plans  associated  with  the  use  of 
information  collected  and  plans  on  how  to  disseminate  data  /  information 
collected.  The  M&E  Matrix  /  Plan  will  also  incorporate  the  project´s  baseline 
data.  
●  Participatory M&E.  To a large extent, the PRODAPE M&E Framework will be 
participatory,  involving  target  communities  in  the  process  of  monitoring  project 
activities. Participatory M&E process enable projects to capture project benefits, 
assess  participation  levels  in  project  related  activities,  capture  opinions  on  the 
timeliness and quality of project implementation and associated project processes, 
as  well  as  identify  potential  omissions,  challenges,  or  additional  needs  to  be 
considered by the project.  
●  Baseline Survey. The Baseline Survey will be carried out at the start of the project 
in  line  with  IFAD’s  reporting  requirements.  The  Baseline  Survey  will  use  the 
standard  RIMS  questionnaire  form  to  collect  key  beneficiary  data  including  HH 
assets  and  baseline  data  to  establish  the  prevalence  of  child  malnutrition  in 
participating  HHs,  with  a  few  added  questions  to  reflect  project-specific  impact 
data particularly concerning HH vulnerability. Participating HHs will be randomly 
selected from the project area.  
The  data  will  be  integrated  and  presented  also  in  the  Project  Geographic  Information 
System (GIS) / Management Information System (MIS). The baseline survey will 
add a third layer to RIMS surveys in order to include HHs outside the project area, 
which noticeably would not be influenced by PRODAPE activities, but could be 
influenced  by  other  factors.  The  baseline  survey  should  be  completed  within  3 
months with an estimated cost of USD 50,000.  The survey may be carried out by 
a service provider. 
●  Mid-Term  &  Project  Completion  Surveys.  Project  impacts  will  be  measured 
against  baseline  data  through  mid-term  and  project  completion  surveys,  which 
will be carried out just before the Mid Term Review (MTR) and towards the end 
of the project, timed so that that the respective results are available for the MTR 
and  Project  Completion Review  (PCR).  These  follow-on  surveys  will  be  carried 
out  in  the same manner  as the Baseline Survey.  Ideally efforts  are made  to  visit 
the same HHs so that developments in the course of project participation can be 
measured in  a longitudinal  manner; efforts  would be invested to  ensure that HH 
members  who  have  left  the  project  area  as  a  result  of  finding  employment 
elsewhere will be interviewed as well. 
●  The  Mid  Term  Review  constitutes  a  ‘forward  looking  review’  to  assess  target 
group perceptions of project impacts and benefits, especially poor and vulnerable 
HHs as well as the adequacy of targeting mechanisms and project strategies. The 
Joint Review will re-visit the project logic, objectives, assumptions and risks, and 
suggest  needed  adjustments  to  project  strategies,  approaches  and  methods. 
Institutional arrangements, including M&E, learning and KM and partnership will 
also object of such reviews. 
●  The  Project  Completion  Review  will  be  carried  out  in  Project  Year  6  by  an 
independent team and will focus on documenting the achievements of outputs and 
outcomes  per  component,  and  ultimately,  progression  towards  the  realisation  of 
the  Project  Goal.  Criteria  such  as  relevance,  effectiveness,  efficiency  and 
sustainability of interventions will be reviewed, building on findings of the Joint 
Reviews  /  Supervision  Missions.  Scale-up,  replicability  and  sustainability  of 
development  results  will  also  be  analysed.  The  completion  review  will  distil 
lessons to guide future sector interventions and other IFAD projects.  
C.  Progress Reporting 
154.  Regular  and  periodic  reports  will  be  generated  by  PCU,  DPMAIPs  /  FP  and 
service providers, to  document achievements, challenges, and to  habitually  review the 
goal, objectives, status of the project at various stages.  
155. 
 Monthly,  Quarterly,  Semi-Annual  and  Annual  Progress  Reporting.  Progress 
reports  provide  a  platform  for  analysing  cumulative  results/outputs  achieved  with 
respect to outcome and the overall goal  and will be used to guide the AWPB process. 
The  PCU,  together  with  relevant  DPMAIPs  /  focal  point,  will  be  responsible  for  the 
preparation  of  progress  reports  for  submission  to  the  GoM  and  IFAD.  The  PCU  and 
DPMAIPs / focal point will provide monthly, quarterly, semi-annual,  yearly and other 
reports,  as  per  the  guidelines  and  specified  formats  of  the  GoM.  In  addition,  the 
PRODAPE  will  report  progress  on  the  sixth-month  of  every  year  and  consolidated 
annual  progress  reports,  consistent with  IFAD's  project  performance  reporting system.  
In general progress reports will include the following information: 
a) 
b) 
Summarised  information  on  progress  made  in  the  implementation  of  the 
AWPB with achievements against annual targets;  
Summarised  information  on  cumulative  achievements  against  appraisal 
report targets together with summary information from any of related impact 
studies, where applicable; 
c)  Detailed progress on implementation by component; 
d)  An analysis of strength and weaknesses, opportunities and threats; 
e)  A summary of expenditures relative to PRODAPE disbursement targets; 
f)  A summary of successful approaches used and lessons learned; 
g) 
h) 
Information  on  constraints  encountered  during  the  reporting  period  and 
remedial actions taken; 
Information  in  relation  to  strategic  areas  of  intervention  for  the  next 
planning period; and  
i)  Way forward (this is the conclusion of the report based on the financial and 
physical progress, the analysis of Project performance, and progress towards 
achieving  Project  outcomes  and  impacts).Additional  guidelines  on  AWPB 
and Progress Report writing are attached as Annex 10 to this PIM.  
156.  Roles  &  Responsibilities.  The  overall  responsibility  for  M&E  and  Reporting 
will be vested in the PRODAPE´s M&E Specialist in the PCU, who work closely with 
the FP in the respective DPMAIPs. However, it is important to note that all staff will be 
involved in  monitoring  project  progress  in  their  own respective  areas of  expertise and 
responsibility.  The  M&E  Framework  and  Strategy  will  further  define  M&E  roles  and 
reporting responsibilities as well as timelines for reporting for each agency involved in 
Project implementation at all levels, in line with project reporting requirements. 
D.  Learning & Knowledge Management 
157. 
 Knowledge  management  is  a  valuable  tool  for  project  management  to  drive 
continued  assessment  of  project  implementation,  the  identification  of  innovation  and 
lessons  learnt  for  improved  performance  and  timely  achievement  of  targets.  Through 
M&E  activities,  large  amounts  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  data  /  information  are 
collected  and  analysed.  However,  KM  is  only  complete  when  the  best  practices  and 
lessons  learnt  are  integrated  into  management  and  associated  project  implementation 
processes.  
158.  Thus,  Learning  and  KM  will  be  implemented  as  an  integral  part  of  the 
PRODAPE  together  with  IDEPA,  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  project  will  be 
identifying,  testing,  demonstrating  and  disseminating  approaches  with  innovative 
technologies. The project will support a major learning process to overcome some of the 
conceptual  barriers  and  raise  awareness  about  the  models  piloted.  In  this  context,  the 
PRODAPE  M&E  system  will  constitute  the  foundation  of  the  project´s  KM  and 
learning  system  and  will  be  an  essential  instrument  to  capture  and  store  information 
related  to  the  indicators  detailed  in  the  results  framework.  Case  studies,  stakeholder 
interviews and surveys will be used to deepen understanding of the factors contributing 
to success and failure and to enable full documentation of impacts at beneficiary level. 
159.  Learning and knowledge sharing within PRODAPE and MIMAIP. A vital factor 
for  the  success  of  PRODAPE´s  KM  strategy  is  the  existence  of  a  knowledge  sharing 
environment within the PCU, and more broadly within IDEPA, DPMAIPs and MIMAIP 
as a whole, as well as among other implementing partners. In this regard, efforts will be 
made  for  key  staff  to  understand  the  role  played  by  KM  in  project  success.  The  PCU 
together  with  IDEPA  will  identify  KM  champions  interested  in  leading  efforts  in  this 
respect and act as FPs for KM issues. 
160.  The  establishment  of  effective  communication  at  all  levels  is  critical  raise 
awareness, promote actual learning and the adoption of new approaches and practices. 
Communication  facilitates  multi-stakeholder  engagement  and  encourages  participation 
of  target  groups.  Communication  with  the  wider  public,  including  the  media,  will 
facilitate  sharing  project  experience,  emerging  lessons  and  raise  awareness  about  the 
importance  attracting  investment  into  the  rural  economy,  encourage  entrepreneurship, 
and encourage young people that opportunities do exist in rural areas.   
161.  The  PRODAPE  communication  plan  will  be  integrated  in  PRODAPE´s  M&E 
system.    It  will  facilitate  effective  and  efficient  communications  with  the  various 
audiences  involved  in  the  project.  Both  the  M&E  and  KM  and  Communication 
Specialists  will  prepare  their  respective  action  plans  for  KM  and  communication.  The 
plans  will  integrate  activities  from  IFAD´s  Good  Practice  and  Innovation  Tracking 
System,  learning  routes,  together  with  documentation,  dissemination  and  learning 
activities. The action plans will be integrated in the AWPB and will be updated every 
year.  During  the  preparatory  phase  the  M&E  and  KM  Specialists  will  ensure  that  the 
communication activities effectively reach women, youth and poorer HHs; these groups 
deserve special attention, as they are often not reached through normal communication 
channels used in communities due to having lesser participation in community affairs. 
162.  For  effective  learning  and  KM,  the  project  will  differentiate  between  two 
approaches: 
●  Action-based  learning  and  KM  that  takes  place  within  and  during  the  project  to 
enhance  project  performance  by  identifying  immediate  responses  and  corrective 
actions to pressing problems; 
●  Learning  and  KM  for  informed  GoM  and  IFAD  decision-making  and  policy 
dialogue. 
163.  Key elements of the Project’s KM and learning strategy include the following: 
●  Establishment  of  the  M&E  System  to  provide  information  and  analysis  on 
progress achieved against the project´s Logical framework, ORMS, and AWPB; 
●  Routine  planning,  review  and  M&E  workshops  at  various  levels  to  effectively 
capture  and  consolidate  challenges  faced,  solutions  encountered  and  lessons 
learned; 
●  Participatory M&E involving beneficiary groups and representatives; 
●  Yearly 
targeted  outcome  assessment  surveys  and  associated  evaluation 
workshops; 
●  Regular  production  and  communication  of  knowledge  products  displaying  good 
aquaculture practices on television, radio, internet, and others, as relevant; 
●  PCU  sharing  experiences  and  lessons  learnt  to  promote  aquaculture  publicly, 
using online exchange platforms (including IFAD Country Offices), as relevant.  
E.  Financial Management and Audit  
164. 
 This  section  of  the  PIM  provides  detailed  information  on  the  systems, 
procedures  and  steps  to  be  used  by  PRODAPE  in  relation  to  financial  management, 
audit and procurement.  Information in this section aligns to  GoM and  IFAD policies, 
practices and standards and should be followed at all times by the project management 
team. 
165.  Financial  Management.    The  financial  management  section  focuses  on  issues 
related  to  the  flow  of  PRODAPE  funds,  policies  and  procedures  and  the  financial 
management  cycle.    The  project  will  follow  GoM  accounting  policies  and  procedures 
prescribed  in  the  State  Financial  Administration  Manual.  This  section  outlines 
additional  project–specific  financial  procedures  and  practices  to  be  followed  by  the 
PCU  during  implementation  and  include  all  required  information  in  relation  to 
budgeting,  accounting,  funds  flow  management,  internal  controls,  financial  reporting, 
project  audits  and  supervision.  The  financial  management  aspects  of  the  project  will 
further  be  guided  by  the  following  key  documents:  (i)  PRODAPE    Financing 
Agreement;  (ii)  IFAD  General  Conditions;  (iii)  Letter  to  the  Recipient;  (iv)  IFAD 
Guidelines  on  Project  Audits;  (v)  Disbursement  Handbook;  and  (ix)  the  PRODAPE 
design  report.  Therefore,  it  is  fundamental  that  project  staff,  especially  the  Project 
Coordinator (PC) and the Finance Manager master these documents in the early stages 
of project implementation. 
●  FLOW OF FUNDS 
166.  Designated and operating accounts. IFAD funds will be channelled into a USD 
designated account maintained at the BoM. The funds will then be channelled into the 
Single Treasury Account (CUT) managed by the MoF via a transit USD account from 
where  the  funds  are  converted  into  MZN  at  the  ruling  exchange  rate  on  date  of 
conversion.  The  funds  in  the  CUT  are  managed  through  coded  designated  ledger 
accounts ensuring traceability of project funds. Each target DPMAIP and implementing 
agency shall maintain a separate account in CUT to receive the project funds from the 
PCU.   
167.  The PCU will have the  responsibility of coordinating  and  ensuring the smooth 
flow  of  funds  so  that  funds  are  available  as  and  when  necessary  to  meet  PRODAPE 
financial  obligations  towards  suppliers,  service  providers  and  contractors.  This  will 
involve: (i) establishing the liquidity requirements of each implementing agency based 
on the approved AWPB; (ii) preparing and dispatching bank transfer instructions to the 
BoM  to  warrant  sufficient  liquidity  in  the  operational  account  at  all  times;  (iii) 
following up on any funds advanced to implementing agencies and ensuring the timely 
justification  thereof;  (iv)  maintaining  the  supporting  documentation  underlying 
expenditures  incurred  by  the  project  in  order  to  prepare  withdrawal  applications  for 
submission  to  IFAD;  and  (v)  ensuring  that  the  IFAD  authorized  allocation  is  fully 
accounted for at all times through the preparation of periodic reconciliation statements 
for  designated  accounts.  All  movements  from  the  designated  account  will  require 
countersignature by the authorized representative of the GoM.    
168.  The  GoM  will  be  implementing  an  integrated  procurement  module  in  e-
SISTAFE  in  fiscal  year  2019  to  enhance  the  country’s  procurement  and  budgetary 
control systems. The implication is that all committed funds will not be available in the 
CUT. Long-term procurements and delays in completion of a procurement process may 
hold up funds in the CUT. As expenses can only be included in withdrawal applications 
when  payment  is  affected,  the  project  could  experience  liquidity  challenges.  To  avert 
this,  the  authorised  allocation  to  the  designated  account  will  be  set  and  reviewed 
regularly to ensure its adequacy. Further, the Finance Manager at the PCU shall ensure 
timely  submission  of  withdrawal  applications  to  IFAD  either  once  after  90  days  have 
elapsed from the submission of the previous withdrawal application or when the amount 
withdrawn from the designated account is equal to about 20-30% of the advance, even if 
90  days  have  not  elapsed.  Further  disbursement  details  and  procedures  are  to  be 
included  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  (LTB).  The  threshold  of  direct  payments  from 
IFAD  will  be  limited  only  to  large  payments  over  the  equivalent  of  USD  100,000.  
Figure 5 illustrates PRODAPE fund flow. 
Figure 5: PRODAPE fund flow chart 
169. Signatories to PRODAPE bank accounts will be as follows: 
Designated account 
The  designated  account  will  be  operated  fully  by  the  staff  of 
MoF as the official recipient.  
For any transfers from the designated account to the operations 
account  will  require  that  PRODAPE’s  PCU  write  to  the  MoF 
requesting such a transfer. On receipt of the request the office of 
the MoF will process the transfer request. 
For  a  payment  to  go  through  it  must  have  two  signatures;  one 
from category A and another from Category, as follows: 
Category    A  signatures:  IDEPA  Director  &  IDEPA  Deputy 
Director 
Operational 
accounts 
Category  B  signatures:  PRODAPE  Accountant  &  PRODAPE 
Coordinator 
●  IDEPA Director 
●  IDEPA Deputy Director 
●  PRODAPE Accountant 
●  PRODAPE Coordinator 
Signatories  
170.  It must be noted that IFAD Supervision Missions will always be interested in the 
following: 
a)  Timeliness  of  funds  disbursed  by  different  sources  (and  co-financiers  funding  if 
applicable); 
b) Timeliness of counterpart funds disbursed; 
c)  Efficiency of the funding channels; timeliness and traceability of funds flows;  
d) Designated account and operating account management; disbursements; 
●  Adequacy of the authorized allocation to ensure a smooth flow of funds;  
●  Appropriateness of disbursement methods used; 
●  Adequacy  of  documentary  support  for  Statement  of  Expenditure  (SOE) 
disbursements, reimbursements, directs payments and special commitments;  
●  Timely preparation and accuracy of withdrawal applications; 
●  Authorization of withdrawal applications preparation; 
●  Status  on  expenditures  withdrawn  from  the  designated  account  but  not  yet 
claimed for replenishment (old cases will be queried); 
●  Regularity  of  designated  account  monitoring  and  monthly  reconciliations 
signed  by  the  Project  Coordinator;  Supervision  Missions  will  always  review 
and assess the reconciliations; and 
●  Disbursement  rate  against  AWPB  and  whether  satisfactory  given  the 
implementation time remaining. 
171.  Recognition,  Measurement  and  Disclosure  of  PRODAPE  Beneficiary  and 
Government in-kind Contributions: 
a)  Participating  beneficiaries  will  contribute  to  the  project  by  providing  seed  and 
feed.  Government  will  contribute  to  the  programme  in  form  of  staff  salaries  for 
government  staff 
financial 
management system will ensure that expenditures are recognized and recorded in 
the accounting system only when  incurred; 
the  programme. 
implementing 
  PRODAPE 
b) Contribution  shall  be  considered  as  incurred  expenditures  by  beneficiaries  or 
government if they meet the eligibility rules drawn up on the basis of the agreed 
AWPB as well as project costs, and the amount of expenditure is duly justified by 
supporting documents having equivalent probative value to invoices; 
c)  All in-kind contributions are recognised as assets and revenue when it is probable 
that  the  future  economic  benefits  or  potential  service  will  flow  to  the  entity  and 
the fair value of the assets can be measured reliably;  
d) In-kind contributions shall be recognised at fair market value. “Fair market value” 
is  defined  as  the  agreed-upon  price  in  an  open  and  unrestricted  market  between 
knowledgeable  and  willing  parties  who  are  dealing  at  arm’s  length  and  who  are 
fully informed; 
e)  In  case  of  government  employees  working  on  PRODAPE,  the  actual  portion  of 
salary  cost  of  staff  assigned  to  fulfil  duties  specifically  and  necessary  to 
PRODAPE will be the fair market value of the government contribution; 
f)  In the case of seed and feed cost pre-financed by PRODAPE beneficiaries, the fair 
market  value  shall  be  the  actual  invoiced  amount  by  the  supplier  duly 
authenticated by PRODAPE Monitoring and Evaluation staff;  
g) It is the ultimate responsibility of the PRODAPE Finance Manager to ensure that 
the  reported  fair-market  value  for  all  items  involving  an  in-kind  contribution  is 
reasonable, as well as correctly and fully disclosed in its financial statements. 
●  THE FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CYCLE 
172.  Financial  management  in  Government  Projects  such  as  PRODAPE  is  to  be 
established as a routine and highly standardised process and will follow an annual cycle 
of inter-dependent steps. It will start with planning and budgeting. In financial control, 
any expenditure incurred outside the approved budget will be declared ineligible for 
IFAD financing. After the AWPB is approved together with the procurement plan, the 
next step is the process of committing funds. Following on from commitments will be 
the treasury functions, payments to eligible contractors, service providers and suppliers. 
The  finance  team  will  have  to  exercise  efficiency  in  turnaround  of  withdrawal 
applications to IFAD to ensure liquidity challenges do not hamper implementation. The 
final  phase  in  the  financial  management  cycle  is  financial  reporting  and  auditing.  
Figure  6  depicts  the  financial  management  cycle.    This  is  followed  by  a  detailed 
description of each of the steps involved in the process. 
Figure 6. The PRODAPE (yearly) financial management cycle 
a.  Step 1: Budgeting and budget control 
173.  PRODAPE  budgeting  is  reflected  in  the  project´s  yearly  AWPB.    The  AWPB 
constitutes  a  key  instrument  for  PRODAPE  implementation  and  operational  control. 
Once  approved,  it  guides  day-to-day  financial  management,  and  serves  as  a  guiding 
document indicating the  activities to  be implemented and the  resources  available. The 
AWPB is more than a guideline, it represents: 
a)  The  commitment  of  the  PCU  and  implementing  agencies  to  carry  out  a  set  of 
activities, produce specific outputs and achieve certain targets; and 
b) The agreement by the GoM and IFAD, that the activities planned are appropriate 
in light of the PRODAPE objectives. 
174.  The AWPB is a means by which the GoM and IFAD will have provided  “prior 
approval”  to  the  PCU  to  spend  resources  on  the  activities  included  in  the  AWPB.  It 
should be taken very seriously, as any expenditure incurred outside the AWPB will be 
queried  by  auditors,  supervision  missions  and  will  be  declared  ineligible  for  IFAD 
financing. 
175.  The detailed steps to be followed in the preparation of the AWPB are included in 
the  IFAD  Guidelines  for  Preparation  of  AWPBs  and  Progress  Reports.  All  matters 
related to procurement planning are dealt with under the Procurement Manual. 
176.  It  is  equally  important  that  AWPB  preparation  schedule  be  in  tandem  with 
Government  budgetary  process  since  PRODAPE  budget  should  pass 
through 
Government budgetary approval process and PRODAPE must be included in the GoM 
printed budget estimates. 
177.  With  reference  to  the  detailed  AWPB  preparation  schedule,  the  PCU  will 
undertake  the  following  steps  to  ensure  that  the  approved  AWPB  is  finalised  and 
distributed to implementing agencies by the beginning of the new fiscal  year:  (i) The 
PCU  shall  submit  to  IFAD  the  draft  AWPB  submitted  for  parliamentary  approval  for 
No  Objection  by  end  of  September;  (ii)  The  IFAD  Country  Portfolio  Manager    shall 
collate  IFAD’s  comments  on  the  draft  AWPB  by  mid-November;  (iii)  The  PCU  shall 
submit  IFAD’s  changes  on  the  AWPB  to  the  MoF  for  approval  and  update  in  e-
SISTAFE  by  end  November;  (iv)  The  PCU  shall  distribute  the  approved  AWPB  to 
implementing institutions by the end of December, in time for the new fiscal year. 
178.  In the planning and budgeting stage, the PRODAPE the finance team performs the 
four functions below: 
Figure 7: Roles of PRODAPE staff in the budgeting process 
179.  Role  1:  Avail  the  status  of  funds  available  to  all  PRODAPE  technical  staff. 
Technical  project  staff  will  play  an  important  role  budget  preparation  for  activities  in 
their  respective  realms  of  responsibility.  This  does  not  however  imply  that  technical 
coordinators can dispose of the component budgets on their own, as sub-components are 
interrelated;  PRODAPE  budgeting  will  be  done 
team 
management approach.  
integrated 
through 
the 
1234Avail the technical coordinators status of available balances Quantify  other restricting factorsConsolidation and presentation of budget tablesTreasury planning 
Table 20: PRODAPE Budgeting holders / responsibility centres 
Budget Unit (per project sub-component) 
1.1 Develop fish seed production capacity 
1.2 Develop fish feed production capacity 
1.3 Develop smallholder aquaculture production 
capacity 
1.4 Mainstreaming nutrition and addressing social 
risks 
2.1 Develop aquaculture business partnerships 
2.2 Develop financial services 
2.3 Develop market linkages 
3.1 Project management 
3.2 Institutional capacity building 
3.3 Policy development  
Responsible 
Technical Officer 
Aquaculture Specialist 
Aquaculture Specialist 
Aquaculture Specialist 
Nutritionist 
Value Chain Specialist 
Value Chain/ 
Marketing Specialist 
Value Chain/ 
Marketing Specialist 
Financial Manager 
M & E Specialist 
M & E Specialist 
180.  Prior to the start of the planning and budgeting exercise, the Finance / Contracts 
Manager provides each of the above budget holders the status of available balances and 
overall  category-wise  implications  for  their  respective  sub-components.  The  Financial 
Manager extracts the information from the accounting system and obtains from IFAD a 
status of funds balances available per category. The status of funds available should be 
adjusted  by  deducting  commitments,  withdrawal  applications  in  the  pipeline  and 
projected expenditures for the rest of the year. The adjusted information about the status 
of funds is provided to the budget holders to make them aware of budgetary ceilings. A 
working  form  in  Microsoft  Excel  can be used to determine the balance  available. The 
accounting software can assign historical expenditures to each of the planning units as 
described above as well as in the tables below. 
Table 21: Working form to determine the status of available balances (USD) by 
category of expenditure for IFAD grant 
Category 
Availabl
e Cash 
Balance
17 
Less 
Commitments
18 
Category 1 
Category 2 
Category 3 
Category 4 
Total 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Less 
Withdrawa
l 
Application
s in Pipe 
Line 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Less 
Projected 
Expenses 
by End of 
Year 
Net 
Availabl
e 
Balance 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
181.  The  net  available  balance  should  be  broken  down  by  components,  sub-
components  and  major  activity  headings  so  that  planners  are  able  to  determine  the 
relative weights for each component / sub-component in the AWPB as illustrated in the 
table below. It is important to keep a relative balance between components.  
17
 IFAD Flex cube Statement of Funds (convert to USD) plus balances for domestic financiers well reconciled to 
the computerized accounting system to be installed by PRODAPE. 
18
  Take care to rollover commitments into next year’s budget. 
Table 22: Working form to deduce status of available balance budget units (USD) by 
sub-component of expenditure for IFAD grant 
Budget Unit  
(per project sub-component) 
Available 
Cash 
Balance19 
Less 
Commitments
20 
1.1  Develop fish seed 
production capacity 
1.2  Develop fish feed 
production capacity 
1.3  Develop smallholder 
aquaculture production 
capacity 
1.4  Mainstreaming nutrition 
and addressing social risks 
2.1 Develop Aquaculture 
business partnerships 
2.2  Develop financial services 
2.3  Develop market linkages 
3.1  Project Management 
3.2  Institutional capacity 
building 
3.3  Policy development  
Total 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Less 
Projected 
Expenses to 
End of Year 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 Net 
Available 
Balance 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
182.  Role  2:  Quantifying  other  factors  restricting  disbursement.  Whereas  available 
balances may set the ceiling of what to include in the AWPBs, other restricting factors 
also  need  to  be  considered.  The  Financial  Manager  will  need  to  quantify  these  and 
communicate to the budget holders / sub-component heads at the start of the planning 
season. Examples of other restricting factors include: 
a)  The realistic amount that can be replenished from IFAD.  
b) Time lag between commitment and disbursement.  
c)  Existing obligations to complete on-going works. 
183.  Role 3: Consolidating the PRODAPE AWPB. In the AWPB there is a number of 
finance  tables  that  have  to  be  consolidated  by  the  Financial  Manager  and  his  or  her 
team,  working  closely  with  the  M&E  Officer.  While  the  consolidation  of  the  AWPB 
into  one  document  will  be  led  by  the  M&E  Officer,  the  finance  tables  will  be  a 
responsibility of the Financial Manager. The tables will include: 
a)  Cumulative financial performance for the previous year  
b)  Consolidated annual budget summary 
c)  Summary expenditure/receipts by category per financier 
d)  Summary of expenditure/receipts by component per financier 
e)  Detailed activity based AWPBs for each budget responsibility centre 
184.  The  formats  for  each  of  the  above  summary  tables  are  available  in  the  IFAD 
Guidelines for AWPB Preparation and Progress Reports. 
19
 This will be as per PRODAPE accounting system. 
20
 Take care to rollover commitments into next year’s budget. 
185.  Role 4: Treasury planning. As part of the AWPB preparation and processing the 
Financial  Manager  will  earmark  the  bigger  items  that  can  be  paid  for  through  direct 
payments  and those that  have to  be paid  for from  the operational  bank  accounts. This 
will be translated into a monthly cash flow forecast to ensure there is sufficient liquidity 
even in peak periods. A sample AWPB template is provided in Annex 1. 
186.  IFAD  supervision  missions  will  be  interested  in  the  following  items  related  to 
work plan and budgeting: 
a)  Timely preparation and approval of AWPB; 
b) AWPB  compliance  with  expenditure  categories  as  per  Financing  Agreement 
(Schedule 2); 
c)  Identification  of  financing  sources  and  implementing  agencies  for  each  category 
in the AWPB; 
d) Linkage between AWPB and procurement plan.  
b.  Step 2: Committing funds 
187.  Commitment  of  funds  is  largely  a  procurement  function  covered  under  the 
project´s procurement manual. However, the finance team will have a role to play in the 
procurement cycle, including: 
a)  Providing  the  status  of  available  balances  ahead  of  each  procurement  launch  to 
avoid  over-committing  PRODAPE  /  GoM  funds.  This  will  require  that  the 
Financial Manager maintains a detailed analysis of commitments; 
b) This means contracts cannot be signed off without the Financial Manager entering 
existing commitments into the system; 
c)  The  authentication,  custody  and  execution  of  any  financial  instruments  such  as 
performance  bonds,  advance  guarantees  will  be  a  responsibility  of  the  Project 
Accountant; 
d) Elements  of  financial  progress  in  the  contract  monitoring  forms  will  be  a 
responsibility of the Project Accountant. 
c.  Step 3: Treasury function including the accounting system 
188.  PRODAPE  shall  deploy  the  integrated  public  financial  management  information 
system,  e-SISTAFE,  comprised  of  sub-systems  for  budget,  accounting,  and  treasury, 
inventory,  state  assets  management  and  internal  controls.  However,  the  system  is 
deemed  not  user-friendly  for  the  preparation  of  IFAD  specific  financial  reports.  The 
MoF  has  advised  that  the  system  will  continue  to  be  upgraded  gradually  to  allow  for 
configuration  of  requested  reports.  PRODAPE  shall  therefore  install  and  implement  a 
parallel  off-the-shelf  accounting  software  package  to  compliment  e-SISTAFE  for 
financial  reporting  purposes  with  capability  to  record  and  report  transactions  by 
category, component, activity, cost-centre and financier. It is important that the general 
ledger balances of the two parallel systems are in balance at each the reporting date.   
189.  The project will use the GoM modified cash-basis accounting standards, which, in 
the  2015  Public  Expenditure  and  Financial  Accountability  (PEFA)  assessment,  were 
deemed to be close to International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) norms 
and could be considered comparable with those norms. The GoM is planning to adopt 
IPSAS accrual basis accounting standards within a period of 3-5 years. The project will 
follow  GoM  accounting  policies  and  procedures  prescribed  in  the  State  Financial 
Administration Manual. 
190.  Expenditure  attribution.  The  use  of  the  accounting  software  will  ensure  the 
traceability  of  the  funding.  In  this  manner,  activities  will  be  earmarked  –  right  from 
planning to be followed through by the accounting system up to withdrawal application 
– GoM financing or to the IFAD grant.  
191.  Records  Management.    Financial  records  must  be  created  and  preserved  for 
every  financial  transaction  performed  under  PRODAPE.  Financial  records  are  defined 
as  any  financial  information  including  written  documents,  computer  data,  internal 
forms, e-mails, or any other form of information storage originated from the PCU such 
as  internal  forms,  journal  vouchers,  financial  reports  (monthly  &  quarterly)  copies  of 
cheques  and  withdrawal  applications,  etc.  or  received  by  the  PCU,  such  as  supplier 
invoices and receipts, bank statements, IFAD documents, etc. within the framework of 
official  project  activities.  The  objective  of  this  procedure  is  to  preserve  the  financial 
records and files for further official use by the PCU, for financial audit and for review 
by IFAD during Supervision Missions. The project’s financial records are the property 
of MIMAIP and cannot be removed or destroyed.  
192.  Filing  of  financial  records.  The  Finance  team  will  maintain  chronological  files 
for all financial  documents  related to  PRODAPE. Filing should be performed daily to 
prevent  the  accumulation  of  papers  and  to  ensure  that  the  financial  records  are 
maintained in an up-to-date manner, at all times. Each financial record should be filed 
under  its  code  in  a  chronological  order,  with  a  sequential  number  assigned  to  every 
document.  Any  kind  of  additions  or  amendments  to  the  financial  document  should  be 
filed in a chronological order immediately following the principal document. A separate 
series of vouchers will be filed for each operational account opened. 
193.  Storage  of  financial  records.  In  accordance  with  IFAD  General  Conditions  the 
financial  records  of  the  project  should  be  stored  in  the  PCU  and  /  or  MIMAIP  for  a 
minimum  of  10  years  after  project  completion.  The  data  should  be  stored  within  the 
accounting  software,  as  paper  copies,  as  scanned  copies  and  as  computer  disc  copies. 
The  Financial  Manager  should  allocate  an  appropriate  storage  area  for  the  project´s 
financial records in paper format and maintain them in locked cabinets, safe from water 
and fire, to which access is controlled and limited. The Financial Manager should also 
classify 
important 
the  financial  records  as  "Confidential"  or  "General".  All 
correspondences should be filed. 
194.  Back-up  procedures.  To  avoid  the  loss  or  damage  of  financial  data,  the 
information should be kept in two copies: i) at the computer server and ii) in the locked 
cabinets  of  the  PCU.  Only  authorised  personnel  should  be  allowed  to  access  the 
financial  records.  The  access  of  external  persons  is  prohibited  except  for  authorised 
persons  such  investigators,  auditors  and  IFAD  staff  /  consultants  with  prior 
arrangement.  
195. 
In  addition,  PRODAPE  shall  deploy  an  e-archiving  system  currently  being 
piloted on IFAD/EU funded projects in Mozambique to be launched by the end of 2018. 
This involves digitising the hard copy supporting documents such as vouchers, receipts, 
procurement documents and withdrawal applications to safeguard them for a minimum 
of  10  years  after  project  closure.  The  server  for  the  e-archive  system  is  hosted  by  the 
MoF. This ensures availability of financial records by the borrower after project closure.  
The financial accounting information at each DPMAIP will be stored in the e-archiving 
system as well, under the supervision of the Financial Manager.  
196.  Under  the  area  of  accounting  system,  IFAD  missions  will  be  assessing  the 
following: 
a)  Basis of accounting; PRODAPE should comply with the cash basis of accounting 
and required disclosures; 
b) Adequacy and reliability of accounting system, therefore the project should ensure 
that it complies with internal controls around the accounting system; 
c)  Record-keeping (including documentation and filing / archiving); 
d) Fixed assets register maintained and reconciled; 
e)  Adequate  documentation  and  controls  for  information  systems,  including 
documented accounting procedures, backup of financial records, integration of all 
sub-systems; 
f)  Adequacy of chart of accounts for PRODAPE accounting purposes; 
g) Timeliness  in  recording  financial  transactions,  regularity  of  performance  and 
approval of reconciliations, controls on erroneous recordings; and 
h) Appropriate 
/  adequate  accounting  and  reporting  of  counterpart  funds 
contributions  (including  tax  and  tax  exemptions),  as  well  as  beneficiary 
contributions. 
197. 
Internal  controls  and  expenditure  documentation.    The  PRODAPE  is  a  GoM 
project  and,  therefore,  it  will  comply  with  GoM  allowances  for  travel  and 
accommodation  unless  otherwise  specifically  agreed  formally  between  IFAD  and  the 
GoM. The prevailing GoM field  and travel  related allowance rates  will be applied for 
PRODAPE activities. 
198.  Payment documentation.  For all payments, the Financial Manager should ensure 
compliance with the following steps: 
a)  Preparation of a payment request voucher for each payment.  
b) Validation  of  invoice.  The  following  validation  checks  should  be  performed  by 
the finance team for each invoice: 
●  Invoice is arithmetically correct; and 
●  Quantity  and  price  recorded  on  invoice  should  be  checked  back  to  contract, 
order,  and  certification  of  completion  /  delivery.  Any  discrepancy  identified 
should be raised with the vendor prior to proceeding with invoice processing. 
c)  Supporting  documentation.  The  following  documents  should  be  attached  to  the 
payment voucher to support validation: 
●  Invoice;  
●  Required approvals; 
●  Purchase order, receipt note and contract, if applicable; and 
●  Copy of required guarantees. 
199.  Minimum  documentation.  To  ensure  that  the  finance  unit  collects  all  required 
supporting  documents,  it  is  recommended  that  checklists  be  used.    Examples  of 
checklists are provided below.  Checklists should be carefully and duly filled in (ticked-
off) and attached to each payment voucher. 
Standard Goods 
(Tick) 
1.  Complete written voucher, duly approved 
2.  Confirmation by Procurement Officer that the 
Procurement was properly done in accordance 
with GoM and IFAD procedures 
3.  Attach copies of relevant No Objections from 
IFAD, where applicable 
4.  Availability of supporting documentation 
a)  Contract 
b) Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
d) Bank guarantee 
e)  Delivery notes/reports (Make Cross 
Reference where bulky) 
5.  Fund availability in: 
a)  Budget.  Ensure E-SISTAFE budget 
controls have been updated 
b) Category(ies) 
6.  Accuracy of computations / footings 
7.  Reviewed optimality of the disbursement 
method 
8.  Banking instructions 
9.  Correspondence bank 
10. Percentage of financing 
In-Country Workshops 
(Tick) 
 Attendance sheets 
 Attendance sheets should be reconciled to 
1. 
2. 
DSA paid 
3. 
 Availability of supporting documentation 
a)  Training report 
b) Hotel receipts / bills for meals and 
accommodation (should be reconciled to 
attendance sheets) 
 Procurement record on how the venue was 
 Justification for any fuel refunds and 
4. 
selected 
5. 
related support 
6. 
 Fund availability in 
a)  Budget.  Ensure E-SISTAFE  budget 
controls have been updated 
b) Category(ies) 
7. 
 Accuracy of computations / footings 
1.  Invitations and related IFAD’s No Objection  
2.  Availability of supporting documentation 
- Boarding passes reconciled DSA days 
taken 
- Back to Office Reports 
3.  Fund availability in 
- Budget.  Ensure E-SISTAFE  budget 
controls have been updated 
- Category(ies) 
4.  Accuracy of computations / footings 
Consultancies 
(Tick) 
1.  Timesheets in comparison with the work done  
2.  Attach copies of relevant No Objections from 
IFAD, where applicable 
3.  An acceptable / approved report  
4.  Availability of supporting documentation 
a)  Contract 
b) Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
d) Bank guarantee for advances 
5.  Fund availability in 
c)  Budget.  Ensure E-SISTAFE  budget 
controls have been updated 
a)  Category(ies) 
6.  Accuracy of computations / footings 
7.  Banking instructions 
Correspondence bank 
200.  Adequate  segregation  of  duties.  Within  the  PCU,  the  Project  Coordinator,  the 
Financial  Manager  and  Assistants  (including  Accountant),  will  constitute  “the  finance 
team” and will have overall responsibility for all financial management matters related 
to  PRODAPE.  With  this  structure  no  single  officer  is  allowed  to  originate,  process, 
approve or sign off payments or to certify the receipt of any related goods and services 
all by him / herself. Non-finance staff will also be involved in financial management in 
their capacities  as  users, providing technical  inputs  in  justifying expenditures incurred 
by the project.  As such,  even non-finance staff should  be cognisant of the contents  of 
the  financial  management  section  of    the  PIM  because  they  also  have  a  fiduciary 
responsibility  to  ensure  PRODAPE  funds  are  used  only  for  intended  purposes.    The 
Procurement  Unit  at  the  PCU  will  play  a  special  role  in  contractual  certification  of 
payments  before  these  are  passed  to  the  Finance  /  Contracts  Manager  for  payment 
processing.  
Figure 8: Staff segregation of duties in relation to payments within PRODAPE´s 
integrated management structure 
201.  It  is  worth  noting  that  IFAD  Supervision  Missions  will  also  look  into 
PRODAPE´s organisation and staffing, including the following issues: 
a)  Adequacy  of  organizational  structure  to  meet  the  project´s  functional  needs. 
Hence, the structure above should not be changed without IFAD concurrence; 
b) Availability of clear job descriptions for key project positions, including positions 
with fiduciary responsibilities; 
c)  Adequacy  of  project  financial  management  staff  (numbers  and  skill  level)  and 
correspondence to the project´s functional needs; 
d) Availability and adequacy of operating manuals and guidelines for staff; 
e)  Existence and use of a performance based appraisal system and timely completion 
of performance appraisals for all staff; 
f)  Adequacy of health insurance coverage for all staff; 
g) Timely payment of social security fees; and 
h) Staff  adequately  informed  about  IFAD’s  national  and  anti-corruption  policy  and 
relevant contact details. 
202.  Payments for consultancy  services.  There are two types of consultancy services: 
a) Consultants with a lump-sum contract; and b) Consultants with a time-based contract. 
For  type  (a)  consultants,  payments  will  be  made  against  the  delivery  of  outputs  as 
detailed in their contracts. For type (b) consultants, payments will be made against the 
submission  of  a  time  sheet,  a  report  on  activities  performed  and  the  assurance  (by  a 
technical  coordinator)  of  the  adequacy  of  services  rendered.  Both  time  sheets  and 
reports  will  need  the  technical  approval  of  the  technical  component  head  before  the 
payment can be executed. 
Figure 9 : PRODAPE payment approval process 
203.  Arrangements  similar  to  those  illustrated  above  will  be  put  in  place  to  assure 
segregation  of  duties  will  apply  for  regular  office  supplies  and  travel  related 
expenditures.  
204.  Fixed assets control.  Fixed asset management seeks to track fixed assets for the 
purposes of financial accounting and to ensure preventive maintenance and deter theft. 
Adequate fixed asset maintenance also increases the project sustainability. 
205.  Asset  register.  The  Financial  Manager  must  maintain  a  register  of  all  (material) 
PRODAPE  equipment.  The  asset  register  should  record  the  following  information  for 
each  individual  piece  of  equipment:  1)  Asset  description;  2)  Asset  number;  3)  Serial 
number of the item; 4) Officer responsible for asset; 5) Funding of asset (IFAD, GoM, 
etc.);  6)  Location;  7)  Date  of  purchase;  and  8)  Estimated  life.  Sample  forms  for  asset 
records are included at Annex 4. 
206.  Asset verification review. The Financial Manager must ensure that a verification 
count of all equipment recorded in the fixed asset register is performed at least once a 
year. This should include the following checks: 
a)  Verifying that all equipment is still held in the location recorded at register;  
b) Checking that equipment is still in a reasonable state; 
c)  Discrepancies between the verification exercise and the fixed asset register should 
be  investigated.  Where  assets  are  missing  or  seriously  damaged,  they  should  be 
removed from the asset register. The removal should be formally documented and 
approved by the Project Coordinator and notified to the NPSC. 
d) The verification review must be performed by different staff from those who use 
the equipment to ensure adequate segregation of duty. 
207.  Vehicle  Maintenance  and  Fuel.  Drivers  are  required  to  record  all  trips  and  fuel 
refills  in  the  vehicle  logbook.    All  supporting  documentation  must  be  kept  and 
submitted  (different  if  fuel  cards  /  vouchers  are  used).  The  vehicle  logbook  provides 
control over the use of the vehicles as well as fuel consumption. For official field trips, a 
special cash provision is given to drivers to allow them to purchase fuel during the trip 
and payment of tollgate fees, as relevant. 
208.  The  safety  of  vehicles  is  the  responsibility  of  the  recipient  staff  members  and 
drivers  assigned  to  the  vehicles.  Consequently,  they  must  ensure  that  the  vehicles  are 
parked in a secure area when not in use outside working hours. Drivers are required to 
monitor  the  maintenance  of  their  assigned  vehicles  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Accountant.  The drivers must notify the Accountant of maintenance needs  (including 
periodic  servicing)  so  that  the  vehicles  can  be  serviced  on  a  timely  basis.  Sample 
documents for vehicle and fuel management are presented in Annexes 6 and 7. 
209.  The  Financial  Manager  should  check  the  mileage  and  fuel  usage  on  a  monthly 
basis, as well as any undertaken service reported in the log book of each vehicle.  These 
should  also  be  compared  with  official  invoices  and  travel  authorizations,  etc.  to  make 
sure the numbers are accurate.  
210.  An insurance policy must  be taken by the PCU to  cover  all cars and passengers 
against all risks, including damage, theft and fire, as well as injury and property damage 
to third parties.  
211.  Under internal controls, IFAD missions will be keenly interested in the following 
aspects:  
a)  Segregation  of  duties:  are  the  following  functional  responsibilities  performed  by 
different units or persons:  
●  Authorization of transactions; 
●  Execution of transactions; 
●  Recording of transactions; and  
●  Custody of assets involved in the transaction. 
b) Clarity  and  adequacy  of  decision  processes  and  sequence  of  events  for  control 
functions  in  project  implementation  reflected  in  the  Financial  Manual  (or 
equivalent thereof). 
c)  Adherence to project management manuals. 
d) Effectiveness and efficiency of internal controls  over inflows of funding sources 
other than IFAD. 
e)  Adequacy of contract management (use of contracts register and monitoring form) 
and filing thereof. 
f)  Effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  internal  controls  over  expenditures  (full  cycle 
from  commitment,  payment,  receipt  of  goods  /  services,  approval  of  payments, 
classification, etc.)  
g) Documentary  evidence  to  confirm  delivery  and  acceptance  of  contracted  goods, 
works / services. 
h) Physical controls over cash, documents and records. Adequacy of filing systems. 
Missions  will  review  the  petty  cash  subject  to  monthly  reconciliation  as  well  as 
surprise checks; custody of cash box and control of keys. 
i)  Adequacy of physical management of cash. 
j)  Timely payment to suppliers / consultants. 
k) Eligibility of expenditures with respect to Financing Agreements. 
l)  Legality  /  eligibility  of  advances  from  project  funds  and  timely  justification  for 
use thereof.  
m) Compliance  with  financial  management  covenants  in  the  Financing  Agreement 
and Letter to the Recipient (LTR). 
n) Adequacy of up-to-date record keeping for fixed assets and inventories. 
o) Adequacy of controls concerning project assets including: 
●  Management of vehicles and other assets (assets should be property tagged and 
a physical inventory count done on a regular basis) 
●  Fuel management (drivers should maintain a vehicle log book)  
●  Travel  authorisations  (including  Daily  Subsistence  Allowance  (DSA)  paid  to 
staff) 
●  Adequacy of vehicles and assets insurance. 
p) Workshops:  
●  Availability of list of participants 
●  DSA paid to participants 
●  Receipts for workshop expenditure 
q) Adequacy  of  controls  and  process  of  authorisation  for  use  of  funds  (payments, 
transfers, cash / bank balance management) / and other operational accounts. 
r)  Banking  arrangement  and  controls  (reconciliation  of  bank  statements  with 
financial accounts). 
s)  Existence of a proper information technology support unit in place. 
212.  Beneficiary / community contributions.  Should participating community groups 
will have to match grant funds by contributing a required share of sub-project costs to 
PRODAPE,  such  cash  contributions  from  beneficiaries  will  be  deposited  into  a 
“Beneficiaries”  bank  account  opened  and  maintained  by  the  beneficiary  groups.  The 
first  payment  from  the  community  groups  is  considered  effective  when  community 
contribution is deposited into the bank account in accordance with the MoU. 
213.  Beneficiary  /  community  contributions  may  be  paid  in  kind,  including 
contributions in the form of: 
a)  Labour 
b) Construction materials 
c)  Agricultural products 
d) Plots of land for demonstration gardens, farmer field school gardens, and 
e)  Any materials 
214.  The  accounting  /  auditing  /  controls  of  in-kind  contributions  should  be  kept  as 
simple  as  possible  and  be  captured  for  information  purposes  only  and  in  estimated 
values.  Thus,  there  are  minimum  procedures  to  make  sure  that  the  contributions  that 
have taken place are adequately captured in terms of values. An example of information 
required for beneficiary contribution is included in Annex 5. 
d.  Step 4: Withdrawal Applications 
215.  The  IFAD  Disbursement  Handbook  provides  all  the  guidance  and  forms  needed 
for  the  preparation  of  withdrawal  applications  including  replenishment  applications. 
Those forms and guidance are not reproduced in this manual. As stated in the LTR and 
the Disbursement Handbook, three standard disbursement procedures may  be used  for 
withdrawal of financing, namely: 
a) Procedure  I:    Advance  withdrawal  (using imprest  account  with  replenishment to 
the  designated  account  in  the  BoM.    The  maximum  authorised  allocation  to  the 
designated account will be advised in IFAD’s LTR. 
b) Procedure  II:  Direct  payment.  This  modality  is  used  for  eligible  PRODAPE 
expenditures  to  be  paid  directly  by  IFAD,  generally  for  large  contracts,  to 
suppliers, contractors or third parties in value over USD 100,000. 
c)  Procedure  III:  Reimbursement.  This  is  applicable  when  eligible  PRODAPE 
expenditures,  reimbursable  under  the  financing  agreement,  have  been  pre-
financed by the GoM. Such reimbursements are expected to be claimed not later 
than 90 calendar days from the date of payment by PRODAPE. 
216.  The  finance  team  must  be  efficient  in  the  submission  of  the  withdrawal 
applications to IFAD otherwise liquidity can be a hindrance to implementation. A tool 
that can be used to measure the efficiency of a replenishment process is the designated 
account  reconciliation,  as  shown  below.  Thus,  the  designated  account  reconciliation 
should  not  always  be  included  in  withdrawal  applications,  rather,  it  should  be  carried 
out on a monthly basis as a performance measure, as illustrated below. 
Table 23: Illustrating that Designated Account Reconciliation is good Treasury 
Management Tool 
1  Total initial advance by 
IFAD 
USD 
xxx 
2  LESS amount recovered by 
- 
IFAD 
3  Outstanding advance to 
designated account 
4  Balance of designated 
account as per bank 
statement from the 
commercial bank 
5  Balance on project 
operational accounts as per 
bank statements  
Total of Bank Balances 
6  Plus, total amount claimed 
in this application No.  
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
Management Tips 
should 
reconciliation 
the 
This 
whereabouts of this advance and the Financial 
Manager should always on a monthly basis be 
interested  to  know  the  whereabouts  of  the 
initial deposit. 
give 
If  less  than  50%  of  the  initial  deposit  can  be 
traced  to  bank  statements,  this  can  alert  the 
Financial  Manager 
the  PRODAPE 
Coordinator  of  lingering  cash  flow  problems 
by looking at lines 4 and 5 
  and 
If  this  amount  is  materially  higher  than  30% 
of the initial deposits it points at laxity in the 
7  Plus, total amount 
xxx 
withdrawn from bank 
accounts not yet claimed 
replenishment  system.  If  for  example,  this 
amount  is  twice  or  more  than  the  minimum 
amount  for  replenishment,  It  would  tell  PC 
that  the  Financial  Manager    could  have 
lodged  a  withdrawal  application  when 
expenditure reached the  minimum  amount of 
30% of the  initial  deposit and there  could  be 
over bulking / inefficiency. 
This should cause the PRODAPE Coordinator 
to demand why money to this magnitude has 
been  withdrawn  but  is  not  being  included  in 
the  withdrawal  application.  The  Financial 
  should  always  demand  for  a 
Manager 
schedule of the items making up this amount 
—  it  reflects  inefficiency  and  results  in  cash 
flow  problems  to  have  large  amounts  of 
money  from  bank  accounts  and  take  a  long 
time to be replenished. Secondly, care should 
be taken that this figure is not only inserted as 
a  balancing  figure,  which  would  reflect  that 
the designated account is not well managed. 
8  Plus, amounts claimed in 
previous applications not yet 
credited at date of bank 
statement 
xxx  When withdrawal applications in the pipeline 
take  long  to  be  processed  it  could  indicate 
that  IFAD  raised  questions  on  the  quality  of 
the withdrawal application, in which case the 
PRODAPE  Coordinator  could  request  staff 
training.    Such  a  situation  could  also  be 
caused by IFAD delays, in which case the PC 
would still have to follow-up with IFAD. It is 
advisable  for  the  Financial  Manager    to 
always  follow  the  status  of  the  withdrawal 
applications 
IFAD’s  Withdrawal 
Application Tracking System (WATTS). 
on 
9  Minus Interest Earned 
TOTAL ADVANCE 
ACCOUNTED FOR 
xxx 
If this total does not equal to the outstanding 
the  PC  should  demand 
initial  deposit, 
explanation.  Fail 
initial 
deposit  should  be  considered  as  a  serious 
matter requiring follow up. 
to  reconcile 
the 
217.  It is key for the Financial Manager to know PRODAPE´s available cash balance at 
all  times  in  order  to  better  manage  PRODAPE’s  liquidity  position  in  a  timely  and 
efficient manner. The key goals are to ensure that: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
There are sufficient funds in treasury to implement activities planned.  
The  disbursement  rate  of  the  project  closely  follows  progress  in  physical 
activity; 
PRODAPE performance increases and that the project is well placed to meet 
its objectives, as outlined in the PDR. 
218.  The key elements related to project treasury position are: 
a) 
Status  of  balance  in  designated  accounts  (using  the  cash  books  as  at 
reporting date) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Status  of  balance  in  operations  accounts  (using  the  cash  books  as  at 
reporting date) 
The status of cash in hand (using the cash book as at reporting date)  
The  money  value  of  withdrawal  applications  submitted  to  IFAD  for 
reimbursement 
e) 
The money value of withdrawal applications to be submitted to IFAD 
219.  The Financial Manager should prepare monthly cash and expenditures cash flow 
forecasts. This will help to detect periods, which could be subject to liquidity gaps, and 
adequate  measures  taken,  in  terms  of  work  scheduling  or  any  other  remedial  actions 
deemed appropriate. 
e.  Step 5: Financial reports and auditing 
220.  Periodic  financial  progress  reports  are  required  under  the  IFAD  Financing 
Agreement. Sufficient  information  must be made available on how funds are used, on 
amounts  spent  and  results  obtained.  The  main  financial  reports  to  be  produced  will 
include  the  following:  AWPB,  monthly  financial  reports,  other  periodic  financial 
progress  reports,  supervision  reports,  annual  financial  statements  and  audit  reports. 
IFAD has now developed Guidelines for Interim Financial Reporting to guide progress 
reporting. Sample reporting templates are included in attachment to this PIM.  
221.  Under financial reporting, IFAD Supervision Missions will look for: 
a)  Completeness, accuracy, usefulness, and timeliness of financial reports; 
b) Interim  financial  management  reports  and  linkages  to  progress  reports;  timely 
preparation and submission to IFAD; 
c)  Preparation of reports showing actual vs. budget income / expenditure and AWPB 
execution rate; 
d) Follow  up  of  recommendations  presented  in  previous  Aide  Memoires  related  to 
fiduciary matters; and 
e)  Reasonable  alignment  between  disbursement  rate  of  recurrent  versus  investment 
cost categories. 
222.  Audit  The  key  players  in  PRODAPE´s  financial  management  have  fiduciary 
responsibility  to  ensure  that  project  funds  are  used  exclusively  for  intended  purposes. 
Poor financial management in project implementation could result in failure to achieve 
intended impacts. IFAD will undertake Supervision Missions that will include a review 
of all fiduciary aspects through review of audit reports. IFAD may also commission its 
own audits / reviews.  
223.  External audits. In accordance with the IFAD general conditions and the IFAD 
guidelines  for  project  audits,  the  PCU  must  have  PRODAPE  financial  statements 
audited  by  an  external  auditor  acceptable  to  IFAD.  The  audited  financial  statements 
need to  be sent  to  IFAD no later than six months after the end of the fiscal  year. The 
detailed  instruction  regarding  project  audit  are  outlined  in  the  IFAD  Guidelines  for 
Project Audits available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm.  
224. 
Internal  audits.  The  Internal  Audit  Department  at  MIMAIP  is  to  include 
PRODAPE  in  its  internal  audit  work  plans;  associated  reports  will  be  submitted  to 
PRODAPE to MIMAIP and the NPSC. IFAD will require submission of related action 
plans  and  reports  on  progress  in  implementation  of  internal  audit  recommendations. 
Internal  audit  reports  are  expected  to  provide  assurances  that  PRODAPE  is  being 
implemented  in  accordance  with  the  approved  AWPB  and  in  compliance  with  GoM 
regulations and the IFAD financing agreement. A key risk is low staff capacity to cover 
the project internal audit requirements. It is recommended that at start up, internal audit 
staff be present and attend to familiarise themselves with IFAD procedures.  
225.  Audit  arrangements.    The  project  audit  is  an  ex-post  review  of  financial 
statements, records of transactions and financial systems.  It examines the adequacy of 
accounting systems  and procedures, the capacity to  maintain appropriate  accounts and 
documentation  of  project  /  grant  expenditures.  The  objective  of  the  project  audit  is  to 
provide  credibility  and  assurance  of  accountability.  In  accordance  with  IFAD  General 
Conditions  and  the  IFAD  Guidelines  for  Project  Audits,  financial  statements  must  be 
audited  by  an  external  auditor  acceptable  to  IFAD.  The  audited  financial  statements 
need  to  be  sent  to  IFAD  no  later  than  six  months  after  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year. 
Detailed  instructions  regarding  project  audit  are  outlined  in  the  IFAD  Guidelines  for 
Project Audits available at httphttps://www.ifad.org/web/guest/corporate-documents. 
226.  The  audit  cycle  and  auditor  appointment.  The  complete  audit  cycle  can  be 
divided  according  to  the  roles  carried  out  by  the  Financial  Manager  at  the  PCU,  the 
Auditor and IFAD. 
●  The PCU and the Financial Manager will timely prepare ToRs of the audit and 
submit  these  to  IFAD  for  No  Objection;  manage  the  selection  process  of  the 
auditor (if relevant); and appoint the auditor; prepare the financial statements for 
the  reporting  period  and  make  all  the  financial  information  necessary  to  the 
auditors  available.    The  PCU  should  respond  to  the  audit  findings  and 
recommendations  and  submit  the  audit  report  to  IFAD  no  later  than  six  months 
after the end of the project´s fiscal year. 
●  The  Auditor  will  perform  the  audit;  deliver  an  audit  package  that  includes  the 
audited financial statements, including additional disclosures; an audit opinion on 
the financial statements within the audit scope, a report on factual findings, within 
the scope of agreed-upon procedures indicating identified ineligible expenditures 
and a management letter. The audit report should provide sufficient detail as to the 
nature and extent of the procedures performed by the auditor. 
●  IFAD  will  provide  a  No  Objection  to  the  auditors  ToRs;  monitor  timely 
submission  and  review  of  audit  reports;  follow  up  on  remedial  action  /  apply 
sanctions and / or remedies, if relevant including suspension of disbursement and 
or  cancellation  of  loan  balance,  as  required  (legal  notice  is  sent  to  the  Lead 
Programme Agent (LPA) after three months of delay. Suspension of disbursement 
to the project after six-months delay. 
Figure 10: Project audit cycle 
227.  When  appointing  the  Auditor,  the  Financial  /  Contracts  Manager  will  need  to 
ensure that the following steps are followed: 
228.  Appointment procedure. If a private audit firm is contracted to conduct the audit, 
the  borrower  /  recipient  is  responsible  for  its  selection  and  appointment  process. 
Auditors should normally be appointed in advance of the start of the reporting period to 
be audited, to  allow the  auditor sufficient  time to plan and  carry out  a  comprehensive 
examination  of  the  borrower’s  /  recipient’s  financial  records  and  accounts.  The 
following private audit firm appointment process should be adhered to: 
Table 24: Private audit firm appointment process 
Step 
Procedures 
Guidance / Timing 
● The Borrower / Recipient 
prepares ToRs for the audit.  
● The Borrower / Recipient sends 
the ToRs to IFAD for review 
and “No Objection”. 
Development 
of the 
auditor’s  
ToR 
●  IFAD communicates “No 
Objection” to Borrower / 
Recipient on the final ToRs, 
within thirty days of receipt.  
● In sufficient time to allow 
the appointment of auditors 
by the start of the financial 
year to be audited.  
● The Borrower / Recipient 
initiates the procurement 
process, using the agreed ToRs.  
● The Borrower / Recipient 
informs IFAD of the name of 
the proposed auditor and the 
procurement process that was 
followed.  
● The Borrower / Recipient 
appoints the auditor.  
● The appointed auditor will 
issue a formal engagement 
letter. 
● The Borrower / Recipient 
should attempt to finalize the 
procurement process at least 
thirty days prior to the 
commencement of the 
reporting period. 
● The representative of the 
Borrower / Recipient will 
sign and return a copy of the 
engagement letter to the 
auditor.  
Procurement 
process  
Auditor 
appointment  
229.  ToRs  of  the  auditors  and  engagement  letter.  When  preparing  auditors  ToRs  the 
Financial Manager should address the following points: 
a.  Project background; 
b.  Objective of the audit; 
c.  Responsibility of the borrower / recipient; 
d.  Responsibility  of  the  auditor:  auditing  standards,  general  principles,  reporting, 
management letter; 
e.  Scope of the financial audit;  
f.  Scope of agreed procedures: withdrawal application summary, designated account 
statement and reconciliation;  
g.  Other relevant information; 
h.  Public disclosure; 
i.  Appendices: Financing / Grant Agreement(s), LTB, IFAD Handbook on Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects.  
230.  The  audit  report.  The  Auditor  is  required  to  deliver  an  audit  package  that 
includes: 
a.  The audited financial statements, including all specified additional disclosures;  
b.  An  audit  opinion  on  the  financial  statements,  within  the  scope  of  the  financial 
audit; 
c.  A report on factual findings, within the scope of agreed-up on procedures.  Any 
ineligible expenditure identified should be clearly mentioned. 
231.  A management letter, which outlines the auditor’s recommendations to improve 
identified accounting and internal control issues; the responses of project management 
to the identified control issues, and its proposal to address the issues identified within a 
specific  time  period  and  where  applicable,  follow  up  on  the  issues  identified  in  the 
previous year's management letter. 
f.  GRANT COMPLETION AND CLOSURE 
232.  The closure of the loan / grant is due six months after the project completion date. 
Both the completion and the closing dates of the grant have financial implications on the 
project management such as: development and submission of a recovery plans, ensuring 
eligibility of expenditures and submission of the necessary documents outlined below. 
Please also refer to section 1.3 of the Disbursement Handbook for further details.  
233.  Recovery  plan.  To  ensure  that  the  designated  account  is  completely  and  timely 
justified, the Project Accountant / PCU has to develop and submit to IFAD a recovery 
plan  outlining  the  percentages  per  withdrawal  application  that  will  be  recovered  and 
paid respectively. The recovery plan should be submitted to the fund around six months 
before the  completion date or when the outstanding balance (amount still undisbursed 
by  IFAD) is less than the double of the authorised allocation. Please refer to Annex 8 
for a sample recovery plan. 
234.  Grant completion. By the completion date all the project activities must have been 
finalised.  The  payments  can  be  done  also  after  the  completion  date,  as  long  as  the 
commitments  /  contracts  are  signed  prior  to  the  completion  date.  Activities  that  have 
continued  after  the  completion  date  are  considered  as  ineligible  expenditures  and  can 
therefore not be financed with IFAD funds.  
235.  After the completion date but no later than the closing date (six months after the 
completion date) the PCU can still incur expenditures related to so called winding down 
expenditures e.g. final audit, project completion report, project staff salaries involved in 
the winding down activities, PCU maintenance cost, project completion workshop. 
236.  Grant closure. IFAD requires the following to be provided by the PCU in order to 
close the grant: 
a)  Confirmation of last withdrawal application 
b) Submission of final audit report 
c)  Submission of project completion report 
237.  The  final  audit  report  has  to  cover,  the  final  project  year  up  to  the  final 
expenditures and it can be paid from the grant available balance by using, for example, 
direct payment or reimbursement of pre financed expenditures.  
F. 
Procurement 
238.  This  section  provides  additional  advice  and  assistance 
to  PRODAPE 
implementers to help them carry out project related procurement responsibilities using 
IFAD financing. This section does not contain any new policies but  rather explains in 
more detail how specific aspects of procurement should be handled consistent with the 
IFAD  Guidelines  and  Procedures.    It  is  expected  that  this  procurement  section  will 
continue to be improved and added to with a view to keep it relevant and useful to its 
users. 
239.  Under  IFAD  financing,  procurements  of  good,  works,  consulting  and  non-
consulting  services,  is  the  responsibility  of  the  borrower  or  grant  recipient.  Therefore, 
IFAD  encourages  use  of  borrower’s  procurement  guidelines  to  the  extent  they  are 
consistent with its own; where the Government’s public procedures are inconstant with 
those of IFAD, IFAD generic procurement guidelines will supersede. 
240.  Ideally,  the  procurement  process  under  PRODAPE  should  be  transparent, 
competitive and should ensure that the goods and services needed to implement project 
activities are procured with due attention to  economy and efficiency. All  procurement 
processes  will  also  ensure  that  the  grant  is  used  to  buy  only  those  goods  and  services 
included  in  the  approved  AWPB.  It  should  be  noted  that  any  procurement  of  goods, 
services  or  works  outside  the  AWPB  and  non-compliant  with  procurement  guidelines 
will be treated as ineligible expenditures and rejected for IFAD financing.  
KEY PLAYERS  
241. 
IDEPA  at  MIMAIP  is  the  main  PRODAPE  implementation  unit  currently 
governed  by  Public  Procurement  Decree  (PPD)  No.  5/2016  that  establishes  the 
principles  and  procedures  to  be  applied  in  any  procurement  held  by  public  authorities 
and institutions governed by public decree, under public control or using public funds. 
The PCU at IDEPA will include a Procurement Officer. The position will be in charge 
of  coordinating  all  administrative  work  related  to  procurement,  such  as  preparation  of 
bidding documents, Requests for Quotations (RfQ) and others, and users. In addition, a 
Permanent Tender Committee will be formed to handle items common across more than 
one  cost  centre  or  generally  requiring  Open  Competitive  Bidding.  Each  competitive 
procurement  package  will  have  an  Ad  Hoc  Evaluation  Committee  comprising  of 
members skilled in the subject matter at hand. Evaluation Committee members should 
not  be  restricted  to  only  PCU  /  National  Roads  Administration  (ANE)  members  to 
ensure an adequate mix of skill of adequate level; independent external members may 
also be invited to participate. 
242.  Other counterparts should be involved in the project from the beginning such as 
the General Inspection of Finance (IGF) and the Public Procurement Authority (UFSA). 
Both  conduct  joint  annual  audits  that  could  take  place  during  the  IFAD  supervision 
mission.  
CONTRACT MANAGEMENT AND PROCUREMENT RECORDS  
243.  Procurement  methods.  IFAD  has  no  restriction  on  the  use  of  any  procurement 
method.  However,  each  method  used  should  be  easily  justifiable  in  terms  of  the  cost, 
technical  complexity  and  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the  need  for  the  goods  or 
services  concerned.  The  decision  of  a  procurement  method  is  considered  to  be  one  of 
high  importance  and  therefore  the  Procurement  Officer  should  always  reflect  the 
method of procurement at the planning stage.   
244.  According  to  the  IFAD  Procurement  Handbook,  International  Competitive 
Bidding (ICB) will be used in accordance with the World Bank guidelines. This will be 
mandatory for procurement contracts with the following values: 
a)  Goods above USD 200,000 
b) Works above USD 1,000,000  
c)  Services above USD 100,000 
245.  Guidance on when to use other procurement methods is summarised in the table 
below. 
Table 25: Thresholds for procurement and review methods 
Expenditure 
 Category 
Contract Value Threshold 
(USD) 
> 1,000,000 
Procurement/Selection Method 
International Competitive Bidding 
(ICB) 
Works 
≥ 50,000 ≤ 1,000,000 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) 
< 50,000 
All values 
≤ 200,000 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
ICB 
Goods 
≥ 10,000 < 200,000  
NCB 
< 10,000 
All values 
Shopping 
Direct Contracting 
246.  Non-Consulting  Services.  Non-consulting  services  will  be  procured  using  the 
following methods: 
a)  Request for Quotations: 
●  Internationally, for contracts valued over USD 200,000 equivalent, and  
●  Nationally,  for  contracts  valued  over  USD  50,000  equivalent  up  to  and 
including USD 200,000 equivalent (i.e. > USD 50,000 ≤ USD 200,000);  
b) National  shopping  applies  to  contracts  valued  up  to  and  including  USD  50,000 
equivalent (i.e. ≤ USD 50,000). 
247.  Consulting Services.  The Quality and Cost Based Selection will be the standard 
method applied unless otherwise approved. The following processes will apply:  
●  Request for Proposals (Internationally) – for contracts with a value over USD 
200,000 equivalent (i.e. > USD 200,000); and  
●  Request  for  Proposals  (Nationally)  –  for  contracts  with  a  value  up  to  and 
including USD 200,000 (i.e. ≤ USD200,000). 
248.  Prior-Review  by  IFAD.  In  accordance  with  paragraph 80  of  the  IFAD  Project 
Procurement Guidelines, the following will be subject to prior review by IFAD: 
a)  Award  of  any  contract  for  goods  and  equipment  to  cost  USD  100,000  or 
equivalent or more (i.e. ≥ USD100,000); 
b) Award of any contract for works estimated to cost USD 100,000 or equivalent or 
more (i.e. ≥ USD100,000); 
c)  Award of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost of USD 50,000 or 
equivalent or more (i.e. ≥ USD50,000); 
d) All contracts done under direct procurement method; and 
e)  Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) or any equivalent contractual vehicle 
entered into between RFEP/FARE with any entity including GoM agencies. 
THE PRODAPE PROCUREMENT CYCLE 
249.  The IDEPA will be held responsible for overall contract management including 
monitoring  of  performance  of  the  implementing  agencies  as  appropriate  and 
establishing  contract  management  systems.  The  IDEPA  contract  management  system 
will  include:  a)  management  of  contract  start-up  issues;  b)  opening  and  updating  the 
contracts’  register;  c)  monitoring  of  contract  implementation;  d)  complaints  handling 
management and tracking; e) implementation of penalty clauses; f) monitoring contract 
amendments;  g)  contract  completion  and  closure;  and  h)  record  keeping,  including  e-
filling.  
250.  Procurement records shall include a request to initiate each procurement action, 
the  rationale  for  the  method  of  procurement,  solicitation  document  including,  ToRs  / 
specifications / bid documents, selection of contract type, advertisement, record of sale 
of  bids,  record  of  receipt  of  bids  (both  successful  and  unsuccessful  bids),  record  of 
opening of bids, minutes and reports associated with the evaluation, justification for the 
award,  award  letter,  acceptance  letter,  contracts  (including  amendments  if  any),  and 
other  correspondences  related  to  the  procurement,  including  approvals  and  ‘No 
Objections’.    Under  the  IFAD  General  Conditions,  records  are  kept  for  10  years  after 
project closure. 
251. 
IFAD  Involvement.  All  procurements  with  contract  value  above  set  thresholds 
will  require  the  IFAD  Country  Portfolio  Manager’s  clearance  (No  Objection).  Also, 
IFAD  Supervision  Missions  will  always  intently  scrutinize  project  procurement 
processes  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  on  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of 
procurement practices. 
252.  All  PRODAPE  procurement  processes  will  involve  fifteen  sequential  but 
interrelated steps.  The steps describe the process from planning to contract performance 
evaluation, as discussed hereunder: 
Step 1: Procurement Planning 
253.  Procurement planning is the first step – a critical step - that enables objectives and 
priorities  to  be  set,  workloads  to  be  estimated  and  resources  to  be  allocated.  The 
PRODAPE  will  plan,  organise,  forecast  and  schedule  its  procurement  activities  and 
identify  potential  areas  for  aggregation  of  needs.  Procurement  planning  is  not  the 
beginning  in  itself,  before  reaching  the  decision  to  procure,  a  number  of  more 
fundamental decisions should have been made, for example, definition of project goals 
and resource availability. It is thus necessary for PRODAPE procurement planning to be 
aligned  to  or  integrated  with  financial  budget  and  project  activity  plans  as  much  as 
practicable.  At  project  inception,  IFAD  requires  the  PCU  to  prepare  an  indicative 
procurement  plan  covering  a  period  of  18  months.  This  should  be  finalised  and 
submitted  to  IFAD  within  six  months  of  the  implementation  period.  For  subsequent 
years, 12-month successive plans should be prepared and synchronised with the AWPB 
during implementation period. 
254. 
In  addition,  IFAD  needs  to  provide  the  procuring  units  to  ANE  with  useful 
templates  for  each  step  of  the  procurement  cycle.    Besides,  a  procurement  workshop 
should  be  conducted  jointly  with  IFAD,  the  UFSA,  the  IGF  and  the  Administrative 
Court to  clarify the  role  of each institution and anticipate any potential confusion that 
may lead to errors, delays and cost overruns. 
255.  Scope of the Plan. A Procurement Plan should at least include a brief description 
of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period, estimated value of each 
activity, the method of procurement to be adopted for each activity and the method of 
review  IFAD  will  undertake  for  each  activity.  The  standard  templates  for  the 
procurement plan are contained in the IFAD procurement Handbook. 
256.  All procurement will be executed only against approved procurement plans and 
AWPBs,  specifying  items  to  be  procured,  responsibility  for  the  procurement  and  the 
appropriate  procurement  methods.  A  detailed  procurement  cycle  is  presented  and 
discussed  herein.  The  Procurement  Plan  for  each  year  will  be  consistent  with  the 
PRODAPE  AWPBs.  Items  procured  outside  the  Procurement  Plan  and  the  related 
AWPB will be declared mis-procurement and the related expenditure will be ineligible 
for  financing  from  the  grant  proceeds.  The  consolidated  Procurement  Plan  will  be 
submitted together with the AWPB to the NPSC for approval and to  IFAD for review 
and expression of  ‘No Objection’. 
257.  Summary of key areas to consider during the procurement planning process. The 
following  is  a  summary  of  the  key  areas  for  consideration  during  the  process  of 
procurement planning: 
a)  A  brief  description  of  each  procurement  activity  to  be  undertaken  during  the 
planning period;  
b)  The estimated value of each activity in USD equivalent to MZN;  
c)  The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity;  
d)  Works Procurement Packages with methods and time schedule;  
e)  Goods Procurement Packages with methods and time schedule;  
f)  Service  Procurement  Packages 
(both  consultancy  and  non-consultancy 
assignments) with selection methods and time schedule;  
g)  Requirements  as  contained  in  the  specific  funding  windows  that  will  require 
requests  for  expression  of  interest  will  also  be  included  in  the  plan  under  the 
services category; 
h)      The  method  of  review  IFAD  will  undertake  for  each  activity  (post  or  prior 
review);   
i)   Timelines  showing  milestones to  be achieved in  key stages of the procurement 
cycle; and 
 j)  The effective procuring entity. 
258.  Tracking actual dates of completion against the baseline will be useful for future 
activities and is a powerful performance indicator of the procuring entity. 
259.  Procurement Plan Review.  Once the initial plan has been approved and cleared 
by  IFAD,  it  should  form  the  basis  of  all  procurement  activities  by  the  project.  It  is 
important  that  the  procurement  plan  is  reviewed  at  least  once  every  quarter  and 
necessary  amendments  are  made  promptly  and  a  No  Objection  sought  from  IFAD, 
accordingly. 
Step 2: Procurement Requisition 
260.  Once  the  procurement  plan  is  in  place,  the  various  users  will  initiate 
procurements based on project needs by filling requisition forms. It is the responsibility 
of  the  users  to  specify  the  technical  requirements  and  specifications  of  the  required 
goods, services and works including the estimated cost of the goods and services. 
Step 3: Confirmation of Funds Available 
261.  The  Procurement  Officer  will  first  direct  any  procurement  requisitions  to  the 
Finance / Contracts Manager to check availability of funds.  This will take into account 
any  outstanding  commitments.     Specifically,  the  Procurement  Officer  should  confirm 
that the contract amount is covered by the amount stated in the budget and that there is 
(or  there  will  be)  enough  money  in  the  bank  to  pay  the  planned  invoices  as  per  the 
payment schedule. Strictly, any procurement should be stopped at this point if no funds 
are confirmed.  
Steps 4, 5 and 6: Review of Specifications, ToR and Scope of Works  
262.  This  will  be  done  by  the  Permanent  Tender  Committee  /  Ad  Hoc  Evaluation 
Committee, Procurement Officer , depending on the package type to be procured. The 
results  of  the  analysis  will  determine  the  method  of  procurement  to  be  used  and  also 
result  in  the  preparation  of  solicitation  documents.  The  team  will  make  use  of  the 
standard templates contained in the IFAD Procurement Handbook or those of the GoM. 
The  solicitation  documents  are  expected  to  cover  Specifications  /  ToRs  /  Scope  of 
Works,  Procurement  Method,  Evaluation  Criteria,  Procurement  method,  Instruction  to 
Bidders, Price Schedule and Terms and Conditions. 
263.  Solicitation  documents  will  not  be  necessary  where  Direct  contracting,  local  / 
international shopping or Force Account procurement methods are chosen. In this case, 
a RfQ will be prepared.  
Step 7: Approval of Procurement Documents  
264.  Except  for  contracts  falling  under  shopping  procurement  method,  solicitation 
documents  must  be  approved  by  the  Permanent  Tender  Committee  or  Ad-hoc 
Evaluation Committee, depending on the type of procurement. For all items above the 
prior  review  threshold,  IFAD’s  No  Objection  on  the  solicitation  documents  will  be 
required.  
Step 8: Advertising / Issuance of Bidding Documents 
265.  The  conduct  of  a  transparent  and  successful  procurement  is  dependent  on  the 
quality  of  bidding  documents.  Thus,  to  guard  against  omissions,  costly  amendments 
arising  out  of  bidders  seeking  clarifications  and  related  delays,  and  unnecessary  cost 
overruns,  it  will  be  essential  that  bid  documents  are  very  well  prepared  and  obtain 
necessary approvals. Under PRODAPE, the GoM standard bid documents will be used 
and  adapted  to  suit  each  specific  procurement  item.  IFAD  clearance  of  the  Standard 
Bidding Documents / ToR and specifications  in respect of the PRODAPE project  will 
be a requirement. 
266.  Bidding  opportunities  should  be  advertised  in  such  a  way  to  allow  an 
opportunity to all potential bidders to participate. 
267.  To  ensure  smooth  and  rapid  procurement  actions,  all  invitations  to  tender  and 
expressions of interest shall be published through the IDEPA and the UFSA websites. 
The IDEPA will ensure that the necessary approvals and the required No Objections are 
obtained prior to implementing any procurement actions.  
268.  A  shorter  version  of  the  advertisement  text,  including  the  minimum  relevant 
information,  shall  be  published  in  a  national  newspaper  of  wide  circulation  provided 
that the full text is simultaneously published in the official gazette or on a widely used 
website or electronic portal with free national and international access. 
269.  The  issuance  of  solicitation  documentations  under  open  bidding  will  comply 
with the following: 
●  Arrange publication of the advertisement  (open  competitive bidding only). This 
can  be  via  the  local,  regional  and  international  newspapers,  depending  on  the 
procurement method; 
●  Documents must be dispatched promptly to those who respond to any notice.  If 
documents are being sold, they must be dispatched immediately on receipt of the 
request or payment of the fee, whichever is later; 
●  A register must be kept of all bidders issued with a document. This will be used 
to  contact  bidders  in  the  event  that  a  bid  clarification  or  extension  needs  to  be 
issued; and 
●  In all cases, bidders must be required to confirm receipt of the document. 
270.  The issuance of solicitation documentations under restricted bidding will comply 
with the following: 
●  Where documents are being issued to bidders on a shortlist or pre-qualified list, 
the documents must be dispatched to all bidders at the same time; and 
●  A record must be kept of the issue of documents. 
271.  Pre-bid  conferences  or  site  visits  will  be  crucial  for  some  procurements.  This 
will  be  a  useful  technique  because  some  of  the  procurements  are  highly  technical. 
Through these site visits, a significant number of requests for clarification are likely to 
be  received  and  knowledge  of  the  site  will  be  very  important  for  tender  preparation. 
This will, however, have to be included in the procurement plans and bid documents; it 
cannot be arranged hurriedly or on ad hoc basis. 
272.  The Tender Committee will undertake the following after the completion of the 
pre-bid conference or site visits: 
●  Prepare  authorised  minutes  of  the  proceedings,  which  will  be  sent  to  all 
organisations that have been issued with solicitation documents; 
●  Determine whether it is necessary to issue a formal bid clarification in addition to 
the Minutes in which case Permanent Tender Committee (PTC) approval will be 
required; 
●  Determine  whether  it  is  necessary  to  amend  the  tender  closing  date  as  a 
consequence  of  the  bid  clarifications.  The  decision  to  extend  the  closing  date 
should  be  made  quickly  but  will  also  require  approval  of  the  PTC.  It  will  save 
time and work if it is issued with the bid clarification. 
273.  Even  without  a  pre-bid  conference  or  in  cases  where  site  visits  may  not  be 
mandatory, the PTC will provide clarifications to bidders in accordance with  IFAD or 
relevant GoM procurement regulations. Importantly, any clarification provided must be 
copied to all bidders that were issued with the bidding documents. 
274.  No automatic extension of the bid validity shall apply. If justified by exceptional 
circumstances,  an  extension  of  the  bid  validity  may  be  requested  in  writing  by  the 
project  to  all bidders before the original bid  validity expiration date and  it shall  cover 
only the minimum period required to complete the evaluation and award of the contract. 
It is important to note that where bid security is a requirement, extension of the validity 
period should correspond to the bid validity. 
Step 9: Receipt and Opening of Bids 
275.  Bidders shall be  given  at  least  forty five days  for  ICB, thirty days for NCB and 
fourteen days for selective tendering, from the date of the invitation to bid or the date of 
availability of bidding documents, whichever is later, to prepare and submit bids in line 
with Public Procurement Regulations. It is good practice to publish bids when the tender 
documents  are  ready  for  issuance.  This  should  shorten  the  time  for  the  specific 
procurement  cycle  and  allow  adequate  time  to  address  clarifications  whenever  they 
arise. Bids shall be opened in public, immediately after the deadline for their submission 
in  accordance  with  the  procedures  stated  in  the  bidding  documents.  The  public  bid 
opening shall take place in only one session. At the public bid opening, the names of the 
bidders and the total amount of each bid and of any alternative bids if they have been 
requested or permitted, shall be read aloud and recorded when opened. Bids shall not be 
evaluated  as  part  of  the  bid  opening  process,  and  no  bid  shall  be  rejected  during  the 
public bid opening session, except for late bids. Bidders shall not be allowed to submit 
their  bids  or  additional  information  after  the  deadline  for  submission  of  bids  has 
expired. 
276.  Bidders will deliver their bids to the location and official stated in the invitation 
document.  The  selected  officer  will  ensure  that  the  bids  submitted  are  kept  under  key 
and lock. The committee will issue a receipt to the bidders confirming the date and time 
of  delivery  as  proof  of  delivery  prior  to  the  deadline  for  submission.  Bids  submitted 
passed the deadline should be rejected. For open competitive bidding procurements, the 
opening date should be communicated in advance to the applicants and opened in their 
presence. 
277.  Qualification  criteria  shall  entirely  concern  the  bidder’s  capability  and  resources 
to perform the contract considering objective and measurable factors. The qualification 
criteria shall be clearly specified in the bidding documents, and all criteria so specified 
and  only  such  criteria  so  specified  shall  be  used  to  determine  whether  a  bidder  is 
qualified.  Qualification  criteria  shall  be  assessed  on  a  ‘pass  or  fail’  basis,  and  merit 
points  shall not be used. Bidders’ qualifications may be assessed by post-qualification 
and  such  an  assessment  shall  be  conducted  separately  from  the  technical  and 
commercial evaluation of the bids. 
Step 10: Evaluation of Bids 
278.  Evaluation  of  bids  shall  be  made  in  strict  adherence  to  the  evaluation  criteria 
declared in the bidding documents.  Basically, the purpose of bid evaluation will be to 
decide  on  the  most  economically  advantageous  bid  for  contracting  with  PRODAPE. 
Evaluation  of bids  should be done systematically following certain  procedures, as any 
error  made  at  this  stage  can  have  significantly  cost  implications  to  PRODAPE.  It  is 
important that evaluation criteria are directly relevant to the package for which bidding 
in  being  carried out  and neither should it be seen as favouring particular bidders. The 
committee  doing  the  evaluation  will  follow  the  stages  of  a  good  evaluation  process 
which include: 
●  Preliminary  examination  –  to  eliminate  tenders  that  do  not  meet  the  basic 
requirements of the invitation document and bids that do not meet the mandatory 
eligibility requirements; 
●  Assessing  responsiveness  and  undertaking  detailed  technical  and  commercial 
requirements of the invitation documents – this includes seeking clarification from 
bidders where necessary; 
●  Financial evaluation – to compare costs of the responsive tenders and determine 
which  is  successful  bidder  and  should  be  recommended  for  award  of  contracts; 
and 
●  Post qualification – this will be done to verify if the best-evaluated bidder has the 
capacity  and  resources  to  execute  the  contract,  if  awarded.  The  criteria  for  post 
qualification should be specified in the solicitation documents. Post qualification 
should  be  done  where  pre-qualification  was  not  carried  out  prior  to  bidding.  If 
prequalification  was  carried  out  prior  to  bidding,  the  evaluators  need  to  satisfy 
themselves  that  the  information  provided  for  in  the  prequalification  is  still  valid 
before recommending contract award. 
279.  The following should be noted: 
●  A contract shall be awarded to the qualified bidder offering the lowest-evaluated 
and substantially responsive bid; 
●  Bidders shall not be eliminated on the basis of minor, non-substantial deviations;  
●  Requests for clarification and the bidder’s responses shall be made in writing and 
all the clarifications made shall be notified to all the bidders; and 
●  After  the  public  opening  of  bids,  information  relating  to  the  examination, 
clarification, and evaluation of bids and recommendations concerning the awards 
shall not be disclosed to bidders or other persons not officially concerned with this 
process until publication of the award of the contract. 
280.  Rejection of all bids and re-bidding. Without the Fund’s prior concurrence, there 
will  be  no  procurement  process  where  all  the  bids  will  be  rejected,  or  which  will  be 
cancelled, and new bids solicited. This also applies to corrections on bid documents that 
had been previously given a No Objection by IFAD. 
281.  Securities. Bid securities shall not exceed 3% of the estimated cost of the contract 
and performance securities shall not  exceed 10% of the contract  price. The successful 
bidder shall be given at least 15 days from the receipt of notification of contract award 
to submit a performance security. No advance payment shall be made without a suitable 
advance payment security in accordance with Public Procurement Regulations. 
Step 11: Submission of Evaluation Report to IFAD 
282. 
 To  ensure  that  the  evaluation  of  bids  has  been  properly  done,  an  independent 
person  /  committee  will  review  the  evaluation  report.  For  procurement  above  a  given 
threshold, the evaluation report will be submitted to IFAD for review. 
Steps 12 and 13: Contract Award and Signature 
283. 
 The  PRODAPE  Procurement  Committee  will  award  the  contract  to  the  best-
evaluated bid as per the reviewed evaluation report. The terms of the contract should be 
clear and are expected to be in line with the initial user requirements stated. To uphold 
the  principles  of 
in  good  public 
transparency  and  responsiveness  applicable 
procurement, it is important that appropriate communication is made to both successful 
and unsuccessful bidders. 
284.  Contracts shall be in  writing and the bid of the successful bidder shall become 
part  of  the  contract  documents.  In  the  case  of  contracts  signed  after  prior  review  by 
IFAD,  the  IFAD’s  No  Objection  shall  be  obtained  before  agreeing  to  any  type  of 
amendment, such as: a) a material extension of the stipulated time for performance of a 
contract;  b)  any  substantial  modification  of  the  scope  of  services  or  other  significant 
changes to the terms and conditions of the contract; and c) the proposed termination of 
the contract. A copy of all contracts and amendments shall be furnished to the IFAD for 
its record. 
285.  Complaints  by  Bidders  and  Handling  of  Complaints.  The  borrower  /  recipient 
shall  establish  an  effective  and  independent  protest  mechanism  allowing  bidders  to 
protest  and  to  have  their  protest  handled  in  a  timely  manner.  The  GoM  complaint 
management procedure shall be used (see the PPD). 
Steps 14 and 15: Contract Management and Performance Evaluation  
286.  This will be the last stage of any PRODAPE procurement process. This step is a 
critical part of the process as it focuses on the outcomes. Contract management strives 
for continuous improvement, value preservation and additional value creation, 
mitigation,  quality  assurance  and  compliance  with  the  terms  and  conditions.  The 
contract  administration procedures are largely determined by the terms and conditions 
of each individual contract and the description of requirements for the goods, works or 
services. The procedures should be designed to ensure that: 
 risk 
●  The supplier / service provider performs the contract in accordance with the terms 
and conditions specified in the contract; 
●  The PRODAPE fulfils its obligations and duties under the contract; and 
●  Swift  remedial  or  preventative  action  is  taken  when  problems  arise  or  are 
foreseen. 
287.  The detailed contract administration tasks are outlined in the IFAD Procurement 
Handbook and therefore have not been reproduced in this PIM. 
288.  Right  to  Inspect  /  Audit.  In  accordance  with  the  Procurement  Guidelines, each 
bidding  document  and  contract  financed  from  the  proceeds  of  the  financing  shall 
stipulate  that  bidders,  suppliers  and  contractors,  and  their  subcontractors,  agents, 
personnel,  consultants,  service  providers  or  suppliers,  shall  permit  that  IFAD,  at  its 
request, inspects their accounts, records and other documents related to the submission 
of  bids  and  contract  performance  and  to  have  them  audited  by  auditors  appointed  by 
IFAD. Acts intended to materially impede the exercise of IFAD’s inspection and audit 
rights constitute an obstructive practice as defined in the Procurement Guidelines. 
289.  Fraud  and  Corruption.  In  accordance  with  the  Procurement  Guidelines,  each 
bidding  document  and  contract  financed  from  the  proceeds  of  the  financing  shall 
include  provisions  on  matters  pertaining  to  fraud  and  corruption.  The  IFAD  will 
sanction a firm or individual, at any time, in accordance with prevailing IFAD sanctions 
procedures,  including  by  publicly  declaring  such  firm  or  individual  ineligible,  either 
indefinitely or for a stated period of time. 
290.  Contract Registration. All contracts must be listed in the Register of Contracts, 
which should be updated and submitted to the IFAD on a quarterly basis. In accordance 
with the GoM Public Procurement Regulations, all contracts are subject to review by the 
Administrative Court. The IDEPA should ensure that the requirement is met. 
291.  Transparency,  governance,  anti-corruption.  The  PRODAPE  Governance  and 
Anti-Corruption  Framework  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  corruption  and  promote  effective 
utilisation of resources include the following: 
a.  The  provisions  of  this  financial  management  manual  articulating  the  type  of 
towards 
to  be  established 
internal  controls  and  administrative  systems 
transparency and accountability;  
b.  The  E-SISTAFE  accounting  system  that  will  substantially  reduce  the  scope  for 
human error;  
c.  The risk-based implementation reviews of programme financial management and 
staff; 
d.  The back-up procedures kept on the PCU’s computer server to avoid the loss or 
damage of financial data; 
e.  The PRODAPE will also include a systems audit in the ToRs of the auditors and 
in the supervision plan; and 
f.  The  internal  audit  department  of  MIMAIP  will  include  the  programme  in  its 
yearly  internal  audit  oversight  plans.  The  implementation  status  of  the  internal 
audit recommendations will be addressed and made available to the fund. 
292.  IFAD  zero  tolerance  policy  for  corruption  and  fraud  urges  persons  observing 
concerns of irregular practices in IFAD funded projects to report to the IFAD Office of 
Audit and Oversight through any of the following means: 
●  By telephone: +39 0654592888 
●  By confidential fax: +39 0654597888 
●  By  confidential  email:  anticorruption@ifad.org  or  by  using  the  online  complaint 
form 
●  In  person  or  by  mail  to:  IFAD  -  Office  of  Audit  and  Oversight  (AUO): 
Investigation Section - Via Paolo Di Dono, 44 - 00142 Rome, Italy 
●  Annex 1: Sample Annual Workplan and Budget Templates 
Summary table 1: Planned Project Expenditures by Component and Financier 
Total  
Financing Source 
Component 
Local 
USD 
IFAD 
Grant   Source 1 
Source 2 
Source 3 
Beneficiaries 
1.  Component 1 
1.  Component 2 
2.  Component  3 
3.  Component 4 
4.  Component 5 
Total 
Summary table 2: Planned Project Expenditures by Expenditure Category and Financier 
Total  
Financing Source 
Local  USD 
IFAD 
Grant  Source 1  Source 2 
Source 3  Beneficiaries 
Sub 
Component 1 
Component 
2 
Component 
3  
Programme 
Management 
Total 
Category 
I.  Category 1 
II.  Category 2 
III. Category 3 
IV. Category 4 
V.  
VI.  
Total 
Component 
Category 
I.  Category 1 
II.  Category 2 
III. Category 3 
IV. Category 4 
V.  
VI.  
Total 
●  Annex 2: Sample Templates for Monthly Report for Management Use 
Table 1: Monthly Budget Execution Report 
 Monthly Budget Execution 
Budg
A
Vari
Cu
M
To 
Cu
t
To 
M
d
- To 
m
d
C
a
T
d
Comm
nts 
(not 
To - 
 Cash 
per 
/subcompo
4 
Project 
 Cash 
Expenditure 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
T
T
● 
a.  Table 2: Designated Account Reconciliation Form 
 Designated Account Reconciliation Statement (imprest account) 
Designated Account 
No: 
Bank Name: 
1. Total Advanced by IFAD 
2. Less total amount recovered by 
IFAD 
3. Equals present outstanding amount advanced to the designated 
account (line 1 less line 2) 
4.Balance of designated account per attached bank statements as of 
(Date: day/month/year) 
5. Plus balance of the project account(s) (listed separately) 
Plus, balance of sub accounts (listed separately) 
Plus, balance of Cash in Hand 
Total of Bank Balances (designated A/C, PA, SUB accounts& cash 
in hand balance) (line 4+line 5) 
6. Plus total amount claimed in this WA no. 
7. Plus total amount withdrawn from the designated/PA/Grant 
account and not yet claimed for replenishment) or WAs pending 
submission 
  USD 
  USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
8. Plus amounts claimed in previous applications but not yet created 
at the date of bank statement and/or claimed after date of bank 
statement 
USD 
Applicat
ion No.  Date 
Amount 
USD 
$ 
$ 
$ 
9. Minus Interest earned (to be completed. If zero, please 
enter zero) 
10. Total Advance accounted for (line 5 through 
line 9) 
  USD 
  USD 
11. Explanation of any difference between the totals appearing in 
Lines 3 and 10 
  USD 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
Non eligible amount to be refunded to the 
designated account 
calculation errors in application of 
percentage financing 
counterpart financial 
resources to be reimbursed 
cheques not yet 
cleared/presented to Bank 
  USD 
  USD 
  USD 
  USD 
12 DATE 
● 
  SIGNATURE 
  Name in full  
  Title in Full 
b.  Table 3: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Project ________________________ 
Date of reconciliation ________________ 
Part I. Petty cash reconciliation 
Petty cash balance brought forward (a) 
Replenishments during the current month (b) 
Total petty cash balance (c = a + b) 
Disbursements during the current month (d)   
Petty cash book balance (e = c – d) 
Cash count balance (f) – see part ii. below 
Difference (G = E – F) 
Explanation Of Difference 
___________________________________________________________________ 
___________________________________________________________________ 
           ______________ 
            ______________ 
______________ 
             ______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
Part II - Cash Count 
Description 
Quantity 
Total amount 
bank notes 
 100 
  50 
  10 
coins 
Total in local currency 
Counted/reconciled by (Accounts Assistant)___________ 
Reviewed by (PA) ________________ 
Date _________________ 
c.  Table 4: Monthly DSA report 
Project Name:  
Lead Project Agency: IDEPA 
Reporting period: 1 Jan-31 Jan 2017 
 Monthly DSA report as at DD/MM/YYYY 
Name of 
Traveller/missi
on member 
Description 
of the 
Training 
course/miss
ion 
Cost 
(reporting 
period in 
USD) 
Annual 
Planned 
(USD) 
Cumulat
ive  Cost 
(annual 
in USD) 
Varianc
e (%) 
Locati
on 
Total 
Table 5: Monthly fuel consumption report 
Project Name:  
Lead Project Agency: MIMAIP 
Reporting period:  
Monthly fuel Consumption report as at DD/MM/YYYY 
Vehicl
e 
Locatio
n 
Quantity 
(litres) 
Cost 
(reporting 
period in 
USD) 
Annual 
Planned 
(USD) 
Cumulative  
Cost (annual 
in USD) 
Variance 
(%) 
Total 
●  Annex 3: Sample Periodic Financial Progress Report 
Table 1: Statement of cash receipts and payments  
(by category and by financier) 
notes 
20xx 
20xx-1 
 1 - Initial cash balance / or cash balance brought 
forward 
FINANCING: 
 - IFAD funds received: 
 - Initial deposit 
 - Replenishment of the 
Designated Account 
 - IFAD Direct Payments 
 - Funds received by the government - if 
any 
 - Funds received by the beneficiary - if 
any 
 - Other receipts - if any 
 2 - TOTAL FINANCING 
PROJECT EXPENDITURES (BY CATEGORY 
OF EXPENDITURES) 
USD 
USD 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
Category 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
IFAD Grant  (separate analysis if different sources 
of IFAD's funding) 
Consultancies 
Goods, Services and Inputs   
Training and Workshops 
Works 
Operating expenses 
Salaries and allowances 
Subtotal IFAD Grant 
Government Funds 
Consultancies 
Goods, Services and Inputs 
Training and workshops 
Works  
Operating expenses 
Salaries and allowances 
Subtotal Government Funds 
Beneficiary Funds 
Consultancies 
Goods, Services and Inputs 
Training and workshops 
Works 
Operating expenses 
Salaries and allowances 
Subtotal Beneficiary Funds 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 3 - TOTAL PROJECT 
EXPENDITURES 
Balance brought forward (1 + 2 - 3) 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Cumulative 
to date 
USD 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
a.  Table 2: Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component) 
 1 - Initial cash balance / or cash balance brought 
forward 
FINANCING: 
 - IFAD funds 
received: 
 - Initial deposit 
 - Replenishment of the Designated 
Account 
 - IFAD Direct 
Payments 
 - Funds received by the government - if 
any 
 - Funds received by the beneficiaries - if 
any 
 - Other receipts - if 
any 
 2 - TOTAL 
FINANCING 
Compon
ent 
        1 
IFAD 
grant  
Support to feed production  
Support to fingerling 
production  
Support to smallholder 
aquaculture farmers 
Support to aquaculture 
marketing 
 Nutrition / social risks 
Etc. 
Project 
Management, etc. 
Subtotal IFAD 
Funds 
Government Funds 
Support to feed production  
Support to fingerling 
production  
Support to smallholder 
aquaculture farmers 
Support to aquaculture 
marketing 
 Nutrition / social risks 
Etc. 
Project 
Management, etc. 
2 
3 
        1 
2 
3 
notes 
20xx 
20xx-
1 
USD  USD 
XX 
XX 
Cumulati
ve to date 
USD 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Subtotal Government Funds 
xx 
xx 
xx 
        1 
2 
3 
Beneficiary Funds 
Support to feed production  
Support to fingerling 
production  
Support to smallholder 
aquaculture farmers 
Support to aquaculture 
marketing 
 Nutrition / social risks 
Etc. 
Project 
Management, etc. 
Subtotal beneficiary  Funds 
 3 - TOTAL PROJECT 
EXPENDITURES 
Balance brought forward (1 + 
2 - 3) 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Table 3: Statement of comparative budget and actual amount by category 
notes 
20XX 
BUDG
ET 
USD 
20XX 
ACTU
AL 
USD 
VARIA
NCE 
USD 
FINANCING: 
 - IFAD funds 
received: 
 - Initial deposit 
 - Replenishment of the Special 
Account (SA) 
 - IFAD Direct Payments 
 - Funds received by the government 
- if any 
 - Funds received by beneficiaries - if 
any 
 - Other receipts 
- if any 
 TOTAL 
FINANCING 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
Catego
ry 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
IFAD Grant  (separate analysis if different sources of 
IFAD's funding) 
Civil Works 
Equipment, Goods and 
Vehicles   
Training, workshops, Technical assistance and 
studies 
Pasture improvement 
grants 
Income generating Activity (IGA) 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Grants 
Pasture reserve 
funds 
Operating 
Expenses 
Subtotal IFAD 
Grant 
Government 
Finance  
Civil Works 
Equipment, Goods and 
Vehicles   
Training, workshops, Technical assistance and 
studies 
Pasture improvement 
grants 
Income generating Activity (IGA) 
Grants 
Pasture reserve 
funds 
Operating 
Expenses 
Subtotal Government 
Funds 
Beneficiary 
Funds 
Civil Works 
Equipment, Goods and 
Vehicles   
Training, workshops, Technical assistance and 
studies 
Pasture improvement 
grants 
Income generating Activity (IGA) 
Grants 
Pasture reserve 
funds 
Operating 
Expenses 
Subtotal Beneficiary Funds 
6 
7 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
TOTAL PROJECT 
EXPENDITURES 
The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the budget 
of X% was due to…. 
Table 4: Statement of comparative budget and actual amount by component. 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
FINANCI
NG: 
 - IFAD funds 
received: 
notes 
20XX 
BUDG
ET 
20XX 
ACTU
AL 
VARIA
NCE 
USD 
USD 
USD 
 - Initial deposit 
XX 
 - Replenishment of the Special 
Account (SA) 
 - IFAD Direct 
Payments 
 - Funds received by the government - if 
any 
 - Funds received by 
beneficiaries - if any 
 - Other receipts - if 
any 
 2 - TOTAL 
FINANCING 
Component 
1 
1.a 
1.b 
2 
2.a 
2.b 
3 
IFAD grant  
Subtotal IFAD 
Funds 
Government 
Finance 
1 
1.a 
1.b 
2 
2.a 
2.b 
3 
1 
1.a 
1.b 
2 
2.a 
2.b 
3 
Subtotal Government 
Funds 
Beneficiary 
Funds 
Subtotal beneficiary  
Funds 
 3 - TOTAL PROJECT 
EXPENDITURES 
The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the budget of 
X% was due to…. 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Table 5: Designated Account Reconciliation 
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement (imprest account) 
Designated Account 
No: 
Bank Name: 
1. Total Advanced by IFAD 
2. Less total amount recovered by 
IFAD 
3. Equals present outstanding amount advanced to the designated 
account (line 1 less line 2) 
  USD 
  USD 
4.Balance of designated account per attached bank statements as of 
(Date: day/month/year) 
5. Plus balance of the project account(s) (listed separately) 
Plus, balance of sub accounts (listed separately) 
Plus balance of Cash in Hand 
Total of Bank Balances (designated A/C, PA, SUB accounts& cash 
in hand balance) (line 4+line 5) 
6. Plus total amount claimed in this WA no. 
7. Plus total amount withdrawn from the designated/PA/Grant 
account and not yet claimed for replenishment) or WAs pending 
submission 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
8. Plus amounts claimed in previous applications but not yet created 
at the date of bank statement and/or claimed after date of bank 
statement 
USD 
Applicat
ion No.  Date 
Amount 
USD 
$ 
$ 
$ 
9. Minus Interest earned (to be completed. If zero, please 
enter zero) 
10. Total Advance accounted for (line 5 through 
line 9) 
  USD 
  USD 
11. Explanation of any difference between the totals appearing in 
Lines 3 and 10 
  USD 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
Non eligible amount to be refunded to the 
designated account 
calculation errors in application of 
percentage financing 
counterpart financial 
resources to be reimbursed 
cheques not yet 
cleared/presented to Bank 
  USD 
  USD 
  USD 
  USD 
12 DATE 
  SIGNATURE 
  Name in full  
  Title in Full 
b.  Table 6: STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES –  
c.  WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT 
Project Name:  
Lead Project Agency: Ministry 
of Agriculture 
Reporting period: 1 Jan-30 
June 2012 
STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES - 
WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION 
STATEMENT 
By category of Expenditures in Local 
Currency 
WA 
n.. 
WA 
n.. 
WA n.. 
WA 
n.. 
Tota
l 
WA submitted to 
IFAD 
Category 
Descripti
on 
AAAA 
BBBB 
CCCC 
Catego
ry 
1 
2 
3 
Total 
In USD equiv/ 
Rejected from 
IFAD 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Net Reimbursed 
xx 
xx 
WA pending submission 
to IFAD 
WA 
n.. 
WA 
n..  WA n.. 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
WA 
n.. 
Catego
ry 
1 
Category 
Descripti
on 
AAAA 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
2 
3 
BBBB 
CCCC 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Total 
xx 
Withdrawal applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the historical 
exchange rate of the transfers to the Operating Account. 
Expenditures partially or totally rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here. 
This statement should be reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and Payments 
xx 
● 
●  Annex 4: Fixed Asset Register 
ASS
ET  
RE
F. 
NO. 
ASSET 
DESCRI
PTION 
COMPO
NENT 
FINAN
CING 
SOURC
E 
BENEFI
CARY 
AGENC
Y 
LOCA
TION 
ASSIG
NED 
TO 
TAG 
NUM
BER 
SUPP
LIER 
NAM
E 
PMT/I
NV. 
REFER
ENCE 
DATE 
OF 
PURC
HASE 
DAT
E OF 
REC
EIPT 
PURC
HASE 
VALU
E 
REM
ARKS 
4. Fixed Asset Register 
Tot
al 
a.   
●  Annex 5: Vehicle Log 
Vehicle registration number ______________________________________             
Assigned driver ______________________________ 
Time 
Mileage 
Trip 
Da
te 
Depar
ting 
Arri
val 
Depar
ting 
Arri
val 
Destina
tion 
Purp
ose 
Fuel 
purchase 
Mile
age 
Quan
tity 
Drive
r 
signat
ure 
Respon
sible 
staff 
●  Annex 6: Vehicle History Record 
Insurance 
Type  
Period 
covered 
Fitness tests 
Cost 
Checked 
Cost 
by  
Vehicle registration number     ______________________________________                                     
Assigned driver ____________________ 
Date  Repairs 
Service & maintenance 
Description of 
repair 
Garage  Cost  Description of 
Garage 
Cost 
service 
Report accidents in the space below, providing all relevant details for each 
occurrence: 
Date: 
Place: 
Name of driver: 
Circumstances: 
Damage to PCU vehicle: 
Damage to other vehicles: 
Injuries (indicate name of victims and describe injuries): 
Insurance settlement: 
a.   
●  Annex 7: Sample Recovery Plan  
Recovery 
Designated  
IFAD 
IFAD Loan Amount 
Project Completion 
31-
Loan Closing 
W
D
U
E
S
1 
18/01 
$
250 
€
€
Exchange 
- 
- 
0
172 
172 
#V
Partic 
Rep
P
Autho 
Alloc 
Justific 
20 000  
30-
Unjustified  
USD                  
0
(77 
R
N
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
W
D
Estimate v
(
Estimated WA 
  (
Prop
Recov 
Recovery  (
Cumu 
Recovery  (
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
21-
3-
5-
7-
5-
31-
10-
111 
72 
74 
70 
64 
82 
26 
4
3
3
4
4
8
1
50 
25 
26 
29 
25 
66 
26 
50 
75 
101 
131 
157 
223 
250 
T
503 665.77 
250 000.00 
Cumu 
Unjus 
ba
(
(50 
(75 
(101 
(131 
(157 
(223 
(250 
In accordance with IFAD procedures, any amount unjustified at the time of loan closing date will be promptly refunded to 
Prepare
Confirme
15-Oct--
 D
D
●  Annex 8: Procurement Manual 
Contents 
A. Preamble  
A.1- Public Procurement Environment in Mozambique 
A.2-Capacity assessment 
B. Programme’s Institutional arrangements 
B-1. Programme Institutional aspects and implementation 
arrangements 
B.2- Programme procurement arrangements 
B.3- General Considerations 
B-4. Applicable procurement rules and regulations 
B-5. Procurement Methods and prior review thresholds 
C. Procurement planning 
D. Record keeping 
E. Register of contracts 
List of Procedures 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB for goods or works) 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB for goods, works or non-
consulting services) 
Shopping (for goods; works or non-consulting services) 
Direct Procurement  
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS for Consulting Services) 
Least Cost Selection (LCS for Consulting Services) 
Consultant’s Qualification-based Selection (CQS) 
Selection of Individual Consultants (IC) 
Single Source Selection (SSS) 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
5 
5 
7 
8 
13 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
PRODAPE Procurement Manual 
A.  PREAMBLE 
Public Procurement Environment in Mozambique 
Public  Procurement  is  regulated  by  a  decree  (Decree  Nº  5/2016  dated  8  March  - 
Regulations  for  Contracting  of  Public  Works,  Supply  of  Goods  and  Consultancy  and 
Non-Consultancy Services) which approves the regulations for public Works contracts, 
supply  of  Goods  and  Consultancy  (and  non-consultancy)  services.  The  regulations 
cover  goods,  works  and  services  (including  consultancy)  for  all  procurement  using 
national  budget  funds.  The  decree  is  enshrined  in  the  State  Financial  Management 
System (SISTAFE) Law. Two Ministerial Orders were issued with the aim to set up the 
institutional  arrangement  following  the  Decree.  The  Ministerial  Order  nº  141/2006 
dated  5  September  establishes  the  public  procurement  authority  (UFSA)  within  the 
Ministry of Finance, while Ministerial Order nº 142/2006 dated 5 September approves 
the  structure  of  procuring  units.  Standard  bidding  documents  were  approved  with 
ministerial  orders;  however,  these  documents  are  not  updated  to  accommodate 
provisions of the new decree.  
However, there are few weaknesses in the system that may negatively affect the project 
efficiency, 
the  complexity  of  the  Government’s  electronic  financial 
administration system e-SISTAFE; and complex procedures for approving contracts and 
procurement-related activities, and the delays this may lead to. 
including 
Donors  and  development  partners’  overall  appreciation  of  the  current  status  of 
public procurement in Mozambique.  
The existing legal framework for public procurement in Mozambique is assessed to face 
some  challenges.  In  fact,  according  to  an  Independent  assessment  of  Public 
Procurement system carried out by the AfdB in 2017, the public procurement system in 
Mozambique-both  in  terms  of:  i)  national  public  procurement  legal  framework  and 
regulatory  institutions  performance  and  ii)  procurement  practices-  was  assessed  to  be 
moderately risky. 
Capacity assessment 
During  the  programme  design  mission,  IFAD  team  undertook  a  comprehensive 
assessment  of:  (i)  the  degree  of  practical  implementation  of  the  Mozambican  public 
procurement  framework,  and  (ii)  the  procurement  capacity  of  the  programme 
implementing  agency  IDEPA  and  other  stakeholders  (  oversight  institutions:  IGF, 
UFSA) 
IFAD met with the World Bank (WB) and reviewed recent reports and assessments of 
the African Development Bank, the World Bank within the framework of their work in 
Mozambique in the procurement domain. 
Main findings of the procurement capacity assessment: 
The  existing  legal  framework  for  public  procurement  in  Mozambique  is  currently 
governed  by the  Public  Procurement  Decree  (PPD)  No:  5/2016  that  establishes  the 
principles  and  procedures  to  be  applied  in  any  procurement  held  by  public  authorities 
and institutions governed by public law, under public control or using public funds. The 
overriding principles of the legislation are: (i) legality, (ii) purpose, (iii) reasonableness, 
(iv) proportionality, (v) public interest, (vi) transparency, (vii) publicity, (viii) equality, 
(ix)  competition,  (x)  fairness,  (xi)  good  will,   (xii)  stability,  (xiii)  motivation, 
(xiv)   responsibility,  (xv)  sound  financial  management,  (xvi)speed  and  (xvii)  other 
applicable principles of public law. 
The  Public  Procurement  Authority  (UFSA)  is  the  main regulatory  authority.  It  is  an 
important  tool  to  improve  the  completion  and  transparency  and  to  reduce  costs. 
Unfortunately, the Procurement Regulatory Authority (UFSA) does not have resources 
to: (i) handle complaints; (ii) conduct or contract out annual independent  procurement 
audits; and (iii) publish contract awards; 
The existing legal framework for public procurement in Mozambique is assessed to be 
broadly in compliance with international standards.    
Overall,  the  capacity  assessment  has  determined  that  the  Mozambican  public 
procurement  system  is  deemed  to  be  consistent  with  the  IFAD’s  procurement 
guidelines, in particular, and with  the  International  donor  community  requirements, in 
general.  Hence,  the  national  procurement  system  will  be  used  to  undertake  the 
programme-funded  procurement  activities  subject  to  the  implementation  of  the  risk 
mitigation plan detailed below. The team needs a capacity building session on the IFAD 
procurement  guidelines  including  the  use  of  the  procurement  plans  and  the  contracts’ 
register  as  monitoring  tools  and  to  anticipate  activities  by  preparing  all  bidding 
documents in advance for all planned procurements 
B.  PROGRAMME’S PROCUREMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Programme Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
PRODAPE  will  be  integrated  into  the  Ministry  of  Sea,  Interior  Waters  and  Fisheries 
(MIMAIP) that will be responsible for providing overall policy guidance and oversight.  
Day-to-day  oversight  will  be  assigned  to  IDEPA as  the  lead  project  agency 
implementing  the  project  through  a  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU).  The  Ministry´s 
implement  and  monitor 
(DPMAIPs)  will  coordinate, 
Provincial  Directorates 
procurement activities at the provincial levels.  
Robust procurement systems and procedures will be put in place and used at all times 
during  project  implementation.    Public,  open  and  competitive  procurement  processes 
will  be  used,  as  relevant  to  warrant  transparency  and  safeguard  project  resources. 
Templates will be provided for every step of the procurement cycle.. 
The  national  procurement  officer  in  addition  to  the  regional  procurement  officers  and 
the  provincial  procurement  officers  will  make  sure  the  procurement  activities  are 
conducted  as  stated  on  the  procurement  manual,  the  procurement  plan  and  monitor 
contracts using the e-archiv and the contracts’ register. 
Programme procurement arrangements 
All  procurement  for  the  project  will  be  under  the  oversight  of  the PCU.  The  PCU 
Procurement Specialist will oversee and carry out all PRODAPE procurement activities 
in  coordination  with  specialised  and  technical  units  .  At  the  provincial  level  , 
procurement would be limited to small works and locally available service providers for 
issues  such  as  transport  and  subject  to  the  close  supervision  by  the PCU  Fiduciary 
Officer.  As  required  by  the  PPD, bidding  documents  will  be  submitted  to  the  the 
administrative tribunal for approval. The PCU will also provide the necessary technical 
support  in  the  preparation  of  technical  specifications,  bills  of  quantities  and  ToR  to 
project participating provinces, as required.  
While  PCU  staff  will  knowledgeable  on  national  procurement  procedures  to  be  used 
under  PRODAPE,  they  would  need  to  be  trained  on  applicable  IFAD  procedures  and 
guidelines. A joint induction training should be conducted with IFAD, UFSA and staff 
from  the  Administrative  Tribunal  to  explain  the  different  roles  within  the  project  and 
provide guidance for smooth implementation. UFSA should publish all PRODAPE calls 
for  bidding  and  contract  awards.  All  relevant  documentation  will  be  stored  in  the  e-
archive system. 
Risk Mitigation Measures  
The  procurement  capacity  assessment  identified  overall  procurement  implementation 
risks and gaps and proposed the following mitigation measures:  
Analysis of 
Procurement 
Capacity 
1. Organization. 
Management of the 
project involves a 
PCU in IDEPA. This 
unit will ensure the 
overall coordination 
of the project and 
assume PRODAPE 
fiduciary 
responsibilities 
2. Facilities, Support 
Capacity and Staff 
Experience. 
The project 
implementation 
would involve, in 
addition to the PCU 
other 
structures/department
s of the MIMAIP 
such as ANE and 
provincial entities 
3. Record Keeping 
and Filing System. 
Procurement records 
will be kept under the 
custody of the 
procuring in IDEPA 
4. Procurement 
Planning. 
Issues/Risks 
Mitigation Measures 
During the assessment, it was 
not possible to ascertain that 
IDEPA is committed the 
fiduciary responsibility and 
the tasks that it entails. 
It is recommended to make the 
fiduciary arrangements clear in 
the legal agreement and in the 
Programme Implementation 
Manual (PIM) for IDEPA and 
the entities involved in the 
project at the provincial level. 
There are some doubts about 
the availability of support 
staff and capacity to 
undertake project-related 
procurement and produce 
adequate documentation in a 
timely manner. 
It is not sure that the IDEPA 
will have the capacity to cope 
with the project volume of 
transactions since some 
procurement transactions are 
handled by other 
departments. 
It is uncertain that IDEPA 
will update the project’s 
Procurement Plan; it appears 
that the institution does not 
perceive the instrument as a 
management and monitoring 
tool. 
. 
(i) Conduct an induction training 
to brief and update MIMAIP/ 
IDPA staff who will be involved 
in project procurement on the 
main procurement procedures -- 
to be used in project 
implementation -- before the start 
of project operations;  
(ii) Hire a senior procurement 
specialist and a fiduciary officer 
to help in the preparation of the 
documents for procurement and 
selection of consultants; and  
(iii) Train staff and consultants 
involved in the project, on IFAD 
procedures and guidelines, as 
required. 
Ensure that instructions and 
training are given to ensure that 
project specific files are kept for 
all procurement and related 
transactions and recorded contract 
by contract. Storing documents 
using e-archiving system can ease 
access to documentation. 
(i) Prepare a detailed Annual 
Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
with full costing consistent with 
an Annual Procurement Plan; 
(ii) Ensure proper coordination 
between IDEPA and other 
relevant units and departments at 
MIMAIP especially with respect 
5. Monitoring/Control 
Systems. 
6. Capacity to meet 
IFAD’s Reporting 
Requirements. 
While the existing legal 
framework for public 
procurement in Mozambique 
is deemed to be almost in 
compliance with international 
standards, it still presents 
certain shortcomings at 
operational level.  
Register of contracts and 
annual reports on statistics 
for the overall procurement 
transactions are  not provided 
in a timely manner and in an 
adequate format. 
to procurement planning;  
(iii) Use the procurement plan as 
a monitoring tool for processing 
timely activities, not only as a 
reporting tool. 
 Update the procurement section 
in the PIM to reflect new PPD 
provisions. 
(i) Ensure that the Project 
Coordinator is assigned with the 
responsibility of reporting: 
(ii) Clearly define the content of 
reports and contributions of all 
entities involved in the project. 
(iii) Involve UFSA in project 
supervision missions and 
associated reports.  
7.  Conclusions:  The  executing  agency  MIMAIP/  IDEPA  has  the  capacity  to  carry  out  and 
manage the procurement under this financing, provided that the above recommended actions 
are  effectively  carried  out.  This  does  not  apply  to  the  Procurement  Plan,  which  should  be 
provided before the approval of the financing. 
Procurement Arrangements  
Overriding principles. As provided in  Section 7.05 of the  IFAD General  Conditions, 
procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions of the Borrower/Recipient’s procurement regulations, to the extent such are 
consistent  with  the  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines  and  by  observing  the  following 
specific principles:  
●  Procurement  will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  Financing  Agreement 
and any duly agreed amendments thereto;  
●  Procurement  will  be  conducted  within  the  project  implementation  period, 
except as provided under Article 4.10(a)(ii) of IFAD General Conditions;  
●  The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated 
funds established in the Financing Agreement;  
●  Procurement is  to be  consistent with  the duly  approved AWPB including a 
procurement plan;  
●  Procurement is to result in the best value of money and fit for purpose.  
Procurement of goods. The goods to be financed under the project include but are not 
limited to the following: office equipment (computers, printers, photocopiers and other 
equipment),  accounting  software  and  vehicles.  Contracts  for  procurement  of  goods 
costing  USD  200  000  or  more  will  be  awarded  based  on  International  Competitive 
Bidding (ICB); those costing USD 10 000 or more, but less than USD 200 000 will be 
based  on  National  Competitive  Bidding  (NCB);  while  those  costing  less  than  USD 
10,000 will be based on National Shopping/Request for Quotations (RfQ).  
Procurement of works. Works to be financed under the PRODAPE include, but are not 
limited  to,  the  construction  of  Irrigation  scheme  /  ponds.  The  procurement  of  works 
estimated to cost more than USD 50,000 and less than USD 1 million will be carried out 
under  NCB;  ICB  will  be  applied  for  contracts  to  cost  USD  1  million  and  above. 
National  Shopping/RfQ  will  be  applied  for  contracts  with  values  estimated  at  USD 
50,000  or  below,  as  long  as  they  are  clearly  identified  in  the  relevant  AWPB  and 
procurement plan.  
Procurement of consulting services. The consulting services to be financed under the 
project  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  are  the  following:  the  selection  of  individual 
consultants,  the  market  study  and  other  qualitative  studies  on  social  issues  relevant  to 
the  project.  These  studies  will  be  under  the  responsibility  of  MIMAIP/IDEPA.  (i) 
Quality  and  Cost  Based  Selections  (QCBS);  (ii)  Least-Cost  Selection  (LCS);  (iii) 
Selection Based on the Consultants’ Qualifications (CQS); (iv) Single Source Selection 
(SSS); and, (v) Selection of Individual Consultants (IC).  
Direct  Contracting.  Direct  contracting  might  be  used,  if  duly  justified,  for  some 
expenses  which  could  include  hiring  venues  for  training,  village/  community  based 
events  such  as  awareness  raising  and  sensitization,    beneficiary    exchange  visits  and 
visits to demonstration sites.  
Prior Review Thresholds. The following shall be subject to prior review: 
i.  Award  of  any  contract  for  goods  and  equipment  to  cost  USD 50 000  or 
equivalent or more; 
ii.  Award  of  any  contract  for  works  estimated  to  cost  USD 100 000  or 
equivalent or more; 
iii.  Award  to  a  firm  of  any  contract  for  consulting  services  estimated  to  cost 
USD 50 000 or equivalent 
iv.  Award to  an individual of any  contract  for consulting services  estimated to 
cost USD 30 000 equivalent and more;  
v.  All  contracts  awarded  through  direct  contracting  and/or  single  source 
selection; and 
vi.  Award of and the first two contracts regardless of the contract amount. 
1. 
The  above  thresholds  may  be  modified  by  IFAD  unilaterally  or  upon  MIMAIP 
request  as  a  result  of  experience  in  the  field  during  the  course  of  PRODAPE 
implementation; 
2.  All  contracts  will  be  listed  in  the  Register  of  Contracts  maintained  by  the 
procuring  entity  with  the  date  of  IFAD  approval,  irrespective  of  the  contract 
having  been  approved  by  IFAD  or  not.  As  this  report  facilitates  the  review  and 
approval of payment requests for contracts, it is to be updated and submitted to the 
IFAD Country Programme Manager (CPM) on a quarterly basis. It would also be 
necessary  that  the  PMU at  IDEPA  prepares  annual  statistics  for  all  procurement 
transactions carried out under the project.  
3.  Bidding Documents. All bidding documents for the procurement of goods, works 
and services will be prepared by  IDEPA procurement officer as required. At the 
provincial level, procurement assistants under the overall guidance of the IDEPA 
procurement officer. All procurement documents will be cleared by MIMAIP and 
the IFAD before any action is taken. As per IFAD Procurement Handbook, where 
ICB  is  being  used,  the  World  Bank  ICB  procedures,  as  set  forth  in  their 
Procurement Guidelines, will apply in all cases. 
Procurement Plan.  
II. PROCUREMENT PLAN 
Full  version  of  the  procurement  plan  covering  the  whole  programme  duration  will  be 
available  at  MIMAIP/IDEPA  before  programme  effectiveness.  The  procurement  plan 
will be updated at least semi-annually in agreement with IFAD or as required to reflect 
actual project implementation needs and improvements. 
General Considerations 
The  responsibility  for  the  implementation  of  the  project,  and  therefore  for  the  award 
and  administration  of  contracts  under  the  project,  rests  with  the  Borrower/MIMAIP. 
The IFAD, for its part, is required to ensure that the proceeds of any loan or grant are 
used only for the purposes for which the loan or grant was granted.  While in practice 
the specific procurement rules and procedures to be followed in the implementation of a 
project  depend  on  the  circumstances  of  the  particular  case,  seven  (7)  principles 
generally guide the Fund’s requirements: 1) Ethics, 2) Accountability, 3) Competition, 
4) Fairness, 5) Transparency, 6) Efficiency, Effectiveness & Economy and 7) Value for 
Money. 
Ethics  :  The  guiding  principles  of  ethical  behavior  are  impartiality,  independence  and 
integrity.  No  person  or  entity  shall  use  his/her/its  authority,  position  or  office  for 
personal  gain,  which  will  be  defined  as  soliciting,  accepting  or  otherwise  benefiting 
from  anything  of  material  value,  in  any  form21,  either  in  person  or  indirectly  through 
close  relatives  or  associates,  as  a  result  of  procurement  financed  by  IFAD. 
Borrower/Recipient officials engaged in procurement activity have a duty to: 
(a) maintain and enhance the reputation of the Borrower/Recipient country by: 
(i)  maintaining  the  highest  standards  of  honesty  and  integrity  in  all 
professional relationships; 
(ii)  developing 
the  highest  possible  standards  of  professional 
competence; 
(iii)  maximizing  the  use  of  IFAD  funds  and  other  resources  for  which 
they are responsible for the purposes for which these funds and resources 
were provided to the Borrower/Recipient country; and 
(iv) complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
• 
the financing agreement; 
21
 Including, but not restricted to, gifts, services, favours or hospitality 
• 
• 
• 
the laws and regulations of the Borrower/Recipient country; 
accepted professional ethics; and 
contractual obligations; 
(b) declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed 
by others to affect, impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of 
interest).  In  a  situation  of  this  nature,  the  official  concerned  should  not 
participate  in  any  way  in  the  procurement  process,  to  avoid  mis-procurement; 
and 
(c) respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not 
use  such  information  for  personal  gain  or  for  the  unfair  benefit  of  any  bidder, 
supplier  or  contractor.  Information  given  in  the  course  of  their  duties  shall  be 
true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
Accountability:  The  Borrower/Recipient  is  accountable  to  IFAD  for  all  actions  and 
decisions in relation to project-funded procurement. This includes, but is not limited to: 
(a) Ensuring that the funds are used solely for the purpose for which they were 
provided; and 
(b)  Ensuring  that  procurement  is  undertaken  in  accordance  with  these 
Guidelines. 
Competition:  Full,  fair  and  legitimate  competition  among  eligible  suppliers  and 
contractors is the foundation on which project-funded procurement activities should be 
based.  The  most  common  method  of  seeking  competition  is  through  a  competitive 
bidding process, and, in this regard, IFAD specifies that all goods, works and services 
should  be  obtained  through  an  agreed22  procurement  process  involving  at  least  three 
separate23 suppliers or contractors whose business is directly related to the procurement 
being  undertaken.  It  is  recognized  that  it  is  neither  practical  nor  efficient  to  advertise 
internationally for low-value contracts for goods, works or services, and the degree to 
which  the  principle  of  competition  is  required  for  each  procurement  activity  will  be 
outlined  in  the  procurement  method  approved  by  IFAD  within  the  procurement  plan. 
Borrowers/Recipients  will  be  expected  to  promote  genuine  competition  at  every 
opportunity and maybe required to provide evidence of: 
(a)  fair  and  genuine  competition  in  the  compilation  of  shortlists  and  in  the 
solicitation of bids; and 
(b) the effectiveness of competition during the bidding process. 
Single  sourcing  and  direct  contracting  do  not  provide  the  elements  of  competition 
required  by  IFAD.  Only  in  exceptional  circumstances  will  these  approaches  be 
considered and approved in procurement plans agreed with IFAD. 
Fairness:  IFAD’s  expectation  is  that  project-funded  procurement  will  be  open  to  as 
many  eligible  bidders  from  IFAD’s  developed  and  developing  Member  States  as  is 
practicable  in  order  to  meet  the  requirements  of  competition.  IFAD  expects 
Borrowers/Recipients to ensure that all prospective bidders are: 
(a) managed with a consistent approach and application of laws, regulations and 
requirements in respect of the procurement process; 
(b) offered a level playing field on which to genuinely compete; and 
22
 “Agreed” refers to the use of a recognized procurement method approved in the procurement plan. 
23
  In this context, “separate” means that the suppliers or contractors must (i) all have separate ownership, (ii) not  have any affiliation, 
connection, association or attachment with each other that may be deemed to compromise the principle of competition, and (iii) 
have no common shareholders or directors. 
(c) treated in a fair, impartial and unbiased way, so that principles of impartiality 
and equal opportunity can be demonstrated in all procurement activities. 
In striving for fairness in its procurement operations, IFAD: 
(a)  will  not  tolerate  exclusion  of,  discrimination,  bias  or  prejudice  against,  or 
favouritism  or  inequality  towards  any  potential  supplier  or  contractor,  either 
directly  or  indirectly  through  manipulation  of  any  part  of  the  procurement 
process, including, but not limited to, the preparation of technical specifications, 
evaluation criteria or bidding requirements. Where any such activity is suspected 
or  proven,  IFAD  reserves  the  right  to  take  any  preventative,  corrective  or 
punitive action it considers appropriate; and  
(b)  will  seek  to  address,  in  consultation  with  the  Borrower/Recipient,  any 
impositions  that  may  deter  or  impinge  on  the  attainment  of  fairness  within  the 
procurement process. 
Transparency:  IFAD  expects  the  highest  degree  of  transparency  and  openness  within 
the procurement processes undertaken under its projects. A lack of transparency can be 
perceived as an attempt to withhold information, which in turn may make the fairness 
and  integrity  of  the  procurement  process  suspect.  Transparency  within  procurement 
relates to disclosing the public domain, information for parties involved, interested in or 
affected by the process, including but not limited to information on: 
(a) the availability of potential and existing procurement opportunities; 
(b) where to access relevant data; 
(c) the processes by which the procurement is being undertaken; 
(d) the mechanisms by which contracts will be awarded; 
(e) contract award data; and 
(f) appeal procedures. 
Modes  of  communication/publication  of  such  information  will  vary  depending  on  the 
nature  of  the  data  but  will  generally  be  through  existing  means  of  public  information 
(e.g.  government  websites,  public  notice  boards  or  media)  or  in  the  procurement 
documentation  relevant  to  an  individual  procurement  activity  (e.g.  bid  notices  and 
bidding  documents).  Borrowers/Recipients  are  required  at  all  times  to  act  openly, 
predictably and in accordance with the information provided. 
Efficiency,  Effectiveness  and  Economy:  IFAD  requires  Borrowers/Recipients  to 
demonstrate  efficiency  and  economy  in  undertaking  project-related  procurement,  to 
avoid undue implementation delays and to achieve value for money. Procurement must 
be well organized, carried out correctly with regard to quantity, quality and timeliness, 
and at the optimum price, in accordance with the appropriate guidelines, principles and 
regulations.  Processes  must  be  proportionate  to  the  procurement  activity,  so  that  the 
overall cost of conducting the procurement process is minimized and tailored to the size 
of the budget for the activity being undertaken, while upholding the guiding principles. 
Efficiencies  can  be  obtained  through  a  combination  of  methods.  For  instance,  a 
strategic  approach  can  be  taken  to  planning,  combining  and  conducting  procurement 
activities so as to minimize loss of time and resources. For this reason, the design of all 
IFAD-funded projects must now include a procurement plan. 
Value for money: Underpinning all of the above is the need to obtain value for money 
for  all  project  procurement  activities  through  the  optimum  combination  of  several 
factors, including: 
(a) applying sound, internationally recognized procurement principles; 
(b)  ensuring  that  the  goods,  works  or  services  procured  meet  the  requirements 
for the task and are not overspecified; 
(c) ensuring that the goods, works or services are contracted on the best possible 
terms, taking into account their expected life cycle; and 
(d)  ensuring  that  the  provider/supplier  of  the  goods,  works  or  services  is 
qualified, legally entitled and competent to execute the contract. 
Best  value  does  not  necessarily  mean  the  lowest  initial  price  option,  but  rather 
represents  the  best  return  on  investment,  taking  into  consideration  the  unique  and 
specific  circumstances  of  each  procurement  activity;  the  balance  of  time,  cost  and 
quality  required;  and  the  successful  overall  outcome  of  the  contract  in  meeting  its 
original objectives. 
Applicable procurement rules and regulations 
Overriding principles 
As  provided  in  Section  7.05  of  the  General  Conditions,  procurement  of  goods,  works 
and  services  shall  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
Borrower/Recipient’s procurement regulations, to the extent such are consistent with the 
IFAD Procurement Guidelines and by observing the following specific principles:  
●  Procurement  will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  Financing  Agreement  and 
any duly agreed amendments thereto;  
●  Procurement  will  be  conducted  within  the  Programme  implementation  period, 
except as provided under Article 4.10(a)(ii) of IFAD General Conditions;  
●  The  cost  of  the  procurement  is  not  to  exceed  the  availability  of  duly  allocated 
funds as per the Financing Agreement;  
●  Procurement  is  to  be  consistent  with  the  duly  approved  annual  work  plan  and 
budget  (AWP/B)  including  a  procurement  plan  (for  the  first  time,  the 
procurement  plan  will  cover 
the  programme 
implementation period);  
the  first  18  months  of 
●  Procurement is to result in the best value of money and fit for purpose.  
●  All goods, works and services procured will be exempt from duties and taxes.  
Procurement Methods and prior review thresholds 
Procurement methods and thresholds. For activities to be implemented by PRODAPE 
Project, the following procurement methods and thresholds will apply. 
Procurement of goods/non-consulting services  
●  Goods and Works and Non-consulting services 
1.  Procurement methods and Prior review thresholds  
The  goods  to  be  financed  under  the  programme  include  but  are  not  limited  to  the 
following: Office equipment (computers, printers, photocopiers, and other equipment), 
accounting  software,  barns,  insulated  tents,  vegetable  irrigation  system,  vehicles,  and 
minibus.  
●  International  Competitive  Bidding  (ICB)  will  be  used  for  the  procurement  of 
goods costing USD 200 000 equivalent and above. Where ICB is being used, the 
World Bank ICB procedures, as set forth in their Procurement Guidelines, will 
apply in all cases. 
●  National Competitive Bidding (NCB)(or Open procedure) will be used for the 
procurement  of  goods  costing  USD  100 000  equivalent  or  more  but  less  than 
USD 200 000 equivalent. Procedures to be followed are those as set forth in the 
Mozambique’s Public Procurement Decree (PPD) no. 05/2016  and described in 
this Manual. 
●  National Shopping will be used for the procurement of goods costing less than 
USD  10,000  equivalent  will  be  based  on  as  described  in  the  Procurement 
Manual. 
●  Direct Contracting might be used, if duly justified, for some expenses related 
to  venues  for  training,  village/  community  based  events  such  as  awareness 
campaigns, farmer exchange and study tours, and visits to demonstration sites.  
Procurement of works 
he  works  to  be  financed  under  the  programme  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  the 
following:  construction  of  fruit  processing  units,  construction  of  milk  collecting  and 
cold  storage,  construction  of  Cattle/sheep/goat  market/  barrier,  construction  of 
Vegetable  /  fruit  markets,  construction  of  Market  roads  and  construction  of  Irrigation 
scheme / ponds.  
●  International  Competitive  Bidding  (ICB)  will  be  used  for  the  procurement  of 
works costing USD 
1 Million equivalent and above. Where ICB is being used, the World Bank ICB 
procedures, as set forth in their Procurement Guidelines, will apply in all cases.  
● 
 National Competitive Bidding (NCB)(or Open procedure) will be used for the 
procurement  of  works  costing  USD  200 000  equivalent  or  more  but  less  than 
USD1 Million equivalent. Procedures to be followed are those as set forth in the 
Mozambique Public Procurement Decree (PPD) no. 5/2016 and described in this 
Manual. 
●  National Shopping will be used for the procurement of works costing less than 
USD  50 000  equivalent  will  be  based  on  as  described  in  the  Procurement 
Manual. 
Definition of the applicable Procurement methods 
located  and  operating  both  within 
●  International Competitive Bidding:  International  competitive bidding (ICB) is  a 
procurement method suited to high-value requirements that would be of interest 
to  the international  business  community. The objective of  ICB is  to  provide all 
eligible  prospective  bidders 
the 
Borrower’s/Recipient’s country and abroad with timely and adequate notification 
of the Borrower’s/Recipient’s requirements and  an equal  opportunity to  bid  for 
the  required  goods  and  works.  Where  ICB  is  the  identified  method  of 
procurement  within  an  approved  procurement  plan,  World  Bank  procedures  as 
set forth in their guidelines will apply. As per the new  Procurement Regulations 
for Investment Project Financing (IPF) Borrowers of the World Bank available 
at: 
https://policies.worldbank.org/sites/ppf3/PPFDocuments/Forms/DispPage.aspx?
docid=4005&ver=current, the competitive bidding is now  called “ Request  for 
Bids  (RFB)”.  A  RFB  is  a  competitive  method  for  the  solicitation  of  Bids.  It 
should  be  used  when,  because  of  the  nature  of  the  Goods,  Works,  or  Non-
consulting  Services  to  be  provided,  the  Borrower  is  able  to  specify  detailed 
requirements  to  which  Bidders  respond  in  offering  Bids.  The  minimum  period 
allowed for preparation of Bids/Proposals shall be thirty (30) Business Days for 
international  competitive  procurement.  The  Standard  Procurement 
open 
Document 
at: 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/299661509568509693/SPD-Request-for-Bids-
GOODS-1-envelope-OCT-2017.docx 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/328641509642865653/SPD-Request-for-Bids-
SMALL-WORKS-1-Env-OCT-2017.docx for works. 
available 
Request 
Goods 
Bids 
and 
for 
for 
for 
at 
is 
●  National Competitive Bidding (NCB)(or Open procedure) (Article 6 of the PPD 
No 5/2016):  Open procedure is used where all bidders may submit their tenders 
without any limitation. Both qualification and financial offer is submitted in open 
procedure. The tender documents to be used are those as defined in Art. 47-2 of 
the PPD no. 5/2016 and provided electronically against fees payment. 
●  Shopping.  Shopping  is  a  procurement  method  that  entails  comparing  price 
quotations from several suppliers or contractors (usually at least three) to ensure 
competitive  prices.  It  is  an  appropriate  method  for  procuring  readily  available, 
off-the-shelf goods or standard specification commodities that are small in value, 
or simple civil works of small value. Requests for quotations should indicate the 
description  and  quantity  of  the  goods,  together  with  desired  delivery  (or 
completion)  time  and  place.  Quotations  may  be  submitted  by  mail,  electronic 
mail  or  facsimile.  The  evaluation  of  quotations  will  follow  the  principles  of 
competition. The terms of the accepted offer are to be incorporated in a purchase 
order or brief contract.  Under international  shopping, the purchaser is  to  solicit 
quotations  from  at  least  three  suppliers  in  two  different  countries.  National 
shopping  may  be  used  where  the  desired  goods  are  ordinarily  available  from 
more  than  one  source  in  the  country  of  the  Borrower/Recipient  at  competitive 
prices. 
●  Direct Contracting (for Goods and Works) consists in procuring goods or works 
without  competition  (by  single  or  sole-source  selection).  Due  to  its  non-
competitive  nature,  DC  may  is  only  permitted  in  the  following  exceptional 
circumstances: 
a)  An  existing  contract  for  goods  or  works  awarded  in  accordance  with 
procedures acceptable to IFAD, may be extended for additional goods or 
works  of  a  similar  nature  to  a  maximum  of  25  per  cent  (%)  of  the 
original contract value, with the prior approval of IFAD, provided that 
no advantage could be obtained by further competition and that the prices 
on the extended contract are reasonable. Provision for such an extension, 
if considered likely in advance, is to be included in the original contract; 
b)  Standardization  of  vehicles,  equipment  or  spare  parts 
to  ensure 
compatibility with existing vehicles, equipment or machinery may justify 
additional purchases from the original supplier. For such purchases to be 
justified,  the  original  vehicles,  equipment  or  machinery  should  be 
suitable;  the  number  of  new  items  should  generally  be  less  than  the 
existing  number;  the  price  should  be  reasonable;  and  the  advantages  of 
another  make  or  source  of  equipment  are  to  have  been  considered  and 
rejected on grounds acceptable to IFAD; 
c)  The  required  equipment  is  proprietary  and  obtainable  only  from  one 
source; 
d)  The contractor responsible for a process design requires the purchase of 
critical  items  from  a particular supplier as a condition  of a performance 
guarantee; and  
e)  Purchases from the original supplier may also be justified in exceptional 
cases and emergencies, such as in response to a natural disaster, conflict 
and  post  conflict,  or  in  countries  where  there  are  restrictions  to  free 
markets and enterprises. 
Any  request  for  direct  contracting  from  a  Borrower/Recipient  must  be 
accompanied by a detailed justification, which IFAD will examine carefully 
to ensure that it is satisfied that no other alternative selection methods can 
be used. 
In Direct Procurement, the needs shall be met upon a market price research by a 
person  or  persons  to  be  assigned  by  contracting  officer,  without  necessity  of 
establishing  a  tender  commission  and  of  requiring  the  qualification  provisions 
stated in article 265 of the PPD no.5/2016. 
Any  request  for  direct  contracting  from  a 
Borrower/Recipient  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
detailed  justification,  which  IFAD  will  examine 
carefully to ensure that it is satisfied that no other 
alternative selection methods can be used. 
Consulting Services:  
The consulting services to be financed under the programme include, but are not limited 
to,  the  following:  study  on  Quality  Control,  study  on  geographical  indication,  the 
recruitment  of  IDEPA  and  RPMU  support  staff,  baseline  survey,  mid-term  review, 
completion review, impact assessment, market study and studies on Sector Development 
Facility. PRODAPE is expected to conduct   
●  Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS);  
●  Least-Cost Selection (LCS);  
●  Consultant’s Qualification-based Selection (CQS); 
●  Single Source Selection (SSS); and  
●  Selection of Individual Consultants (IC).  
Definition of the Consultants’ selection methods 
●  Quality  and  Cost  Based  Selection  (QCBS).  QCBS  is  a  competitive  process 
among  Shortlisted  consulting  firms  under  which  the  selection  of  the  successful 
firm takes into account the quality of the Proposal and the cost of the services. 
The request for proposals (RFP) document shall specify the minimum score for 
the technical  Proposals.  The relative weight to  be  given to  the quality  and cost 
depends  on  the  nature  of  the  assignment.  Among  the  Proposals  that  are 
responsive  to  the  requirements  of  the  request  for  proposals  document  and  are 
technically qualified, the Proposal with the highest combined (quality and cost) 
score is considered the Most Advantageous Proposal  
●  Least-Cost  Selection  (LCS).  Similar  to  QCBS,  LCS  is  a  competitive  process 
among  Shortlisted  consulting  firms  under  which  the  selection  of  the  successful 
firm takes into account the quality of the Proposal and the cost of the services. 
LCS  is  generally  appropriate  for  assignments  of  a  standard  or  routine  nature 
(such as engineering designs of non-complex Works), for which well-established 
practices  and  standards  exist.  The  request  for  proposals  document  specifies  the 
minimum  score  for  the  technical  Proposals.  Among  the  Proposals  that  score 
higher than the minimum technical score, the Proposal with the lowest evaluated 
cost is considered the Most Advantageous Proposal.  
●  Consultant’s Qualification-based Selection (CQS). CQS is appropriate for small 
assignments  or  Emergency  Situations  in  which  preparing  and  evaluating 
competitive Proposals is not justified. The Borrower shall request expressions of 
interest (REOI), by attaching the TOR to the REOI. At least three qualified firms 
shall  be  requested  to  provide  information  about  their  relevant  experience  and 
qualifications.  From  the  firms  that  have  submitted  an  Expression  of  Interest 
(EoI),  the  Borrower  selects  the  firm  with  the  best  qualifications  and  relevant 
experience  and  invites  it  to  submit  its  technical  and  financial  Proposals  for 
negotiations. Advertisement of REoIs is not mandatory.  
●  Single Source Selection  (SSS). This  selection method  may  be appropriate when 
only  one  firm  is  qualified,  a  firm  has  experience  of  exceptional  worth  for  the 
assignment,  or  there  is  justification  to  use  a  preferred  firm.  SSS  may  be 
appropriate under the following circumstances:  
a)  an  existing  contract  for  Consulting  Services,  including  a  contract  not 
originally financed by IFAD but awarded in accordance with procedures 
acceptable to IFAD, may be extended for additional Consulting Services 
of  a  similar  nature,  if  it  is  properly  justified,  no  advantage  may  be 
obtained by competition, and the prices are reasonable; 
b)  for  tasks  that  represent  a  natural  continuation  of  previous  work  carried 
out  by  a  Consultant  within  the  last  12  months,  where  continuity  in  the 
technical  approach,  experience  acquired,  and  continued  professional 
liability  of  the  same  Consultant  may  make  continuation  with  the  initial 
Consultant  preferable  to  a  new  competition,  if  performance  has  been 
satisfactory in the previous assignment(s); 
c)  there  is  a  justifiable  requirement  to  reengage  a  firm  that  has  previously 
completed  a  contract  with  the  Borrower  to  perform  a  similar  type  of 
Consulting  Service.  The  justification  shows  that  the  firm  performed 
satisfactorily under the previous contract, no advantage may be obtained 
by competition, and the prices are reasonable; 
d)  the procurement is of both very low value and low risk, as agreed in the 
Procurement Plan; 
e)  in exceptional cases, for example, in response to Emergency Situations; 
f)  only  one  firm  is  qualified,  or  one  firm  has  experience  of  exceptional 
worth for the assignment; or 
g)  the  Consulting  Services  provided  in  the  Borrower’s  country  by  a  State 
Owned Enterprise (SOE), university, research center, or institution of the 
Borrower’s country are of a unique and exceptional nature. 
In all instances of direct selection, the Borrower shall ensure fairness and equity, 
and shall have in place procedures to ensure that: 
- 
- 
the prices are reasonable and consistent with the market rates for 
services of a similar nature; and 
the  required  Consulting  Services  are  not  split  into  smaller-size 
procurements to avoid competitive processes. 
● 
the  paramount 
 Individual  consultants  (IC).  IC  are  employed  on  assignments  for  which  (a)  a 
team  of  experts  is  not  required,  (b)  no  additional  outside  (home  office) 
professional support is required, and (c) the experience and qualifications of the 
individual  are 
for  seeking 
expressions of interest (EOI) is encouraged, particularly when the Borrower does 
not  have  knowledge  of  experienced  and  qualified  individuals  or  of  their 
availability, or the services are complex, or there is potential benefits from wider 
advertising, or if it is mandatory under national decree. All invitations for EOIs 
should  specify  selection  criteria  that  are  solely  based  on  experience  and 
qualifications.  
requirement.  Advertisement 
Individual  consultants  are  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  relevant  experience, 
qualifications,  and  capability  to  carry  out  the  assignment.  They  do  not  need  to 
submit  proposals  and  shall  be  considered  if  they  meet  minimum  relevant 
requirements  which  shall  be  determined  by  the  Borrower  on  the  basis  of  the 
nature and complexity of the assignment, and assessed on the basis of academic 
background and relevant specific experience, and, as appropriate, knowledge of 
local  conditions  such  as  national  language,  culture, administrative systems,  and 
government  organization.  The  selection  shall  be  carried  out  through  the 
comparison of the relevant overall capacity of at least three qualified candidates 
among  those  who  have  expressed  interest  in  the  assignment  or  have  been 
approached directly by the Borrower. Individuals selected to be employed by the 
Borrower  shall  be  the  most  experienced  and  best  qualified,  and  shall  be  fully 
capable of carrying out the assignment. The Borrower shall negotiate a contract 
with  the selected individual  consultant after reaching  agreement on satisfactory 
terms  and  conditions  of  the  contract,  including  reasonable  fees  and  other 
expenses.  
●  Individual  consultants  may  be  selected  on  a  single-source  basis  with  due 
justification in exceptional cases such as:  
a)  tasks  that  are  a  continuation  of  previous  work  that  the  consultant  has 
carried out and for which the consultant was selected competitively;  
b)  assignments with a total expected duration of less than 6 (six) months;  
c)  urgent situations; and  
d)  when  the  individual  is  the  only  consultant  qualified  for  the  assignment. 
The  Borrower  shall  submit  to  IFAD  for  its  review  and  no  objection  the 
TOR of the assignment, a sufficiently detailed justification, including the 
rationale  for  single-source  selection  instead  of  a  competitive  selection 
process,  and  the  basis  for  recommending  a  particular  individual 
consultant in all such cases. 
Government officials and civil servants of the 
Borrower’s country may only be hired under 
consulting contracts in the Borrower’s country, 
either as individuals or as members of the team 
of experts proposed by a consulting firm, 
provided that such hiring does not conflict with 
any employment or other laws or regulations, or 
policies of the Borrower’s country and if they (i) 
are on leave of absence without pay, or have 
resigned or retired; (ii) are not being hired by 
the agency they were working for before going 
on leave of absence without pay, resigning, or 
retiring and (iii) their hiring would not create a 
conflict of interest  
Prior  review  thresholds.  In  accordance  with  paragraph  80  of  the  IFAD  Project 
Procurement Guidelines, the following will be subject to prior review by IFAD:  
Works  
●  Documents for the first two (2) contracts, regardless of their value, and 
thereafter for works estimated to cost USD100,000 or more;  
●  Award of the two (2) first contracts procured through shopping; and  
●  Award of any contract through direct procurement/contracting.  
Goods /Non consulting-services 
●  Documents for the first two (2) contracts, regardless of their value, and 
thereafter for goods estimated to cost USD50,000 or more;  
●  Award of the two (2) first contracts procured through shopping; and  
●  Award of any contract through direct procurement/contracting.  
Consulting services  
●  Documents for the first two (2) contracts for consulting firms, regardless of their 
value, and thereafter for services estimated to cost USD50,000 or more;  
●  Documents for the first two (2) contracts for Individual Consultants, regardless 
of their value, and thereafter for services estimated to cost USD30,000 or more; 
and  
●  Award of any contract through single source selection.  
 The aforementioned thresholds may be modified by IFAD during the course of Project 
implementation. 
The  following  documents/steps  shall  be  submitted  by  the  Borrower  to  IFAD’s  prior 
review 
Goods, non-consulting services and works 
Prior to issuance of invitations to bid, IFAD reviews: 
●  conformity  of  procurement  with  applicable 
AWPB/procurement plan and funds availability; 
rules/procedures,  approved 
●  draft  bidding  documents,  including  invitation  to  bid,  instructions  to  bidders, 
technical specifications, qualification  criteria, contractual conditions; and 
●  proposed  composition  of  the  bid  evaluation  committee  (for  comments  if 
requested by IFAD). 
After borrower’s evaluation of bidders’ submissions, IFAD reviews:  
●  bid evaluation report including minutes of public bid opening session, evaluation 
and comparison of bids and award recommendation. 
Consulting services (Firms) 
Prior to issuance of Request for proposals (RFP), IFAD reviews: 
●  conformity  of  procurement  with  applicable 
rules/procedures,  approved 
AWPB/procurement plan and funds availability; and 
●  draft  RFP,  including  instructions  to  consultants,  terms  of  reference  (TOR), 
selection  method  and  evaluation  criteria,  shortlist  of  consultants,  cost  estimate, 
and contractual conditions. 
After borrower’s evaluation of technical proposals, IFAD reviews:  
● 
technical  evaluation  report,  including  description  of  the  process,  summary  of 
scores and award recommendation 
● 
technical scores/ranking given to each consultant on each evaluation criterion 
●  scores given by each evaluation committee member 
●  copy of proposals, if requested by IFAD  
After borrower’s evaluation of financial proposals, IFAD reviews:  
●  minutes of public bid opening 
●  account of adjustments made to prices of the proposals and determination of the 
evaluated price 
●  final evaluation report and award recommendation; and 
● 
the negotiated draft contract. 
Consulting services (Individual Consultants) 
●  Competitive  selection  process:  the  Evaluation  report  comparing  at  least  3  CVs 
along with the 3 CVs and the negotiated contract with the selected consultant as 
initialed by the latter: 
●  Single source selection: The Borrower shall submit to IFAD for its review and 
no  objection  the  TOR  of  the  assignment,  a  sufficiently  detailed  justification, 
including  the  rationale  for  single-source  selection  instead  of  a  competitive 
selection  process,  and  the  basis  for  recommending  a  particular  individual 
consultant  in  all  such  cases  together  with  the  negotiated  contract  with  the 
selected consultant as initialed by the latter. 
C.  PROCUREMENT PLANNING 
An initial 18-month project procurement plan is required to be prepared at the outset of 
each project, with successive 12-month procurement plans to follow during the course 
of implementation. Once this initial plan receives a ‘no-objection’ from IFAD, the plan 
should form the basis of the procurement activity for the project. The Procurement Plan 
summarizes  procurement  methods,  applicable  rules  and  prior  review  requirements  as 
provided  in  the  financing  agreement.  The  procurement  Plan  template  to  be  used  is 
automatically generated by the Planner Excel-based software that the project is using. 
D.  RECORD KEEPING 
The  IFAD  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural  Development  Financing  require  that 
Borrower/recipients  retain  documents  and  records  for  review  by  IFAD  at  any  time 
within a period of three (3) years after completion of the bid or contract. The following 
table shows what procurement files, folders or dossiers should contain: 
Document 
(i) A copy of the published advertisement or shortlist (if applicable)* 
(ii) A copy of the published pre-qualification and invitation documents 
and any amendments, extensions or clarifications that were requested 
and issued* 
(iii) A record of tender opening signed by all present 
(iv) A full copy of each bid received and evaluated, plus clarifications 
requested and responses received 
(v) A copy of the evaluation report* 
(vi) Signed minutes of all meetings relating to the procurement, 
including pre-bid and negotiation meetings where these were held 
(vii) A contract award notice* 
(viii) Any letter of tender acceptance to the supplier, contractor or 
consultant* 
(ix) The signed contract document and contract acceptance* 
(x) Any contract amendments* 
(xi) All contractual correspondence between the procuring entity and a 
supplier, contractor or consultant 
(xii) Post-contract documents relating to the fulfillment of contract 
obligations, in particular photocopies of bank guarantees or payment 
guarantees 
Preferred 
format 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
(xiii) Signed minutes of any meetings related to contract management, 
including contract progress or review meetings 
(xiv) Signed delivery documents evidencing delivery of supplies or 
signed completion certificates in relation to a contract for services or 
works under the contract, including any contract delivery records 
(xv) A copy of all invoices for works, services or supplies, including 
work papers verifying the accuracy of payments claimed and details of 
the actual payment authorized 
(xvi) A copy of cumulative payment worksheets/records evidencing 
management of all payments made 
(xvii) A copy of all submissions to and all decisions of the appropriate 
approval authority related to the procurement, including the approval of 
the invitation documents, approval of the evaluation report(s), contract 
award, approval of contract documents and contract amendments and 
any decision to suspend or cancel procurement proceedings 
(xviii) A copy of any claims made by the procuring entity with respect to 
any warranty, nonwarranty, short supply, damage and other claims upon 
the provider or upon the procuring entity 
(xix) In the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and 
correspondence in relation to the seeking of IFAD’s no-objection 
(xx) any other communications relating to the procurement in questions, 
including internal entity correspondence 
*Ideally, drafts of these published documents and reports should also be retained for 
completeness and to provide a full picture of how the published document evolved. It is, 
however, accepted that where issues of space exist this may not always be possible in 
practice. 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
Hard and/or Soft 
copy 
E.  REGISTER OF CONTRACTS 
All contracts, with or without prior IFAD approval, should be listed in the Register of 
Contracts with the dates of approval. As this report facilitates the review and approval 
of  payment  requests  on  contracts,  please  ensure  that  the  Register  is  updated  and 
submitted to the IFAD Country Programme Manager on a monthly basis. The Register 
of Contracts template is annexed to the Letter to the Borrower. 
List of Procedures 
Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE) 
Number : 01 
Procedure : Open Procedure /International Competitive 
Bidding (ICB for goods or works) 
Elaborated : Feb 2019 
Approved : 
Revision : 0 
Revised :   
Actio
Preparation of the Bidding 
 (BD)  using the WB 
Including Instruction to 
Bidders, 
Technical Specifications and 
contract 
  BD review and 
Submission of BD to IFAD 
Quality 
No- 
N
  Revis
Y
Advertise
Bids Preparation 
 (Minimum 6 
Public bid 
Bids Evaluation 
Submit Bid Evaluation Report 
     to 
No- 
N
R
B
Y
 Contract preparation and 
  Contract Implementation and 
Management 
Responsibil
IDEPA 
Tech Divisions of 
MIMAIP 
Admi
nistra
tive 
ID
I
F
IDEPA/ 
Bidders/compa
Tender 
Tender 
Committee 
ID
I
F
IDEPA/Firms 
IDEPA/UFSA 
IDEPA/ ANE 
Contractor/suppl
Contract Award advertisement 
Project : Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE)) 
Procedure : Open Procedure/National Competitive Bidding 
(NCB for goods; works or non-consulting services) 
Elaborated : Feb 2019 
Approved : 
Number : 02 
Revision : 0 
Revised :  
Actio
Responsibil
Preparation of the Bidding Document 
(BD) Including Instruction to Bidders, 
Technical specifications and contract 
Send to local press and UFSA for 
advertisement 
Advertis 
Bids preparation (period based on the 
Cost estimate, cf.: Art. 13 of the PPL) 
Public Bid  
  Bids Evaluation and preparation of the Bid 
Evaluation Report (BER) 
Contract award 
Contract Preparation and Signing 
Contract 
Implementation and 
Management 
IDEPA/RPMU+Tech  
Divisions of MIMAIP+ ANE if Works 
CPMU 
Bidders 
Tender 
Tender 
Tender 
IDEPA/Firms 
IDEPA 
IDEPA; 
Contractor/ 
Contract Award advertisement 
Project : Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE) 
Procedure : Shopping (for goods, works or non-consulting 
services) 
Elaborated : Feb 2019 
Approved : 
Number : 03 
Revision : 0 
Revised :  
Actions 
Responsibili
  Preparation of the Request for 
Quotations Document (RfQ) 
Request for at least 3 quotations 
(Give at least 7 calendar days to suppliers) 
IDEPA/RPMU+T
ech  
IDEPA/R
Quotations opening 
Tender Committee 
Quotations Evaluation 
Award 
Purchasing 
Evaluation 
IDEPA/RP
IDEPA/RPMU- 
Project : Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE) 
Procedure : Direct Procurement 
Elaborated : Feb 2019 
Approved : 
Number : 04 
Revision : 0 
Revised :  
Acti
  Market price Research  
Identification of the single 
provider/ 
Contractor 
Request for Quotation from 
the 
Submit the selection 
procedure+ 
No- 
N
Revise 
documents 
Y
Contract 
Contract 
Contract Implementation 
and Management 
Responsibilit
Person or persons to be 
assigned  
by contracting officer  
IDEPA/RPMU+T
ech  
Divisions of 
IDEPA/R
PMU 
IDEPA/R
IDEPA/R
IDEPA/RPMU/ 
Contractor 
IDEPA/RPMU/Single 
provider/contractor 
IDEPA; 
Project: Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE) 
Procedure : Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS for 
Consulting Services) 
Elaborated : Feb 2019 
Approved : 
Number : 05 
Revision : 0 
Revised :  
Actio
Preparation of TORs, Request for Proposals 
(RfP), Establishment of a shortlist following a 
Request for Expressions of Interest (RfEOI) 
Responsibil
IDEPA/RPMU+T
ech  
Submission of Documents to 
OGM for review/Quality control  
  Submission of Documents to 
No-
N
  Revise  
Y
Send RFP to shortlisted consultants 
Proposals 
(Minimum 4 
 Technical Proposals opening 
Technical 
  Submit Tech. Eval Report to 
No-
N
  Revise 
Tech. 
Y
Financial Proposals Opening + 
combined Evaluation 
Award Proposal 
Contract Negotiation 
Send to IFAD the Combined Eval. Report+ Negotiated 
Contract  
Contract 
  Contract implementation and 
Management 
  Publication of award 
ID
ID
ID
Consult
Tender 
Tender 
ID
Tender 
Committee 
Tender 
Committee 
IDEPA-
ID
Consul
tant 
UFSA 
IDEPA; 
Project : Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE) 
Number : 06 
Procedure : Least Cost Selection (LCS for Consulting 
Services) 
Elaborated : Feb  2019 
Approved : 
Revision : 0 
Revised :  
Actio
Preparation of TORs, Request for Proposals (RfP), 
Establishment of a short-list following a Request for 
Expressions of Interest (RfEOI) 
Responsibil
IDEPA/RPMU+ 
Tech Divisions of 
Submission of Documents to 
the Administrative Tribunal for 
review/Quality control  
  Submission of Documents to 
No-
N
  Revise  
Y
Send RFP to shortlisted consultants 
Proposals 
(Minimum 4 
 Technical Proposals opening 
Technical 
  Submit Tech. Eval Report to 
No-
N
  Revise 
Tech. 
Y
Financial Proposals Opening + 
Least Cost proposal 
Award Proposal 
Contract Negotiation 
Send to IFAD the Combined Eval. Report+ Negotiated 
Contract  
Contract 
 Publication of award 
  Contract Implementation and 
ManagementGMth 
ID
ID
ID
Consult
Tender 
Tender 
ID
Tender 
Committee 
Tender 
Committee 
IDEPA-
ID
IDEPA-
UFSA 
IDEPA; 
Project : Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE) 
Procedure : Consultant’s Qualification-based Selection 
Number : 07 
Revision : 0 
(CQS) 
Elaborated : Feb 2019 
Approved : 
Revised :  
Acti
 Preparation of TORs, Establishment of a shortlist following a Request 
for Expressions of Interest (RfEOI) if needed 
Submission of TORs and 
shortlist (at least 3 qualified 
firms) 
Responsibility 
IDEPA/RPMU+ 
Tech Divisions of 
MIMAIP 
ID
N
Revise documents 
No 
Y
 Request for information (experience 
and qualification from at least 3 
 Selection of the Best Qualified 
Firm 
ID
Tender 
  Request for full technical and financial proposal 
ID
Preparation and submission of 
proposal 
Contract 
Contract 
Submission of 
negotiated contract 
to IFAD for No 
Objection 
  Contract Management and 
Implementation 
Consulting 
IDEPA, 
IDEPA 
IDEPA; 
Project : Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE) 
Procedure : Selection of Individual Consultants (IC) 
Elaborated : Feb 2019 
Approved : 
Number : 07 
Revision : 0 
Revised :  
Actions 
Preparation of TORs 
and 
Submit TORs to  IFAD 
for No Objection 
No - 
N
Revise 
Documents 
Y
Request for CVs from at 
least 
Selection of the Best Qualified 
Consultant 
Request for simplified technical 
and 
Submission of proposal 
Contract 
IFAD No-
Objection 
Contract 
Contract Management   
and 
Implementation  
Responsi
bility 
IDEPA/RPMU+ 
Tech Divisions of 
ID
ID
Tender 
ID
Best Qualified 
IDEPA, 
IFAD 
IDEPA, 
Consultant 
IDEPA; 
Project : Small-Scale Aquaculture Development Project 
(PRODAPE) 
Procedure : Single Source Selection (SSS) 
Approved : 
Elaborated : Feb 2019 
Number : 08 
Revision : 0 
Revised :  
Acti
Preparation of TORs and 
Cost estimate 
Identification of the  
consultant 
Request for Technical and 
Financial 
Submission of  TORs and  
justification 
No-Objection 
N
Revise 
Docum
Y
Contract 
IFAD 
No-Objection 
Contract 
Responsi
bility 
IDEPA/RPM
U+ 
Tech 
Divisions of  
ID
EP
A 
ID
ID
IDEPA, 
Consultant 
IDEPA, 
I
IDEPA, 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/2
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Medium
Medium
2. Macroeconomic
Medium
Medium
Risk: General elections to be held in October 2019 to
potentially delay financing agreement ratification and start
of project activities due to a new Government being sworn
in by January 2020 and the potential need for a Legal
Opinion by Attorney General. 
Mitigation measures: the IFAD Country Office in
Mozambique will continue its engagement with the
relevant Government authorities to ensure ratification is
done before elections and that the start-up of PRODAPE
is prioritized by the Ministry of the Sean, Inland Waters
and Fisheries (MIMAIP).
Risk: Following the impact of cyclones IDAI and Kenneth
in the first quarter of 2019, the sluggish economy may be
affected by exchange rate deterioration and higher
inflation than foreseen in design. 
Mitigation measures: The PRODAPE project management
team will ensure that project funds are always kept in a
USD account to avoid the impact of exchange rate
variations
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Low
Risk: None
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Medium
Medium
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Medium
Medium
6. Financial management
Medium
Medium
Risk: There’s a risk of low uptake of cage aquaculture as
cage farming is limited to specific lakes and reservoirs,
and requires higher levels of management. 
Mitigation measures: PRODAPE to conduct rigorous
feasibility studies and environmental and impact
assessments of the potential areas identified for cage
farming.
Risks: The proposed implementation agency for
PRODAPE, the Institute for Aquaculture and Fisheries
Development (IDEPA) has implemented past IFAD
projects in the small-scale fisheries and aquaculture
sectors. However, it is dependent on international
assistance, and suffers from insufficient
technical/extension capacity in the field. 
Mitigation measure: Building on the results of PROPESCA
and PROAQUA, PRODAPE will continue supporting the
capacity building of IDEPA staff and local administration.
Risk: Delays in processing payments at provincial
government level resulting from potential decentralization
of the central government structures to provincial and
district levels following proposed constitutional
amendment in 2018. This will be mitigated by centralizing
large payments through the PCU account for the first two
years of programme implementation and the provinces
execute only operational payments until payment systems
at the provincial levels are fully functional.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/2
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
Risk: While the existing legal framework for public
procurement in Mozambique is deemed to be almost in
compliance with international standards, it still presents
certain shortcomings at operational level. 
Mitigation measures: 1) Update the procurement section
in the IFAD “Code of Practice for Project Management in
Mozambique” to reflect new IFAD Project Procurement
Guidelines; 2) Project to ensure that Procurement Plans
are compliant with IFAD requirements; 3) Appointment a
qualified and experienced procurement officer with prior
experience in donor-funded projects.
Risk: There’s a risk that Government and the Private
Sector shall remain dependent donor-funded projects for
the continued development of the small aquaculture
sector. 
Mitigation measures: The Project will empower the
relevant provincial and district institutions and the private
sector by, progressively but gradually, transferring
increased responsibilities to those institutions, particularly
for planning, coordination of implementation, monitoring
and evaluation.
Risk: Small-scale aquaculture can have significant
environment and social impacts especially if it is newly
introduced and if the system of production has high
demand of water in areas where freshwater is a scarce
natural resource. 
Mitigation measures: The project will use technologies and
production methods adapted to local conditions and avoid
operations located in fragile or environmental sensitive
areas, including natural reserves and parks. An
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been elaborated to set out the principles,
rules, guidelines, and procedures to assess the
environmental and social risks and impacts of the Project
7. Procurement
High
High
8. Stakeholders
Medium
High
9. Environment and social
Medium
Medium
Overall
Medium
Medium
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy  
1. 
Government  of  Mozambique  and  IFAD’s  desire  to  ensure  sustainability  of  the 
different  interventions  has  been  very  clear  from  the  very  beginning.  The  successful 
implementation  of  PRODAPE  to  be  hinged  on  both  the  Government  and  the  private 
sector. This institutional framework will continue to exist after the funded Project comes 
to a close.  In addition, the participatory design process for PRODAPE responded directly 
to target beneficiaries’ concerns and national development policies and strategies. These 
efforts  to  create  ownership  of  the  Programme  from  the  very  beginning  will  provide  the 
foundation and necessary commitment for post-PRODAPE continuity. The capacity of all 
the different stakeholders will be strengthened in various ways. this increased know-how 
will  facilitate  continued  productivity  improvement  after  project  closure.  In  addition, 
stakeholders in this project will be linked to available financing options, including to the 
IFAD-funded  Rural  Enterprise  and  Financing  Project  (REFP)  to  access  different  products 
on offer in that project. . 
2. 
Economic/Income  Sustainability  –  The  design  and  approach  in  this  project  is 
market-based.  Interventions  are  being  planned  to  increase  productivity,  value  addition 
and  quality  of  the  target  commodities  and  their  by-products  to  fill  an  identified  market 
gap  for  fresh  water  fish  locally  and  internationally.  As  long  as  the  market  linkages  are 
mutually  beneficial  to  the  involved  stakeholders,  the  existent  market  pull  will  stimulate 
the production of the demanded products in a sustainable manner. 
3. 
Institutional Sustainability – PRODAPE implementation will be mainstreamed within 
the  Government’s  institutional,  strategy  and  policy  framework  and  will  also  position 
beneficiaries  and  project  participants  to  better  leverage  private  sector  p[alyers  ineth 
value chain. 
4. 
Environmental Sustainability – To enhance environmental sustainability and climate 
resilience,  the  Programme  will  promote  sustainable  natural  resource  management 
practices and climate smart technologies and practices.  Climate smart technologies and 
practices  are  expected  to  increase  productivity,  enhance  resilience  and  reduce  carbon 
emissions.  Climate,  weather  and  market  information  services  will  strengthen  farmers' 
and value chain actors' access to timely and reliable weather updates and extension, to 
inform decision making.  
5. 
A SECAP review note has been developed in line with IFAD's guidelines. The SECAP 
review  note  identifies  potential  risks  and  proposes  mitigation  measures  and  monitoring 
protocols, such as ESMPs. In addition, the Programme will ensure strong integration with 
line  ministries  and  strengthen  the  capacities  of  Programme  staff  and  the  relevant 
government  units  to  implement  proposed  interventions  within  value  chains,  mitigate 
risks and monitor the implementation of ESMPs and other SECAP related guidelines and 
recommendations.  Climate  risk  analysis  and  vulnerability  assessments  will  improve 
decision making and targeting of interventions. 
In  the  process  of  implementing  the  PRODAPE  exit/sustainability  strategy,  the 
6. 
following basic principles should be observed: 
  The  NPMU  should  empower  the  relevant  provincial  and  district  institutions  and  the 
private sector by, progressively but gradually,  transferring increased responsibilities 
to  those  institutions,  particularly  for  planning,  coordination  of  implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation; 
  Capacity building of all institutions with a responsibility in PRODAPE  implementation 
should  target  those  areas  that  are  identified,  through  a  needs  assessment.  This  will 
equip  them  with  the  needed  abilities  to  effectively  execute  the  different  tasks  after 
the Project; 
  The  aquaculture  communities,  through  their  various  local  organisations  should  be 
closely  involved  in  all  matters  related  to  management  and  use  of  their  natural 
resources.  
11 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Moz Prodape Pdr Annex Full Irf
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)  
1. 
In accordance with IFAD’s Financial Management policies and guidelines, a financial 
management  assessment  was  carried  out  during  the  PRODAPE  design  mission  at  two 
levels: (i) the Government public financial management system assessment; and (ii) the 
financial management operations assessment at the project level made on the proposed 
Fisheries  and  Aquaculture  Development  Institute  (IDEPA),  delegated  by  the  Ministry  of 
Sea,  Inland  Waters  and  Fisheries  (MIMAIP).  IDEPA  will  have  day-to-day  oversight 
responsibility  on  a  separate,  dedicated  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU),  which  will  be 
recruited  using  a  competitive  selection  process  to  handle  both  technical  and  financial 
issues of the project.  
2.  Government of Mozambique public financial systems assessment. The 2015 
World  Bank  Public  Expenditure  and  Financial  Accountability  (PEFA)  assessment  for  the 
Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  Public  Finance  Management  reported  that  71%  of 
Mozambique’s  indicators  had  either  improved  or  remained  the  same  when  compared  to 
the previous assessment of 2010. The country has consolidated the major improvements 
in a number of areas in the public financial management systems, most notably   in the 
implementation  the  of  single  treasury  accounts  (CUT),  budgets,  integrated  financial 
accounting  system,  administrative  procedures  for  authorization  of  expenditures,  state 
inventory  and  fixed  assets  management,  integrated  procurement  systems  and  external 
audits. Key among areas of deficiency was procurement practices, which were deemed to 
be  lagging  behind  international  best  practices.  The  GoM  is  currently  piloting  an  e-
procurement  module  integrated  with  the  budgeting  and  accounting  modules  in  e-
SISTAFE  a  Government  integrated  financial  management  information  system.  This 
development  is  aimed  at  enhancing  the  procurement  and  budgetary  controls  and  is 
expected to go live at the start of financial year 2019.  
3. 
The  PRODAPE  financial  management  arrangements  will,  to  the  extent  feasible,  be 
mainstreamed within the GoM systems as the  assessment has  shown  the government’s 
financial  management  systems  have  potential  to  provide  adequate  controls  and  ensure 
proper management of project funds.  
4. 
The country’s score on the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index 
for  2017  was  25,  ranking  153  out  of  180  countries  assessed.  This  is  rated  as  high  risk 
and  the  PRODAPE  design  arrangements  have  taken  into  account  this  fiduciary  risk  and 
proposed  appropriate  financial  management  safeguard  measures  to  be  put  in  place  at 
project level.  
The  overall  country  fiduciary  risk  at  design  is  assessed  as  high  after  taking  into 
5. 
account the above country level issues:  
6. 
Project  specific  assessment.  Below  is  the  overall  summary  of  risk  ratings  at 
design, derived from the lead project agency assessment mentioned above, inclusive of 
recommended mitigation measures to be implemented from project start-up.  
2 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 1: Fiduciary risk assessment framework 
Risk Category 
Inherent Risks 
Country Level 
(i) Transparency International 
Corruption Perception Index 
Rated Mozambique at 153th / 
180 countries with a score of 
25. 
(II) 2015 PEFA assessment 
found the country’s procurement 
system below best practices. 
Entity and project design 
Implementation is spread across 
23 districts in seven provinces 
of the country. Previous 
implementations of IFAD –
funded projects in IDEPA were 
centralised at the PCU level.   
Project Control Risks 
1. Organization & Staffing 
Inadequate staff capabilities, 
skills and experience on donor 
funds management and on IFAD 
procedures.   
2.  Budgeting 
Some projects under IDEPA in 
the past did not have an 
approved budget uploaded in e-
SISTAFE for up three months 
after the start of a fiscal year. 
(ii) Foreseen delay in approval 
of FY2020 budget following the 
2019 general elections in 
Mozambique.  
Initial FM 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
Proposed Risk Mitigating Measures 
Residual 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
H 
L 
L 
L 
H 
M 
M 
M 
Processing of payments to suppliers of 
goods and services, implementing 
partners and beneficiaries to be 
centralized at the PCU level for the first 
two years of project implementation 
while the provinces process mostly 
local operational expenses related to 
daily subsistence allowance, travel and 
office sundries until adequate financial 
management capacity of staff and 
systems   within Provincial Directorates 
of Sea, Inland Waters and Fisheries 
(DPMAIPs) is established.  
(i) Recruited PCU finance staff   and 
financial management staff within the 
provincial DPMAIPs will be inducted in 
IFAD specific procedures at start of the 
project and continuously during 
implementation. 
(ii) Draft Terms of Reference (ToRs) for 
finance staff outlined in Appendix 6 as 
a basis for their recruitment / 
performance evaluation to include 
experience in IFAD/donor funds 
management. 
The PRODAPE PCU will obtain budget 
submissions of the planned activities 
from all concerned stakeholders timely, 
ensuring accurate forecasts of the 
current fiscal year AWPB execution to 
the end of the fiscal year to form a 
proper basis for developing an accurate 
and comprehensive AWPB for the 
following fiscal year. The PCU timetable 
will allow for timely approval by the 
National Project Steering Committee 
3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Risk Category 
Initial FM 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
M 
M 
3. Funds Flow & 
Disbursements  
(i) The GoM will be 
Implementing an integrated 
procurement module in e-
SISTAFE in FY2019 to enhance 
the country’s procurement and 
budgetary control systems. The 
implication is that all committed 
funds will not be available in the 
CUT. Long-term procurement 
and delays in completion of a 
procurement process may hold 
up funds in the CUT, and the 
expense can only be included in 
withdrawal applications when 
payment is affected. The project 
could therefore face potential 
liquidity challenges. 
4.  Internal Control    
(i) Whilst e-SISTAFE performs 
daily reconciliations on its 
various systems, evidence of 
regular bank reconciliations 
between the general ledger 
accounting balances and CUT   
balances are not availed.  
(ii) Risk of grants in form of 
fingerlings, support initial pond 
construction / cage acquisition, 
feed, etc. not reaching project 
beneficiaries.   
(iii) Delay in granting prior 
approval for project expenses by 
the Administrative Court under 
its legal mandate to conduct 
prior approvals (ex-ante control) 
Residual 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
L 
L 
Proposed Risk Mitigating Measures 
(NPSC), prior to its submission for 
approval within the Government's 
annual budget calendar and for 
obtaining IFAD’s non-objection before 
start of the fiscal year. The process for 
budget amendments within the fiscal 
year to be clear in the FMM to avoid 
delays in the budgeting process.  
(ii) The procurement planning shall 
factor long-term project activities that 
can be paid using direct payment 
method according to IFAD thresholds to 
avoid implementation delays.    
(i) The level of the authorised 
allocation for the project should factor 
in this risk  and should be reviewed 
regularly during implementation to 
ensure its adequacy.  
(ii) PCU Finance Manager to ensure 
timely and regular submission of   WAs 
to IFAD.  
(iii) Regular monitoring and follow-up 
of the procurement commitments in 
CUT.  
 (i) PRODAPE shall perform monthly 
bank reconciliations between the e-
SISTAFE general ledger accounting 
balances and the CUT balances. All 
general ledger balances in the off the 
shelf accounting software system 
should be reconciled to e-SISTAFE 
general ledger balances on monthly 
basis.  
(ii) All grant support to project 
beneficiaries will be channelled through 
service providers or other entities, 
which will be subject to appropriate 
due diligence.  
(iii) Robustness in procurement 
planning process to factor in envisaged 
delays in obtaining prior approvals 
4 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Risk Category 
Initial FM 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
Proposed Risk Mitigating Measures 
Residual 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
on public expenditure.  
from the Administrative Court.  
5. Accounting Systems, 
Policies & Procedures 
(i) Inadequate record keeping of 
accounting records in a 
decentralised environment.  
(ii) Inadequate accounting for    
in – kind contributions from 
beneficiaries supported to 
initiate aquaculture production 
activities, (labour) and GoM in-
kind contributions (office space, 
staff salaries, vehicles usage 
and utilities).  
6. Financial Reporting & 
Monitoring 
e-SISTAFE, the integrated 
financial management 
information system of the GoM, 
captures all information relating 
to all Ministries and 
Development Projects/Projects. 
PRODAPE will process all 
payments in e-SISTAFE. The 
system was deemed not user-
friendly for the preparation of 
IFAD specific financial reports. 
The Ministry of Finance (MoF) 
has advised that the system will 
continue to be upgraded 
gradually to allow for the 
configuration of requested 
reports. 
7.  Internal Audit  
The internal audit division within 
MIMAIP mainly deals with 
inspections and verifications. It 
also faces capacity constraints 
due to the low capacity level of 
staff. For projects under IDEPA 
there have been few internal 
audit interventions.  
M 
M 
H 
L 
L 
M 
(i) PRODAPE shall deploy an e-
archiving system currently being 
piloted on IFAD / European Union 
funded projects in Mozambique 
expected to be launched by end of 
2018. This involves digitising the hard 
copy supporting documents such as 
vouchers, receipts, procurement 
documents and withdrawal applications 
to safeguard them for a minimum of 10 
years after project closure. 
(ii) Guidance on evaluation of in-kind 
contributions to be included in the 
Financial Management Manual. The 
evaluation methods shall be agreed 
upon at negotiation between IFAD and 
GoM to facilitate proper accounting   
throughout project implementation. 
PRODAPE shall deploy a parallel off- 
the-shelf accounting software package 
to compliment e-SISTAFE on financial 
reporting, with capability to record and 
report transactions by category, 
component, activity and financier 
according to IFAD requirements. This 
will be in place until IFAD´s Financial 
Management Division confirms the 
adequacy of financial reports generated 
from e-SISTAFE. 
The General Inspection of Finance 
(IGF) has agreed to include PRODAPE 
in their annual audit program and they 
will need to familiarize themselves with 
IFAD’s procedures during the start-up 
workshop. Internal audit 
recommendations thereon (together 
with the status once implemented), will 
be communicated to the NPSC and 
IFAD.  
5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Initial FM 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
M 
Residual 
Risk 
Rating 
(H/M/L) 
L 
Proposed Risk Mitigating Measures 
IFAD's revised audit guidelines are to 
be applied for PRODAPE. The decision 
regarding selection of whether the 
Administrative Court or private external 
auditors are to be appointed will be 
taken dependent on the outcome 
assessment of the Administrative 
Court.  
Risk Category 
8. Auditing 
Private external auditors are 
appointed for IFAD-funded 
projects under IDEPA; audit 
requirements were performed 
satisfactorily.  
The Administrative Court, which 
is the supreme audit institution 
of the GoM will be assessed on 
the ability to undertake timely 
and quality audits on PRODAPE 
to meet IFAD requirements.  
The World Bank has been using 
the Administrative Court for 
projects implemented by GoM 
ministries.  According to 2015 
PEFA assessment, the audits by 
the Administrative Court follow 
the international standards of 
the International Organisation of 
Supreme Audit Institutions 
(INTOSAI), and include regular 
audits and performance audits. 
OVERALL FM RISK 
M 
* H=High, M=Medium, L=Low 
M 
7. 
The assessment concluded that the proposed financial management arrangements 
for  PRODAPE  will  satisfy  IFAD’s  minimum  requirements  for  robust  and  sound  financial 
project management. Risk levels are deemed to be low with the inclusion of the specific 
risk mitigation measures incorporated in project design. 
8. 
Proposed  financial  management  structure.  IDEPA,  the  proposed  the  lead 
project  agency,  is  an  institution  under  MIMAIP.    It  has  a  management  structure 
comprising operations departments, and support departments, which include finance and 
administration,  information  technology  and  human  resources  and  procurement.  IDEPA 
has  separate  internal  audit  department.  It  is  planned  that  at  the  provincial  level,  the 
finance  staff  at  the  DPMAIPs  will  be  responsible  for  financial  accounting  aspects  of  the 
project, which will be implemented in 23 districts in seven provinces.   Within IDEPA, the 
Director  General  and  the  Finance  Manager  will  have  an  oversight  role  on  the  financial 
management unit of PRODAPE.  The IDEPA came into being in 2016 following the merger 
of  IDPPE  (responsible  for  sea  fishing)  and  INAQUA  (responsible  for  aquaculture).  The 
new merged institution undertook the oversight function of the two existing IFAD–funded 
projects, PROPESCA (since 2011) and PRODIRPA (since 2013).  In addition, IDEPA is an 
implementing agency of World Bank–funded projects. The NPSC will provide an oversight 
role and ensure coordination with relevant implementing partners. 
The PRODAPE PCU finance team shall comprise of a Finance Manager, reporting to 
9. 
the  Project  Manager  supported  by  an  Accountant.  The  PCU  finance  team  will  be 
responsible  for  the  accounting  function  of  the  project  including  budgeting,  accounting, 
funds  flow  management,  internal  controls,  financial  reporting  and  ensuring  timely 
6 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
external audits. The staff will be competitively hired and engaged on performance-based 
contracts  in  line  with  draft  ToRs  for  key  staff  provided  in  Appendix  6.  At  the  provincial 
level, finance staff within DPMAIPs will be assigned to undertake the financial accounting 
functions, under the guidance of the PRODEPA Finance Manager. 
10.  Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). The project will be implemented on the 
basis  of  approved  AWPBs.  In  the  GoM  annual  budget  process,  requests  for  budget 
submissions  start  in  July  of  the  preceding  budget  year  the  project  expenditure 
appropriations  and  budget  ceilings  are  registered  in  the  e-SISTAFE  by  August  of  each 
year and the central budget is approved by September of each year. The country has a 
well-ordered budget preparation process, with a clear, well-structured budget calendar. A 
comprehensive  budget  circular  with  detailed  methodologies  and  a  guide  to  the 
completion  of  budgetary  tables  is  drafted  annually  and  is  distributed  by  the  National 
Budget  Directorate  to  the  sector  ministries  and  provinces.  Budgeting  procedures  and 
additional controls are further provided in the e-SISTAFE manual.  
11. 
In  order  to  ensure  that  the  timelines  of  the  GoM  budget  calendar  are  met, 
PRODAPE PCU will obtain budget submissions of the planned activities from all concerned 
stakeholders  in  line  with  GoM  detailed  guidance.  The  project  will  hold  annual  review 
workshops,  with  implementing  partners,  beneficiaries  and  NPSC  and  discuss  progress 
during  the  prior  financial  year  and  move  on  to  develop  proposals  for  the  forthcoming 
year.  The  PCU  will  assist  implementing  partners  and  other  participants  to  formulate 
activities  and  expenditure  estimates  and  be  responsible  for  their  timely  analysis  and 
consolidation into an AWPB for the project for the coming year. In view of the time taken 
between the start of budget preparation process and the end of the fiscal year, accurate 
forecasts of the current fiscal year AWPB execution to the end of the fiscal year is key for 
developing an accurate and comprehensive AWPB for the following fiscal year.  
12.  The  Finance  Manager  will  develop  strategic  planning  tools  to  guide  the  different 
stakeholders  during  the  preparation  PRODAPE  AWPB.  This  will  involve  consultations  by 
the  PCU  with  beneficiaries  and  the  implementing  partners  involved,  as  well  as  an 
assessment  of  previous  activities  undertaken,  and  the  related  targets  attained.  The 
process  should  allow  for  timely  approval  by  NPSC,  prior  to  its  submission  for  approval 
within the Government's annual budget calendar and obtaining IFAD no-objection before 
start  of  the  fiscal  year.  The  process  for  budget  amendments  within  the  fiscal  year  shall 
be stipulated in the financial management manual.  
13.  Funds  flow  and  disbursement  arrangements.  IFAD  funds  will  be  channelled 
into a USD designated account at the Bank of Mozambique (BoM). The funds will then be 
channelled into the CUT managed by the MoF, via a transit USD account from where the 
funds are  converted into meticais (MZN) at the prevailing exchange rate on the date of 
conversion.  The  funds  in  CUT  are  managed  through  coded  designated  ledger  accounts 
that  ensure  traceability  of  project  available  funds.  Each  provincial  directorate  and 
implementing  agency  shall  maintain  a  separate  account  in  CUT  to  receive  the  project 
funds from the PCU.    
14.  The PCU will have the responsibility of coordinating and ensuring the smooth flow 
of funds so that funds are available as and when necessary to meet programme financial 
obligations  towards  suppliers,  service  providers  and  contractors.  This  will  involve:  (i) 
establishing  the  liquidity  requirements  of  each  implementing  agency  based  on  the 
approved AWPB; (ii) preparing and dispatching bank transfer instructions to the BoM to 
ensure  that  there  is  sufficient  liquidity  in  the  operational  account  at  all  times;  (iii) 
following  up  on  any  funds  advanced  to  implementing  agencies  and  ensuring  the  timely 
justification  thereof;  (iv)  maintaining  supporting  documentation  for  expenditures 
incurred  by  the  project  in  order  to  prepare  withdrawal  applications  for  submission  to 
IFAD;  and  (v)  ensuring  that  the  IFAD  authorized  allocation  is  fully  accounted  for  at  all 
7 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
times  through  regular  preparation  of  periodic  reconciliation  statements  for  the 
designated  accounts.  All  movements  from  the  designated  accounts  will  require 
countersignature by the authorized representative of the GoM.   
15.  The GoM will implement an integrated procurement module in e-SISTAFE in FY2019 
to enhance the country’s procurement and budgetary control systems. The implication is 
that  all  committed  funds  will  not  be  available  in  the  CUT.  Long-term  procurements  and 
delays  in  completion  of  procurement  processes  may  hold  up  funds  in  the  CUT.  As 
expenses can only be included in withdrawal applications, when payment is affected, the 
project may face potential liquidity challenges. To avert this, the authorised allocation to 
the  designated  account  will  be  set  and  reviewed  regularly  to  ensure  its  adequacy. 
Further,  the  Finance  Manager  at  the  PCU  shall  ensure  timely  submission  of  withdrawal 
applications to IFAD, either: (i) once after 90 days have elapsed from the submission of 
the  previous  withdrawal  applications;  or  (ii)  when  the  amount  withdrawn  from  the 
designated account is equal to about 20-30% of the advance, even if 90 days have not 
elapsed. Further disbursement details and procedures are to be included in the Letter to 
the  Borrower.  The  threshold  of  direct  payments  from  IFAD  will  be  limited  only  to  large 
payments over the equivalent of USD 100,000. 
Figure 1: funds flow chart 
16.  Accounting  systems.  PRODAPE  shall  deploy  the  integrated  public  financial 
management information system, e-SISTAFE, comprised of the budget, accounting, and 
treasury,  inventory  and  state  assets  management  and  internal  controls  sub-systems. 
However,  the  system  was  deemed  not  user-friendly  for  the  preparation  of  IFAD  specific 
financial  reports.  The  MoF  has  advised  that  the  system  will  continue  to  be  gradually 
upgraded  to  allow  for  the  configuration  of  requested  reports.  PRODAPE  shall  therefore 
install and implement a parallel off-the-shelf accounting software package to compliment 
e-SISTAFE  financial  reporting,  with  capability  to  record  and  report  transactions  by 
category, component, activity, cost centre and financier. It is important that the general 
ledger balances  of two  parallel systems are in balance at each the  reporting date.   The 
project  will  use  the  GoM  modified  cash  basis  accounting  standards,  which  in  the  2015 
PEFA  assessment  were  deemed  to  be  close  to  IPSAS  norms  and  could  be  considered 
comparable  with  those  norms.  The  GoM  is  planning  to  adopt  IPSAS  accrual  basis 
accounting standards within 3 - 5 years. The project will follow GoM accounting policies 
and procedures prescribed in the State Financial Administration Manual.  
17. 
In-kind  contributions  from  beneficiaries  at  production  level  will  be  in  the  form  of 
labour  mostly  and  will  include  assumption  of  feed  and  seed  costs  from  the  second 
production cycle onwards. With respect to government in-kind contributions, they will be 
in form of foregone office space, staff salaries, vehicles usage and utilities. Guidance on 
8 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
evaluation  of  in-kind  contributions  shall  be  included  in  Financial  Management  Manual. 
The  evaluation  methods  shall  be  agreed  upon  at  negotiation  between  IFAD  and  the 
recipient to facilitate proper accounting throughout project implementation.  
18.  Internal  controls,  policies  and  procedures.  At  the  project  level,  internal 
controls  will  be  implemented  to  ensure  that  resources  are  properly  utilized  towards 
project  objectives  with  funds  reaching  intended  beneficiaries.  The  GoM  public  financial 
management  regulations  and  systems  will  be  applied  in  the  context  of  PRODAPE 
implementation.    The  accounting  systems,  policies,  procedures  and  internal  controls  to 
be  used  by  the  PCU  for  accounting  and  managing  project  funds  will  be  documented  in 
the  Financial  Procedures  Manual.  The  manual  will  describe  the  internal  control 
procedures,  basis  of  accounting,  standards  to  be  followed,  authorization  procedures, 
financial  reporting  processes,  budgeting  procedures,  in-kind  and  other  beneficiary 
contribution  recording  procedures  and  flow  of  funds,  as  well  as  financial  data  back-up 
procedures. 
19.  Adherence to the internal control framework will be verified during the internal and 
external audit exercises, with reporting to IFAD through submission of an internal audit 
report and management letter, in line with IFAD’s external audit guidelines. Furthermore, 
compliance  with  internal  controls  will  be  part  of  the  fiduciary  checks  performed  during 
supervision missions.  
20. 
controls will be set up at the project level, as follows:  
In order to complement GoM internal control mechanisms, specific internal 
 
 
 
Monthly bank reconciliations prepared by the Finance Manager and approved 
by Head of Finance at IDEPA. 
The  PCU  PRODAPE  shall  deploy  an  e-archiving  system  digitising  hard  copy 
supporting  documents  such  as  vouchers,  receipts,  procurement  documents 
and  withdrawal  applications  to  facilitate  traceability  and  quick  access  to 
documents  during  supervision  and  implementation  support  missions  and 
audits;  
The  project  will  maintain  an  updated  fixed  asset  register,  identifying  assets 
codes  /  numbers  for  ease  of  identification.  Physical  verification  is  to  take 
place on a quarterly basis.  
21.  Financial  reporting  arrangements.  The  PRODAPE  PCU  will  be  required  to 
prepare and submit to IFAD separate half yearly interim financial reports to account for 
project  activity  related  expenditures,  no  later  than  60  days  after  the  end  of  each 
semester.  The  project  will  also  prepare  monthly  and  quarterly  financial  management 
reports designed to provide relevant information to the NPSC for management decision-
making  and  control,  for  financiers  and  other  stakeholders  to  monitor  the  project’s 
performance.  Implementing  partners  will  be  required  to  submit  simplified  quarterly 
financial  reports  to  finance  team  of  the  PCU,  for  validation  with  their  replenishment 
requests.  
22.  Internal  audit.  The  internal  audit  department  of  MIMAIP  is  responsible  for  the 
provision  of  internal  audit  services  to  PRODAPE.    The  unit  reports  to  Inspectorate 
General  of  Finance  at  the  MoF.  Audits  are  conducted  according  to  internationally 
accepted  auditing  standards.  The  selection  of  audits  is  based  on  a  formal  risk  analysis 
and focuses primarily on the major areas of systemic risk.  
23.  The  Internal  Audit  Department  is  to  include  PRODAPE  in  its  internal  audit  work 
plans  with  the  submission  of  PRODAPE  reports  to  MIMAIP  and  the  NPSC.  IFAD  will 
require  submission  of  management  action  plans  and  progress  of  implementation  of  the 
internal  audit  recommendations.  Internal  audit  reports  are  expected  to  provide 
9 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
assurances that PRODAPE is being implemented in accordance with the approved AWPB 
and in compliance with GoM regulations and the IFAD financing agreement. A key risk is 
staff  low  capacity  to  cover  the  internal  audit  requirements  of  the  project.  It  is 
recommended  that  at  start  up,  internal  audit  staff  be  present  and  attend  to  familiarise 
themselves to IFAD procedures.  
24.  External audits. The external audit of the project will be conducted in accordance 
International  Standards  on  Auditing,  under  specific  ToRs  generated  in  line  with  IFAD 
approved  audit  guidelines.  For  IFAD-funded  projects  under  IDEPA,  private  external 
auditors are engaged to conduct the audit. During the design mission a meeting with the 
Administrative Court, the supreme audit institution did not materialize. The IFAD country 
office  Finance  Analyst  should  arrange  for  the  assessment  before  project  financing 
negotiations  to  inform  the  project  audit  arrangements.  The  World  Bank  office  in 
Mozambique advised that the Administrative Court conducts external audit of its projects 
being implemented through the government ministries.  
25. 
In  compliance  with  IFAD’s  General  Conditions,  PRODAPE’s  financial  statements 
prepared  by  the  PCU  and  submitted  through  IDEPA  will  be  audited  on  an  annual  basis.  
The  corresponding  audit  report  together  with  the  related  management  letter  are  to  be 
submitted  to  IFAD  no  later  than  six  months  after  the  end  of  each  fiscal  year.  Costs 
incurred  for  the  external  audit  will  be  borne  by  the  project.  Any  internal  control  issues 
that are identified during the course of the audit will be documented and an action plan 
submitted  to  IFAD  together  with  the  audit  report.  IFAD  will  check  the  status  of 
implementation of the action plan during supervision missions. 
26.  Supervision  of  PRODAPE´s  financial  management.  Due  to  the  expected 
medium risk rating, it is foreseen that in the first year of implementation, the supervision 
plan  will  include  site  visits  to  DPMAIPs  to  assess  the  adequacy  of  financial  accounting 
arrangements,  review  of  the  budgetary  planning  process  for  PRODAPE  in  line  with  the 
national budget calendar and the quality of the AWPB, the review of latest progress and 
interim  financial  reports  against  AWPB,  review  of  compliance  with  internal  controls, 
review  the impact  of the economic crisis triggered by a debt burden of USD 9.89 billion, 
representing  over  90%  of  the  country's  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  in  2016.  For 
subsequent years the supervision may be conducted by the Finance Officer or a financial 
management specialist, including inter alia the following:  
 
 
 
 
Confirm adherence to internal controls and AWPB;  
Review  project  quarterly  financial  reports,  progress  against  planned  budget 
activities and recommend remedial actions, where necessary;  
Development in the implantation of the national public financial management 
systems; 
The  adoption  of  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS) 
accrual based accounting standards.  
10 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Moz Prodape Pdr Annex Poverty Targeting And Nutrition
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex: Poverty, Targeting and Nutrition 
1. 
This  appendix  presents  information,  analysis  and  strategy  for  PRODAPE  design  in 
relation  to  poverty,  social  inclusion  (including  gender  and  women)  and  nutrition.  
Information  is  presented  in  three  sections:  (i)  Poverty  and  social  inclusion;  (ii) 
Mainstreaming nutrition; (iii) Addressing social risks.  As noted in the PDR, the mitigation 
of common social risks and mainstreaming nutrition was integrated into PRODAPE design 
as a sub-component in itself.  
I.   POVERTY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION 
A. 
Demography and Poverty 
According  to  the  last  population  census  conducted  in  Mozambique,  the  country  is 
2. 
home  to  28.9  million  people;  projections  indicate  that  the  population  could  more  than 
double by 2050.  Demographic distribution of the population is highly differentiated with 
the Provinces of Nampula and Zambézia not being the most populous but also the most 
densely populated12.   
3.  Mozambique´s  population  is  predominantly  young  (between  60-70%  of  the 
population  being  aged  0-35  (final  data  from  the  2017  census  yet  to  be  released).  
According  to  the  Human  Development  Index,  Mozambique  ranks  181/187  countries13, 
due  to  high  illiteracy  rates  (41%)14,  coupled  to  low  enrolment  in  and  poor  quality  of 
education.  Life expectancy has been affected by the country´s generalised HIV epidemic 
currently standing at 55 years of age15.  Twenty-five per cent (25%) of households (HHs) 
in  Mozambique  are  headed  by  women16.  Households  are  in  average  comprised  of  4.7 
people17. 
Table 1: Population and poverty data per target provinces 
Target Region 
/ Province / 
District 
Population 
2017 
Population 
density  
(people / 
km2) 
2017 
% People 
living in 
poverty 2015 
(%) 
NORTHERN REGION 
Niassa 
Cabo Delgado 
Nampula 
Zambézia 
       1,865,976 
2,333,278 
6,102,867 
5,110,787 
14.5 
28.2  
74.8 
48.7 
Manica 
Sofala 
Tete 
Gaza 
CENTRAL REGION 
1,911,237 
2,221,803 
2,764,169 
31.0 
32.7 
27.4 
SOUTHERN REGION 
1,446,654 
19.1 
60.6% 
44.8% 
57.1% 
56.5% 
41.0% 
44.2% 
31.8% 
51.2% 
Sources: (i) INE (no date), Censo 2017, Quarto Recenseamento Geral da População e Habitação.  
Divulgação dos Resultados Preliminares; (ii) MEF, October 2016.  Pobreza e Bem Estar em 
Moçambique: Quarta Avaliação Nacional.  Inquérito ao Orçamento Familiar – IOF 2014/15. 
12    INE,  (no  date).    Censo  2017,  Quarto  Recenseamento  Geral  da  População  e  Habitação.    Divulgação  dos 
Resultados Preliminares. 
13    UNDP,  2016.    Human  Development  Report  2016,  Mozambique.    Briefing  Note  for  Countries  on  the  2016 
Human Development Report. 
14    Danish  Trade  Council  for  International  Development  and  Cooperation,  2017.    Labour  Market  Profile 
Mozambique 2017. 
15  PEPFAR, 2017.  Mozambique Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 2017, Strategic Direction Summary. 
16    CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
17  WB, October 2016.  Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities. 
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
B.  Poverty 
4. 
Poverty levels and distribution. Mozambique has made encouraging progress in 
poverty alleviation over a period of 18 years (1996-2014) with a 25 point drop in poverty 
over  that  period.    However,  despite  the  encouraging  macro-economic  environment  the 
country enjoyed for a couple of decades, up to 2014, poverty reduction has not seen the 
same pace of improvement: poverty reduced in only five points between 2009 and 2014. 
Forty-six per cent (46.1%) of the population still lives under the national (consumption) 
poverty line. In fact, the absolute number of people living in poverty in 2015 is actually 
higher  than  in  2009,  due  to  the  low  percentage  decrease  in  poverty  over  the  period. 
Opportunities for the poor have not been equal to those of the non-poor.   
5. 
Poverty alleviation efforts have generated better results in the Southern Region of 
the  country  (partly  attributed  by  a  higher  degree  of  urbanization),  followed  by  the 
Central  Region.    However,  the  same  does  not  hold  true  for  the  Northern  Region,  where 
poverty has actually increased from 45% to 55%.  
6. 
Poverty is primarily rural (50.1%), this is especially true in isolated areas in which 
assets are not only harder to acquire but also it is more difficult to generate returns from 
them18. The current scenario is Mozambique is thus one of increasing disparities. 
7. 
Key  determinants  of  poverty  in  Mozambique  include  location  of  residence,  low 
education,  low  profitability  livelihood  strategies  (especially  subsistence  agriculture)  and 
high  dependency  ratios19.  Poverty  is  similar  across  male  and  female  HHs,  but  can  be 
lower among females headed ones20. 
8. 
According to the World  Bank, the depth of poverty in  Mozambique is  higher than 
international  standards,  meaning  that  most  people  living  under  the  poverty  line  in 
Mozambique  actually  live  in  a  situation  of  extreme  poverty21.    This  is  in  fact  consistent 
with data produced under the national Demographic Health Survey (IMASIDA) of 2015 in 
relation to poverty quintiles, revealing that 55% percent of the rural population falls into 
the two lowest poverty quintiles22. 
9.  Multidimensional  poverty  (MDP).  HHs  in  Mozambique  are  not  only  affected  by 
consumption poverty; multidimensional poverty (MDP) is also prevalent affecting human 
development,  health  and  standards  of  living  of  Mozambicans23.    Despite  significant 
investments in infrastructure over the past 25 years, access to quality services continues 
being  challenging.  According  to  the  MDP  report  of  2017,  over  69%  of  the  Mozambican 
population  encounters  MDP  deprivations  –  which  is  substantially  higher  than  other 
countries  with  high-income  poverty  levels  (examples  of  other  countries  MDP  levels  for 
the same period include Swaziland 16%, Tanzania 56% and Malawi 53%)24.  
10. 
In  this  context,  poor  rural  HHs  face  a  steep  hill  out  of  poverty.  Overcoming 
poverty in such a context requires increasing the profitability of livelihood activities to a 
level  in  which  people  can  meet  the  triple  challenge  of:  (i)  meeting  their  basic  needs  – 
including  access  to  food  and  basic  services;  (ii)  investing  to  improve  their  living 
standards  and  accumulate  productive  assets;  and  (iii)  continuously  improving  their 
livelihood strategies.   
18  MEF,  October  2016.    Pobreza  e  Bem  Estar  em  Moçambique:  Quarta  Avaliação  Nacional.    Inquérito  ao 
Orçamento Familiar – IOF 2014/15. 
19 WB, October 2016.  Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities. 
20  MEF,  October  2016.    Pobreza  e  Bem  Estar  em  Moçambique:  Quarta  Avaliação  Nacional.    Inquérito  ao 
Orçamento Familiar – IOF 2014/15. 
21 WB, October 2016.  Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities. 
22  INE  and  MISAU,  February  2018.    Inquérito  de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em 
Moçambique (IMASIDA) 2015 Relatório Final. 
23  Oxford  Poverty  and  Human  Development  Initiative,  2017.    Mozambique  Country  Briefing.  Multidimensional 
Poverty Index Data Bank. OPHI, University of Oxford. 
24 University of Oxford, 2017. OPHI Country Briefings 2017 for Malawi, Mozambique and Tanzania. 
2 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
C.  Rural Livelihoods 
11.  Seventy-five  per  cent  of  the  country´s  population  is  involved  in  agriculture  with 
subsistence  agriculture  being  the  main  driver  of  rural  livelihoods.  Seventy  per  cent 
(70%)  of  agricultural  plots  are  up  to  2  ha  and  only  3%  are  over  5  ha.  Maize,  cassava, 
beans and groundnut are the main staple crops, while sugar cane, sesame, mango and 
coconut  constitute  the  main  cash  crops.  Low  input  use,  low  yield,  rain-fed  agriculture, 
low  access  to  extension  and  financial  services  and  to  markets,  and  little  bargaining 
power continue driving HH level agriculture.  
12.  Fisheries  plays  an  important  role  in  the  livelihood  strategies  of  people  living  in 
coastal districts of the  country.  It is  estimated that about 350,000 people participate in 
production, processing and sale of fish in Mozambique. It is estimated that over 90% of 
fish production activities come from artisanal fisheries.   
13.  The  culture  of  freshwater  species  such  as  tilapia  has  been  practiced  for  some 
decades in Mozambique, whereas the cultivation of marine species has emerged over the 
last five years. Aquaculture practices range from extensive farming (tilapia and seaweed) 
with few inputs and modest output, to semi-intensive farming (shrimp) with high inputs 
and high output25.  
14.  The  low  production,  productivity  and  profitability  of  smallholder  livelihood 
strategies  continue  locking  smallholders  in  poverty.    Despite  years  of  investment  in  the 
smallholder  segment 
relatively  unchanged.  Paradoxically, 
remains 
approximately 93% of agricultural production and 90% of fishing activities in the hands 
of smallholders26. 
reality 
this 
15.  Albeit  the  strong  reliance  on  agriculture  and  fisheries,  off-farm  activities  such  as 
casual low paid labour, informal trade and remittances also play an important role in the 
HH economy and actually account for a good proportion of HH revenue27. Women´s and 
men´s  participation  in  different  livelihood  activities  have  shown  minor  shifts  in  recent 
years  even  though  agriculture  continues  being  driven  by  women,  while  fisheries  and 
aquaculture is led by men.   Men are moving out of agriculture, when other opportunities 
arise,  especially  into  non-agricultural  self-employment  and  the  private  sector.  At  the 
same  time  women´s  participation  in  agriculture  dropped  from  89%  to  75%,  which  is 
attributed to increased participation in informal trade from 5.5% to 12%28.  
16. 
Adverse  climatic  conditions,  combined  with  other  activities  providing low  returns 
and  the  lack  of  profitable  alternatives  and  low  asset  base  of  the  majority  of  rural 
dwellers, limits the ability of smallholder farmers to make sustainable economic progress 
and enhance resilience to shocks.  
17. 
In  offering  access  to  a  new  livelihood  activity, such  as  aquaculture,  enables  HHs 
to  diversify  activities  and  spread  risk.    However,  for  the  activity  to  succeed  at  HH  level 
and  for  smallholders  to  sustain  their  engagement  and  be  able  to  capture  expected 
benefits  in  the  short,  medium  and  long  term,  it  is  important  that  concerted  efforts  are 
invested to addressing all elements in the value chain related to inputs for engagement 
and outputs to markets. In this sense, PRODAPE´s comprehensive value chain approach 
aligns well to beneficiary needs. It will be critical however that all interventions are well 
coordinated and offered at the right time and in the right quantities and quality. Just as 
25  Technoserve.  2017.  Aquaculture  Industry  Strategic  Plan  –  Final  Report.  The  sector  could  provide  cheap 
source  of  protein,  improve  the  population’s  diet,  create  jobs,  generate  income  and  promote  regional 
development. 
26  CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
27 Ibid. 
28  Danish  Trade  Council  for  International  Development  and  Cooperation,  2017.    Labour  Market  Profile 
Mozambique 2017. 
3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
important  is  that  smallholders,  due  to  their  intrinsic  vulnerability,  receive  assistance  in 
overcoming common social risks that could hinder HH socio-economic progression. 
D.  Common Shocks / Risks Affecting Rural Livelihoods. 
18.  Adverse weather conditions / pests. Droughts, floods and cyclones recurrently 
affect Mozambican smallholders.  Localized floods occur almost every year, causing 
multiple casualties and loss of economic assets. Droughts, “late rains” also lead to loss of 
crops, seeds and animals, and generate pockets of food insecurity throughout the 
country. Cyclones are common and have the same effects along coastal districts of the 
country.  Because of the already low resource base, those endowed with more assets in 
rural areas resort to selling assets to smooth consumption. 
19.  Pests constitute the second major threat to rural livelihood activities; low access to 
inputs and extension services exacerbates vulnerability in this respect29. 
20.  Loss  of  labour  force  at  HH  level.  The  temporary  or  permanent  loss  of  labour 
force at HH level constitutes the prime internal shock faced by smallholder households in 
Mozambique.  Mozambique´s  generalized  HIV  epidemic  constitutes  one  of  the  major 
threats in this respect; approximately 1.9 million people are HIV positive in the country. 
In  Mozambique  HIV  transmission is  driven  by  heterosexual  contact,  due  to  inconsistent 
condom use. 29% of new infections are among sex workers and their clients, 26% occur 
in people in stable relationships and 23% due to multiple concurrent partnerships30.  
21.  HIV  prevalence  increased  from  11.5%  to  13.2%  between  2009  and  2015  among 
people aged 15-49.  Women continue being harder hit by HIV: prevalence rates continue 
being persistently higher among women (15.4% vs.10.1% in men at national level, and 
13% vs. 9% in rural areas). People with the highest prevalence rates include those aged 
35-39,  people  who  are  separated  /  divorced  /  widowed  and  people  who  only  have 
primary  education,  but  the  highest  prevalence  rates  are  among  those  in  the  highest 
wealth  quintiles.  Young  women  aged  15-24  are  also  particularly  vulnerable  to  HIV 
acquisition  with  a  prevalence  rate  of  9.8%  versus  3.2%  among  their  male  peers31, 
highlighting the role of transactional and intergenerational sex mainly driven by poverty 
and economic incentives. 
22.  Mozambique  adopted  the  UNAIDS  90-90-90  2020  targets  meaning  that  90%  of 
those  positive  should  know  their  HIV  status,  receive  treatment  and  be  virally  (HIV) 
suppressed. To achieve this, the country also adopted the “Test and Treat” HIV treatment 
protocol,  with  the  aim  of  enrolling  HIV  positive  people  on  ART  as  soon  as  they  are 
identified HIV positive. This measure aims to suppress viral load with ART serving as the 
prime means of avoiding HIV transmission. 
23.  Seventy-eight  per  cent  of  women  reporting  being  HIV  positive  are  on  Anti-
Retroviral  Treatment  (ART)  against  68%  among  men,  and  trends  are  for  enrolment  in 
treatment to be lower among poorer socio-economic groups. 
24.  While  it  is  anticipated  that  substantial  gains  will  be  obtained  from  newly  adopted 
treatment  guidelines  in  line  with  international  strategies  and  protocols,  along  with  the 
foreseen  expansion  of  HIV  services,  positive  health  outcomes  require  addressing 
behavioural transmission risks. In Mozambique, key areas requiring specific interventions 
are:  (i)  increase  demand  for  HIV  testing;  (ii)  getting  pregnant  women,  young  women 
and adult men into HIV treatment; (iii) encouraging retention to treatment from onset of 
treatment; and (iv) couple disclosure.   
29  CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
30 PEPFAR, 2017.  Mozambique Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 2017, Strategic Direction Summary. 
31  INE  and  INS,  March  2017.    Inquérito  de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em  Moçambique 
(IMASIDA) 2015.  Relatório de Indicadores Básicos de HIV. 
4 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
25.  Widespread  poverty,  gender  inequality,  lack  of  time  and  availability  of  limited 
resources  among  women  –  including  time  -  to  take  care  of  themselves,  zero-status 
disclosure related stigma, and lack of access to sufficient food to take with ARVs, could 
be  some  of  the  reasons  explaining  the  disproportionate  vulnerability  and  effects  of  HIV 
and AIDS on women.  
E.  Women and Youth 
26.  Women.  Women  in  Mozambique  play  a  leading  role  in  managing  their  homes, 
rearing  their  children  and  feeding  their  families.  However,  gender  roles  abscrived  to 
women  result  in  them  facing  multiple  barriers  towards  gender  equality,  including  lower 
education,  access  to  opportunities  and  income  than  men.  Illiteracy  among  women  is 
much  higher  than  among  men  (54%  vs.  27%)32.  Women  have  lower  participation  in 
formal  employment  than  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (14%  versus  21%,  respectively)33  and 
are greater hit by HH or climatic changes and are also the prime victims of gender based 
violence34.   
27.  Women  have  limited  ownership  and  control  of  productive  resources,  have  smaller 
plots  of  farmed  land  and  tend  to  own  animals  of  low  economic  value.  Access  to 
agricultural inputs is limited among women as these are mainly used for the production 
of cash crops that are largely in the hands of men. Even if women play a leading role in 
day-to-day  food  production,  men´s  role  at  specific  times  of  the  agricultural  cycle  is 
essential for smallholder farming, fisheries and aquaculture.   
28.  Women´s  role  in  aquaculture  can  involve  feeding,  selling  and  processing  fish. 
However, aquaculture ponds “belong” to a woman´s husband.  During the fieldwork  for 
this  design  mission  it  was  observed  that  women  tend  to  play  a  more  prominent  role  in 
productive livelihood activities and even control assets and at least part of the resulting 
benefits as HH livelihood strategies diversify and several activities generate returns and 
in  turn  increase  HH  wellbeing.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  husbands  are  already 
engaged  in  a  profitable  activity  and  they  perceive  benefits  to  supporting  their  wives 
personal and economic development. In this context, it is probable that as HH strategies 
are strengthened and income levels improve, married women engage in aquaculture, as 
true beneficiaries in their own right.   
29.  The rapid field assessment conducted in the context of this project design indicates 
however that the same is likely not to be the  case among the poorer potential  married 
PRODAPE beneficiaries. In fact, the establishment of quotas for women within the project 
faces  a  high  risk  of  husband´s  “sending”  their  wives  to  apply  for  the  project  to  get 
access  to  this  benefit,  when  in  fact,  husbands  will  “own”  and  control  the  aquaculture 
ponds and associated benefits. 
30.  Women´s  active  participation  in  community  groups  and  the  degree  to  which  their 
voices  are  heard  and  taken  into  account  in  development  processes  varies  widely  from 
community  to  community  and  largely  depends  on  the  value  attributed  by  individual 
groups  and  community  leaders.  However,  cultural  roles  and  tradition  generally 
emphasize men´s dominance in such spaces. Interestingly though, a study conducted in 
2017  indicates  that  women  have  greater  levels  of  participation  in  decision-making 
related to agriculture than would have been thought given the overall trends in women´s 
participation in decision-making at HH and community level35. 
32  Danish  Trade  Council  for  International  Development  and  Cooperation,  2017.    Labour  Market  Profile 
Mozambique 2017. 
33 Ibid. 
34  INE  and  MISAU,  February  2018.    Inquérito  de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em 
Moçambique (IMASIDA) 2015 Relatório Final. 
35  CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Intra-HH food distribution in rural areas tends to favour men, a trend which can be 
31. 
enhanced  in  situations  of  food  insecurity,  exposing  women,  including  pregnant  women, 
as well as children, to higher levels of nutritional deficiency.  
Interviewees  reached  during  the  design  mission  indicated  that  tensions  and  an 
32. 
increase in gender-based violence could be attributed to sudden increases in HH income 
and women´s increased access to opportunities.   
33.  Different  sources  indicate  that  women  headed  smallholder  HHs  account  for  23%-
38%  of  HHs  in  the  country36.  Lack  of  access  to  male  labour  among  women  headed  HH 
contributes  to  the  gender  gap  in  the  productivity  of  rural  livelihood  activities;  male 
headed HHs are estimated to have 57% more labour power than female headed ones37.   
34.  The  Ministry  of  Gender,  Children  and  Social  Action  leads  efforts  in  promoting 
gender  equality  and  empowering  women.  The  country  has  seen  some  progress  in 
producing sector specific gender policies and strategies and in identifying focal points for 
gender  mainstreaming  within  government  institutions.  IFAD  is  currently  supporting  the 
finalization of a gender strategy and action plan for the agriculture sector for the period 
2016-2025.  A  gender  strategy  and  action  plan  was  developed  for  the  fisheries  sector 
under  PROPESCA  for  the  period  2015-1938  and  serves  as  a  good  basis  for  the 
identification  of  current  needs,  constraints  and  opportunities  for  different  social  groups 
and  the  development  of  sector  wide  commitments  to  render  the  fisheries  and 
aquaculture  sector  more  socially  inclusive.  The  MIMAIP  currently  has  very  limited 
capacity  in  terms  of  gender  mainstreaming  (and  promoting  social  inclusion  more 
broadly). 
35.  Youth. The country´s youth policy considers youth as being people aged 15-3539. 
Illiteracy is lower among youth (23%) than among adults (51%)40. Enrolment in primary 
education  has  increased  substantially  in  Mozambique  but  quality  of  education  and 
completion  rates  continue  being  lower  than  desired.  In  fact,  while  continuity  into 
secondary  education  has  also  increased  dropout  rates  are  still  alarmingly  high. 
Vocational  training  opportunities  for  youth  have  grown  in  the  past  few  decades  but  are 
still not adequate to provide youth without completed secondary education with the skills 
required by the labour market41.  
36.  Agriculture,  the  informal  sector  and  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises  continue 
constituting  the  main  avenues  for  youth.  Youth  lack  some  forms  of  capital,  such  as 
financing,  and  social  capital  to  access  the  few  opportunities  available  in  rural  areas.  
Approximately  37%  remain  unemployed.  Entrepreneurship  constitutes  the  driving 
strategy promoted by the GoM towards youth employment42.   
37.  Youth are not homogeneous, according to anecdotal evidence collected in the field 
during  the  design  mission  youth  aged  15-24  are  more  interested  in  activities  that 
generate  quick  returns;  their  interest  in  longer  term  cycle  opportunities  such  as 
aquaculture  is  generally  contingent  on  their  engagement  in  other  activities  with  quick 
wins.  While this is partly explained by interests, the weight played by the lack of capital 
36    (i)  CGAP,  2016.    National  Survey  and  Segmentation  of  Smallholder  Households  in  Mozambique.  Working 
Paper;  (ii)  Morgado,  J.  and  Salvucci,  V.,  December  2016.  Gender  Divide  in  Agricultural  Productivity  in 
Mozambique.    United  Nations  University  –  UN  WIDER.  Wider  Working  Paper  2016/176;  and  (iii)  INE  and 
MISAU,  February  2018.    Inquérito  de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em  Moçambique 
(IMASIDA) 2015 Relatório Final. 
37  Morgado,  J.  and  Salvucci,  V.,  December  2016.    Gender  Divide  in  Agricultural  Productivity  in  Mozambique.  
United Nations University – UN WIDER. Wider Working Paper 2016/176. 
38 Ministério das Pescas, 2014.  Estratégia de Género e Plano de Acção do Sector das Pescas 2015-2019. 
39 Ministério de Juventude e Desportos, February 2012.  Política da Juventude (Revista).  Versão 1.   
40  Danish  Trade  Council  for  International  Development  and  Cooperation,  2017.    Labour  Market  Profile 
Mozambique 2017. 
41 Ibid. 
42 Ibid. 
6 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
of  most  rural  youth  (human,  social, 
underestimated.  
financial  and  material)  should  not  be 
38.  Youth  aged  24-35  have  more  stable  livelihoods  and  are  interested  in  agriculture 
and  other  rural  livelihood  activities.  In  fact,  they  are  the  social  group  with  the  largest 
plots of farmed last among smallholders in Mozambique and are more likely to take risk 
and are better off than their older smallholder peers43. 
39.  Without  being  specifically  targeted  rural  youth  have  a  limited  opportunities  to 
access  rural  development  opportunities.  Creating  an  enabling  environment  for  youth  to 
engage  in  rural  entrepreneurship  is  crucial.  The  situation  of  young  women  deserves 
special  attention,  as  they  are  seldomly  targeted  by  development  interventions;  early 
pregnancies are common in rural areas. Youth do not generally participate in political and 
local planning processes; the voice of youth is overrun by that of older men.   
F.  Socio-Economic Stratification of the Population 
40.  Rural HHs in Mozambique can be divided into  four socio-economic strata, namely: 
a)  Very  poor  subsistence  smallholders;  b)  Smallholders  battling to  make  ends  meet;  c) 
Entrepreneurial smallholders; and d) Economically stable rural dwellers.   
41.  Economically active households comprise some smallholders battling to make ends 
meet those in more favourable positions. 
Table 2: Socio-economic characterization of rural smallholder HHs in 
Mozambique 
G.  PRODAPE Targeting Strategy 
42.  Project targeting strategy. The PRODAPE targeting strategy involves geographic 
and  beneficiary  targeting  and  is  complemented  by  the  integration  of  gender  and  youth 
transformative  approaches  and  measures  to  ensure  effective  social  inclusion  in  project 
activities and generation of associated benefits. 
43  CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
7 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
43.  The project will include a set of empowering, enabling and procedural measures to 
promote  socio-economic,  gender  and  youth  engagement  and  mitigate  common  social 
risks  identified  during  project  design.  A  comprehensive  set  of  measures  will  be  put  in 
place  to  mobilize,  apply,  and  select  project  beneficiaries  to  ensure  transparency  and 
accountability  to  local  community  members  and  project  staff.    A  grievance  mechanism 
will  enable  community  members  to  submit  concerns  with  the  project  or  any  of  the 
processes employed by it. 
44.  Geographic  targeting.  PRODAPE  will  be  targeting  eight  of  10  provinces  of  the 
country, with a total of 23 target districts, in line with GoM priorities, namely: 
  Niassa Province: Lago, Lichinga and Mecanhelas Districts. 
  Cabo Delgado Province: Metuge, Mueda and Balama Districts. 
  Nampula Province: Mossuril, Ribaue and Larde Districts. 
  Zambézia Province: Milange, Nicoadala and Mocubela Districts. 
  Tete Province: Cahora Bassa, Magoé and Maravia Districts. 
  Manica Province: Sussundenga, Vanduzi, Gondola and Mossurize Districts. 
  Sofala Province: Beira, Dondo, Gorongosa and Buzi Districts. 
45. 
The  project  will  adopt  a  progressive  implementation  approach,  whereby 
operations  will  start  in  key  locations  in  line  with  the  following  criteria:  (i)  favourable 
natural conditions for aquaculture in ponds; (ii) the existence of water bodies capable of 
providing  sufficient  water  for  aquaculture  activity;  (iii)  the  existence  of  potential 
markets;  (iv)  unfavourable  socio-economic  conditions  among  local  populations  (high 
poverty  levels),  food  and  nutrition  insecurity;  and  (v)  the  existence  of  access  roads, 
which  could  be  subject  to  improvements  to  warrant  access  throughout  the  year.  The 
districts  chosen  in  which  to  initiate  activities  being:  Lago,  Baloma,  Ribaue,  Milange, 
Cahora  Bassa,  Sussundenga  and  Beira.  Interventions  in  six  of  the  seven  initial  districts 
(all except Beira, will include a fish production component).   
Expansion  into  other  districts  listed  herein  will  occur  once  the  aquaculture  value 
46. 
chain  in  these  districts  is  operational.  Lessons  drawn  in  these  districts  will  inform 
expansion on the basis of local demand.  
47. 
However,  once  the  results  of  final  assessments  of  damage  caused  by  cyclones 
Idai and Kenneth to aquaculture infrastructure are available, target areas of intervention 
could be adjusted. 
48. 
The  ESMF  will  establish  the  overall  framework  for  project  operations  among  the 
23  target  districts.  This  information,  along  with  demand  expressed  from  districts  will 
support  the  decision-making  process  to  identify  districts  to  be  contemplated  in  the 
second  and  third  batch  of  expansion.  The  phased  implementation  approach  aims  to 
consolidate  supply  and  demand  approaches  towards  effective  and  efficient  value  chain 
functionality.  Lessons  learnt  and  best  practices  will  be  integrated  into  the  project  as  it 
expands from a set of districts to another. 
49.  The  same  criteria  will  be  used  to  identify  specific  target  locations  within  the 
aforementioned  Districts.  Relevant  excluding  criteria  will  also  be  taken  into  account  to 
ensure that the project remains Category B (for example, the project cannot operate in 
conservation areas or in areas with marine water).   
50.  Also,  in  the  event  that  communities  affected  by  large  scale  economic  activities, 
including  extractive 
largely 
deteriorated  as  a  result  of  these  projects  comply  with  all  technical  criteria  stipulated 
above, they will be given priority over other communities. 
livelihood  strategies  have 
industry  projects,  whose 
51.  The  implementation  of  activities  at  community  level  will  also  follow  a  progressive 
approach  through  the  incremental  reach  of  beneficiaries  in  communities  targeted.  The 
first round of  support in each target  community will include financial inclusion activities 
and engagement of easier to reach beneficiaries. 
8 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
52.  Direct  targeting  of  beneficiaries.  The  project  aims  to  reach  88,900  people 
within communities, along the aquaculture value chain and in relevant sector institutions. 
PRODAPE  was  designed  under  an  inclusive  targeting  approach.  Specific  measures  were 
integrated to ensure that poor and vulnerable groups, such as HHs severely affected by 
HIV and the disabled can access project opportunities. At community level, beneficiaries 
will  participate  in  project  activities  based  on  self-selection  within  project-supported 
areas, based on pre-established eligibility criteria.   
53.  Table 3 illustrates the range of beneficiaries that will be reached by PRODAPE over 
the course of the project lifetime. 
Table 3: Summary of PRODAPE beneficiaries at community and institutional 
level 
(i)  Community level beneficiaries: 
 
Smallholder  aquaculture  farmers.  This  group  comprises  poor  /  subsistence 
smallholders and economically active / entrepreneurial smallholders requiring 
support to engage in the aquaculture value chain.  
Figure 1: PRODAPE primary beneficiaries vis-à-vis smallholder categories 
   Poorest                                                           Wealthiest            
SMALL-HOLDER 
TYPES  
Very poor 
subsistence 
smallholders 
Smallholders 
battling to make 
ends meet 
Entreprene
urial small-
holders 
Econo-
mically 
stable 
rural 
dwellers 
PRODAPE 
PRIMARY 
BENEFICIARIES 
Poor / subsistence 
smallholders 
Economically active / 
entrepreneurial 
smallholders 
PRODAPE  will  reach  a  total  of  7,000  people  to  engage  in  smallholder 
aquaculture production over the course of five years, through earthen  ponds 
(60%) and cage culture (40%).   
9 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
                Table 4: Detail of PRODAPE beneficiaries to be reached per year 
EARTHERN  PONDS:  Targeting  quotas  to  be  applied  for  the  smallholder 
aquaculture producers being: 40% poor / subsistence smallholders and  60% 
economically active / entrepreneurial smallholders. Across all socio-economic 
strata 20% of beneficiaries will be women headed HHs, 10% youth aged 18-
24 and 30% youth aged 25-35.   
Table 5:  Expected participation rate of different social groups as primary 
beneficiaries 
Specific  support  packages  have  been  developed  for  the  different  socio-
economic  groups  engaging in  the  production  of  cultured  fish  with  the  use  of 
earthen ponds, as depicted in Table 6. 
Table 6: Packages developed for HHs of different socio-economic groups 
to enable engagement in aquaculture production through earthen ponds 
10 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Other beneficiaries will also include rural HHs already engaged in aquaculture 
production  as  they  will  benefit  from  improvements  at  other  levels  of  the 
aquaculture  value  chain  generated  by  the  project,  with  support  indicated  in 
Table 5 under (support available beyond the first pond). It is expected that at 
least 40% of smallholders owning / managing aquaculture ponds in the target 
areas will progressively expand from 1 to 2-3 ponds over the project lifetime.   
CAGE PRODUCTION: All beneficiaries will be economically active, to ensure 
that they are able to present a 20% contribution of all initial capital costs and 
input costs for the first production cycle, as well as have been granted 
approval for financial support from REFP. 
Rural aquaculture  entrepreneurs.   Comprise individuals wishing to engage in 
levels  of  the  aquaculture  value  chain  other  than  production  but  require 
external support to do so. Fifty per cent (50%) of financial products targeting 
the  value  chain  will  be  attributed  to  women.  Specific  opportunities  and 
products will also be developed to meet the interests and capacities of youth 
of  different  ages.  This  beneficiary  group  will  also  include  existing  private 
sector entrepreneurs. 
A  portion  of  the  youth  reached  at  community  level  as  fish  producers  or 
entrepreneurs  will  benefit  from  participating  in  a  youth  champion  led 
intervention widely used by the International Labour Organization (ILO, Start 
Your Own Business).  
Young  Graduates.    PRODAPE  will  also  target  between  5-10  fresh  graduates 
with  aquaculture  degrees  to  engage  in  the  value  chain,  striving  to  attain  a 
gender balance. In addition to being offered the support packages offered to 
any beneficiary, they will benefit from coaching and mentoring activities from 
specialized institutions. Efforts will be made to attain a gender balance. 
Extensionists.  Extentionists  will  also  be  given  the  opportunity  to  engage  in 
aquaculture  activities  through  the  same  approaches  as  community  level 
beneficiaries. A total of 250 extensionists will receive PRODAPE support. The 
measure  is  intended  to  enable  these  players  to  participate  in  commercial 
activity  within  the  aquaculture  value  chain.  The  approach  replicates  similar 
positive experiences used in the agriculture sector in the country.  
Broader  communities  and  individuals  working  in  markets  targeted  by 
PRODAPE. The following activities are expected to reach and benefit the wider 
communities and markets targeted by the project: (i) The promotion of PCRs; 
(ii)  Nutritional  activities;  and  (iii)  Water  and  sanitation  improvements  in 
markets  and  training  of  traders  in  fish  handling  techniques  and  business 
development. 
 
 
 
(ii)   Institutional level beneficiaries. Staff of all institutions involved in the project 
will benefit from capacity building interventions including exposure visits to locations of 
successful aquaculture activities. Extensionists will be provided with opportunities to 
engage in aquaculture activity. 
H.  PRODAPE Social Inclusion Strategy 
54.  The  PRODAPE  will  integrate  a  comprehensive  social  inclusion  strategy  to  ensure 
that HHs of different socio-economic groups, women, gender dynamics, youth and other 
vulnerable groups are all accounted for. The strategy includes: 
(a)
Parity  of  employment  between  men  and  women  at  the  PCU  and  technical 
assistants hired with PRODAPE funding. 
11 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Training  of  all  project  staff  at  national  level,  implementing  agencies  and 
relevant  stakeholders  on  social  analysis,  as  well  as  youth  and  gender 
sensitive programming. 
PRODAPE human resource policies and procedures are gender sensitive. 
Establishing  targeting  quotas  for  poorer  community  members  who  would 
likely  otherwise  not  be  reached;  identification  and  provision  of  specific 
support  packages  that  cater  to  the  needs  of  each  social  group  at  different 
levels of the aquaculture value chain. 
Ensuring that all activities at local level start with obtaining buy in from local 
structures,  and  specifically,  support  towards  social  inclusion.  Specific  issues 
to be highlighted in that process include:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participatory  socio  economic,  gender  and  youth  analysis  at  community 
level;  
Agreement on the criteria for selection of beneficiaries who will receive 
different support packages promoting meaningful participation of youth 
in project and local governance processes; 
Agreement  on  how  project  information  can  be  disseminated  to  ensure 
that all social groups receive project information;  
Agreement  of  project  related  processes  involving  all  social  groups 
targeted  (men  and  women  of  different  socio-economic  groups,  gender 
and age);  
Participatory  assessment  of  other  common  social  risks  and  barriers 
identified 
that  could  compromise  sustained 
participation in project activities; and 
in  project  design 
Agreement on how the PRODAPE grievance mechanism will work.  
 (f)
(g)
Implementation  of  inclusive  project  information  dissemination,  participatory 
planning and monitoring throughout the lifetime of the project.  
Integration of a Social Mentoring intervention to address pressing social risks 
and  barriers  constraining  sustainable  engagement  of  youth  and  women  and 
enjoyment of benefits to be generated by the project.  
(h) Collection,  analysis  and  use  of  disaggregated  data  by  socio-economic  group, 
gender and age. 
 (i) Monitoring  targeting  goals  per  social  group  and  targeting  effectiveness;  use 
of information to fine tune programme strategies. 
 (j) Monitoring intended and unintended changes in gender relations and common 
areas of gender inequality. 
(k)
 (l)
Earmarking  funds  for  qualitative  special  studies  to  improve  understanding  of 
specific issues related to social inclusion. 
Production  of  knowledge  and  sharing  lessons  learnt  in  the  domain  of  social 
inclusion with stakeholders at national level. 
II.   MAINSTREAMING NUTRITION ACROSS THE VALUE CHAIN 
55. 
In  2015,  Mozambique  reached  the  Millennium  Development  Goal  of  halving  the 
number of hungry people in the country; chronic food insecurity now sits at 24% down 
A. 
Introduction 
12 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
from  61%  in  199744.  Despite  these  impressive  achievements,  significant  challenges  to 
food and nutrition security are still encountered. The situation is made worse by inflation 
and a rise in food prices, recording a five-year high in October 201645. According to the 
2018 Cost of Hunger in Africa study, Mozambique loses more than 10.9 % of its annual 
GDP due to chronic malnutrition, the equivalent to a yearly loss of MZN 62 billion (about 
USD 1.6 billion).  
56. 
In  alignment  with  the  GoM  vision,  the  Mission  underscores  the  importance  of 
aquaculture in poverty reduction, food and nutrition security. In light of this, and based 
on  experience,  PRODAPE  will  mainstream  nutrition;  as  a  result,  rather  than  only 
promoting activities at community level such as nutrition education and demonstration of 
nutritious cooking practices, the project will embed nutrition throughout the value chain. 
The  project  will  focus  on  nutrition-sensitive  strategies  that  increase  supply,  add 
nutritional value and increase demand of aquaculture fish.  
57.  Small-scale farmers will be enabled by the social behaviour change communication 
(SBCC)  activities  to  address  individual  barriers  tied  to  knowledge,  skill,  attitudes  and 
motivation  for  consumption  of  diversified  diets.  To  address  other  underlying  causes  of 
malnutrition, the project will use the nutrition governance structures in place to engage 
in  sector  coordination  with  the  health,  education,  agriculture  and  relevant  programs 
implemented  by  the  nutrition  partners’  forum  implementing  agencies.  Social  Mentoring 
support  will  be  offered  to  rural  aquaculture  producer  households  within  the  farmers 
clustered  groups  to  tackle  social  risks  such  as  lack  of  adequate  planning  and  use  of 
resources at household level, gender inequality and HIV and AIDS.  
58.  Finally,  PRODAPE  will  monitor  nutrition  outcomes  resulting 
from  project 
interventions and contribute to achieve the Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of 
Chronic Malnutrition in Mozambique (PAMRDC) objectives.  The aim of these endeavours 
is to contribute to good nutrition through consumption of fish and fish-based products as 
an entry point to improved and diversified family diet.   
B.  Food and Nutrition Status in Mozambique 
59.  Mozambique  has  a 
three-fold  nutritional  burden  (chronic  undernutrition, 
micronutrient  deficiency  and  emerging  issues  with  overweight  and  obesity  in  urban 
areas). Nationally, 43% of children under the age of five are stunted, 6% are wasted and 
15%  are  underweight.  Low  birth  weight  in  Mozambican  children  is  estimated  at  14%, 
indicating that malnutrition affects children from conception and while in their  mother´s 
womb46.  Adolescent pregnancies contribute significantly to low birth weight. Malnutrition 
levels  vary  across  the  country;  stunting  prevalence  is  highest  in  the  Provinces  of  Cabo 
Delgado  (53%),  Nampula  (55%),  Zambézia  (45%),  Tete  (44%),  Manica  (42%)  and 
Sofala (35%) and highest number of families with limited economic access to a nutritious 
diet.  
60.  Fish is the main source of animal protein for the coastal areas, providing vitamins 
and  minerals,  especially  omega-3.  Freshwater  aquaculture  fish,  mainly  tilapia,  is  not 
widely  eaten  in  comparison  to  marine  fish.  The  main  barrier  to  fish  consumption  is 
accessibility,  affordability  and  preference  to  other  food,  especially in  rural  areas  located 
far  from  the  sea  and  dependent  on  agricultural  crops.  Iron,  Iodine  and  Vitamin  A 
constitute  the  main  micronutrient  deficiencies47.  The  prevalence  of  overweight  and 
obesity among women is reportedly increasing nationwide but is highest in the Southern 
Provinces and in urban areas, affecting over a third of women.   
44 The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2015 – SOFI. 
45 https://tradingeconomics.com/mozambique/inflation-cpi 
46 MISAU, INE and ICFI. 2013.   
47 SETSAN, 2013. 
13 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
61.  High  levels  of  rural  poverty,  low  HH  purchasing  power,  limited  access  to  markets, 
high  post-harvest  losses  and  weather-related  hazards  (droughts,  floods  and  cyclones) 
continue to put significant pressure on food and nutrition security of the population. The 
causes of malnutrition in all its forms are driven by several factors:  
 (i)
(ii)
Nationally,  42%  of  the  population  lives  more  than  30  minutes  walking 
distance from a market and 76% more than 2km from any road. As a result, 
large portions of the population are unable to sell produce, earn an income or 
purchase more nutritious foods.  
The  poorest  do  not  produce  enough  food,  do  not  have  reliable  income 
sources,  and  suffer  disproportionately  from  diseases  due  to  inadequate 
access to quality health care and sanitation. 
(iii) Dependence  on  monotonous  diets  with  limited  diversified  protein  and 
micronutrients.  
(iv) Cultural factors influence food  consumption both in terms  of the  food  that is 
eaten  from  what  is  available  to  HHs,  when  certain  foods  are  eaten  and  in 
relation to food distribution at HH level. 
(v) Women  are  overloaded  with  tasks,  constrained  by  gender  norms,  and  given 
limited access to and control over resources. 
(vi) Limited access to nutrition and consumer awareness information on nutrition.   
62.  Barriers  to  diverse  and  nutritious  diets  have  been  highlighted  by  2018  Fill  the 
Nutrient  Gap  Mozambique  studies  and  the  in-depth  review  of  the  2018  Multisectoral 
Action  Plan  for  the  Reduction  of  Chronic  Malnutrition  in  Mozambique  (PARMDC).48  This 
underscores  that  there  is  a  pressing  need  to  ensure  appropriate  nutrition  interventions 
are in place for vulnerable populations including quality health and nutrition services. 
C.  National nutrition policies, strategies and governance 
63.  Policies  and  strategies.  The  GoM  is  committed  to  tackling  food  and  nutrition 
security.  This  commitment  is  reflected  in  the  Five-Year  Plan  of  the  GoM  (PQG  2015-
2019),  which  includes  the  reduction  of  chronic  undernutrition  as  an  indicator  in  the 
human and social development pillar. It is further supported by the National Strategy for 
Food  Security  and  Nutrition  policy  (ESANII  2008-2015)49  and  the  Multisectoral  Action 
Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Malnutrition in Mozambique (PAMRDC 2011–2020) that 
aim to reduce stunting in children under five; wasting in pregnant and lactating women 
and girls and in children under two are recognized as at-risk groups for stunting.  
64.  The  Communication  and  Advocacy  Plan  in  the  PAMRDC  is  supported  by  the 
Communication  Strategy  for  Social  Behaviour  Change  Communication  (SBCC)  for  the 
Prevention  of  Malnutrition  in  Mozambique  (2015-2019)50.  In  addition,  food  security  and 
nutrition  from  fish  is  one  of  the  development  objectives  of  the  Fisheries  Master  Plan 
2010-19  (PDP)  and  is  also  accounted  for  within  the  PAMRDC.  Finally,  the  Food 
Fortification Strategy (COMFAM)  supports the scale up of industrially processed  fortified 
cereal flours, particularly wheat flour and edible oils.  
65.  Nutrition  governance.  The  Scaling  Up  Nutrition  (SUN)  movement  started  in 
2010; Mozambique was one of the early riser countries committing to the movement and 
its  objective,  namely  to  end  malnutrition  in  all  of  its  forms.  The  movement  has  10 
principles  of engagement and consists  of four  stakeholder networks,  namely the United 
48 2018 In-Depth Review of the Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Undernutrition in 
Mozambique 2011 – 2015 (2020)’. 
49 ESAN III (2018-2025) is currently under development. 
50 Estratégia de Comunicação para a Mudança Social e de Comportamento para a Prevenção da Desnutrição em 
Moçambique ( 2015-2019). 
14 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Nations,  donors,  private  sector  and  civil  society.  SETSAN  with  the  Ministry  of  Health 
(MISAU)  coordinates  the  SUN  movement  and  its  networks  through  a  technical  working 
group. The Executive Director of SETSAN is the SUN focal point.  A similar coordination 
structure has been replicated at provincial level with the recently -decreed provincial and 
district  steering  committees  for  food  and  nutrition  security  (CODSAN  and  COPSAN)51. 
Despite  the  structural  components  in  place,  PAMRDC  2018  review  findings52  show  that 
persistent  gaps  still  exist  at  national,  provincial  and  district  level  in  distinguishing 
nutrition security from food security. As such, it is difficult to accurately assess progress 
in  addressing  chronic  undernutrition,  as  data  is  non-comparable  and  many  times 
missing.    
Mainstreaming Nutrition within PRODAPE 
66.  The investment focus of the PRODAPE has enormous potential  to contribute to the 
increase  in  fish  production  to  meeting  the  country´s  growing  demand  for  fish.  The 
PRODAPE  project  will  improve  nutrition  outcomes  by  using  nutrition-sensitive  impact 
pathways  and  nutrition-sensitive  strategies  that  increase  supply,  add  nutritional  value 
and  increase  demand  of  aquaculture  fish  and  associated  value-added  products.  The 
PRODAPE  will  provide  2,000  women,  youth  and  men  with  targeted  support  to  improve 
their  nutrition.  Overall  however,  it  is  expected  that  13,000  beneficiaries  from  the  24 
target districts benefit from nutrition related activities. 
67. 
Integrated impact pathways embedded in PRODAPE are as follows: 
(a) Consumption  pathway  (among  producers).  The  PRODAPE  will  focus  on 
farmers  as  producers  and  consumers  by  introducing  nutrition  and  consumer 
awareness  around  fish  as  a  driver  for  diet  diversity  among  producers  and 
encouraging  fish  consumption  planning  vis-à-vis  channelling  fish  into 
markets.  Also,  diversified  production  systems  will  be  encouraged  among 
beneficiaries  engaged  in  aquaculture  (fish  production  and  agriculture 
activities)  to  increase  the  quantity  and  nutrient-rich  quality  of  diverse  foods 
available to the HH year-round.  
(b)
Income pathway. The PRODAPE will support the strengthening / emergence 
of  credit  and  savings  groups  (PCRs)  in  all  communities  targeted  by 
aquaculture  production  activities.  These  activities  will  also  include  household 
budgeting  and  business  planning.  The  project  will  encourage  use  of 
associated profits to address malnutrition by addressing health, nutrition and 
care necessities.  
(c) Market  pathway.  The  PRODAPE  will  work  all  across  the  aquaculture  value 
chain to address supply and demand constraints. This is expected to increase 
availability  of  and  access  to  aquaculture  fish  in  markets.  A  consumer 
awareness study on cultured fish and other products will be conducted as part 
of  the  initial  market  survey  to  be  conducted  by  the  project  to  establish 
consumer  awareness  levels  and  on  the  basis  of  that,  delineate  effective 
strategies  for  demand  creation  for  the  purchase  of  aquaculture  fish  in  the 
target districts.  
The  project  team  shall  develop  linkages  with  the  World  Food  Programme 
(WFP)  for  the  fish  farmers  and  cottage  fish  industries  to  explore  the 
possibility of tapping into the diversified diets food baskets e-voucher scheme 
for  emergency response and school feeding programs, so create yet  another 
market for aquaculture producers.  
51 December 6th, 2017, the Council of Ministers (Decree N. 69/2017) approved the creation of the National 
Council for Food and Nutrition Security (CONSAN). 
52 In-Depth Review 2018 of the Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Undernutrition in 
Mozambique 2011 – 2015 (2020)’.  
15 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
In  addition,  fish  farmers  with  support  from  the  project  can  benefit  from  the 
Mozambique  Scaling-Up  Nutrition  Business  Network  platform  to  access 
technical  assistance  /  services  on  nutrition  marketing  including  safe  food 
handling  and  packaging  that  preserves  the  nutritional  value  of  fish, 
frameworks for adherence to mandatory minimum requirements for nutrition 
labelling and market place support activities for demand generation. 
Figure 2: PRODAPE integrated impact pathways for nutrition 
68.  PRODAPE  interventions  will  be  implemented  through  the  use  of  nutrition  sensitive 
strategies,  namely,  SBCC  and  consumer  awareness  activities,  institutional  capacity 
building  activities  on  nutrition  mainstreaming  approaches,  and  food  and  nutrition 
security  policy  support.  To  address  other  underlying  causes  of  malnutrition,  the  project 
will  use  the  nutrition  governance  structures  in  place  to  engage  in  sector  coordination 
with the health, education, agriculture and relevant programs implemented by agencies 
in the context of the Nutrition Partners Forum.  
69.  SBCC  activities.  Project  extension  staff  will  engage  and  support  small-scale 
aquaculture  farmers  with  nutrition  education  and  consumer  awareness  information  and 
activities focused on ensuring that farmers and their HHs consume fish produced and use 
16 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
the income from the fish and fish products to access other diverse nutrient-dense food, 
with  the  aim  of  improving  the  quality  of  their  diets.  The  intention  is  for  them  to  also 
become change agents within their communities and use the marketing of their produce 
to increase demand, consumption and utilisation of fish at community level. Some of the 
suggested SBCC activities include: 
(a) Farmer  clusters  and/or  the  PCR  group  nutrition  education  sessions:  Using 
the  farmer  clusters  and/or  the  PCR  groups  as  entry  points,  the  nutrition  education 
activities will include nutrition-specific content on: a) nutritional value of fish; b) fish 
safety; c) fish benefits for the family, especially for the 1,000-days group53; and d) 
demonstration  of  improved  recipes  for  preparing  cultured  fish54.  Activities  will  be 
implemented from the onset and throughout the production and marketing cycles.  
(b) Marketplace  awareness  and  communication  content  and  materials.  To 
address issues related to aquaculture fish acceptability in coastal areas and address 
cultural habits that inhibit the consumption of fish in inland areas, as well as promote 
fish production and overall fish consumption the project will: (1) develop, multimedia 
messages,  creative  print  materials  such  as  scripts,  stories,  lyrics,  agendas, 
discussion guides and slide shows tailored to rural communities; (2) take advantage 
of local fish fairs to promote tilapia and establish promote fish processing and value 
addition; (3) add to the on-going marketplace communication activities to emphasize 
the  prevention  of  chronic  malnutrition  through  community  drama  /  theatre, 
interactive  storytelling,  music  and  road  shows.  National  events  such  as  health  and 
nutrition weeks and the SETSAN “Month Dedicated to Feeding” (Mês da Alimentação) 
offer a wider geographical and thematic focus opportunity for community awareness 
on  the  use  of  aquaculture  fish  and  associated  products  to  improve  HH  diet.  The 
project team will contribute on the production of content and the social mobilization 
activities  for  the  events  in  target  districts;  (4)  explore  use  of  the  district  and 
provincial  community  radios  that  benefited  from  the  Millennium  Development  Goals 
program  (MDG1c)55  radio  station  training  support  and  the  MISAU  “One  Minute  on 
Nutrition”  (Um  Minuto  de  Nutrição)  initiatives  to  convey  the  fish-related  nutrition 
messages. 
(c) To  support  wider  coverage  and  dissemination  of  information  on  aquaculture  fish 
consumption,  the  project  team  could  explore  the  provision  of  tilapia  and  catfish-
related  content  on  production,  consumption  and  marketing  to  community  mother, 
infant and young child nutrition extension teams (SDMAS) to use during home visits 
and  to  the  Nutrition  Partners  Forum  organisation  working  on  nutrition-specific  and 
nutrition-sensitive  intervention  in  the  districts  to  integrate  health,  school  and 
community nutrition activities. 
70.  Institutional  capacity  building  on  nutrition  mainstreaming.  To  facilitate 
quality extension services within the sector a nutrition specialist will be hired to support 
the PCU in planning, implementing and monitoring nutrition outcomes within PRODAPE. 
An  overall  capacity  assessment  planned  for  the  extension  team  and  provincial  and 
district  directorates  will  also  elaborate  on  the  nutrition  capacity  gaps.  In  collaboration 
with  SETSAN,  Ministry  of  Agriculture  National  Directorate  for  Agriculture  Extension 
Department  of  (DNEA),  and  MISAU,  specific  content  for  the  aquaculture  sector  will  be 
developed  and  included  in  the  overall  aquaculture  extension  services  training  plans.  A 
nutrition  focal  point  will  join  the  extension  master  training  team  that  will  train  target 
provincial  directorates  of  Ministry  of  Sea,  Inland  Waters  and  Fisheries  (DPMAIPs)  and 
extension  staff  at  district  levels  and  the  project  team.  The  training  will  be  done  at  the 
53 Adolescents, pregnant, lactating women and children 6-23 months. 
54 Nutrient-dense recipes that use fish as base ingredient and or fish value added products.  
55  Accelerating  progress  towards  the  achievement  of  the  Millennium  Development  Goals1c  in  Mozambique 
(MDG1c) 2013-2018. 
17 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
district level to avoid the cascading training of trainer model to avoid the potential loss of 
technical knowledge and skills along the training chain. 
71.  Food and nutrition policy support. The DPMAIPs and district level nutrition focal 
points will monitor and manage the data collection and utilisation of the routine nutrition 
outcome  data.  The  data  will  then  be  reported  and  monitored  against  the  aquaculture 
planned activities within PARMDC at district, provincial and national level. In this regard 
the  project  will  support  districts  and  provincial  directorates  to  engage  in  the  food  and 
nutrition  policy  alignment.    This  is  in  line  with  planning  and  monitoring  activities 
stipulated  for  the  recently  decreed  provincial  and  district  steering  committees  for  food 
and  nutrition  security  (CODSAN  and  COPSAN)56.  The  project  will  also  engage  with  the 
food and nutrition evaluation assessment and surveys working group chaired by SETSAN 
department of evaluation.  
72.  Do  no  harm  considerations.  The  time  spent  by  women  participating  in  project 
activities  could  have  a  negative  effect  on  breastfeeding  and  other  childcare 
responsibilities  assumed  by  women.  The  project  will  mitigate  these  harms  by  ensuring 
that  the  organisation  of  the  PRODAPE  activities  are  well  coordinated  and  take  place  at 
times  which  are  convenient  for  women.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  timesaving 
technologies  for  food  processing,  such  as  solar  dryers  and  cool  boxes,  as  well  as  for 
marketing, including mobile phone marketing, will be explored by PRODAPE.  
73.  A social and gender analysis will be carried out by the project to determine trends 
in  the  distribution  of  aquaculture  related  benefits  at  HH  level  to  develop  strategies  to 
ensure equitable intra-household access to resources and benefits. 
D.  Partnerships and linkages 
74.  Synergies  with  initiatives  in  other  donor-supported  projects/programmes  working 
in  target  PRODAPE  locations  will  help  maximize  nutrition  outcomes  by  leveraging 
facilities and other resources already in place, among which: 
(a)  Ministry  of  health  provincial  directorate  and  district  services.  In 
provinces  with  persistently  high  stunting  levels,  such  as  Niassa,  Cabo  Delgado, 
Nampula  and  Zambézia,  small-scale  aquaculture  farmers  with  HH  members  who 
are  pregnant,  lactating,  with  children  under-five  and/or  adolescents  will  be  linked 
with on-going child and maternal health support services in their areas, as needed. 
This  will  be  achieved  thorough  collaboration  with  community  health  workers  (in 
Mozambique  APEs)  and  the  district  women's  health  and  social  services  (SDSMAS) 
extension teams.  
(b)  Nutrition  sector  partners.  The  following  table  elaborates  potential  linkages 
which  could  be  explored  by  PRODAPE  with  Nutrition  Partners  Forum  members  for 
projects planned from 2019 through 202257: 
Organization 
and Partner 
Project / 
Programme 
Area of Linkage / 
Partnership 
Province / District  
IFAD-funded projects 
IFAD 
Nutrition 
Community of 
Practice IFAD 
projects  
Sharing lessons learnt and 
experience on mainstreaming 
strategies in Mozambique and 
diet diversity baseline and 
end line surveys 
56  December  6th,  2017,  the  Council  of  Ministers  (through  Decree  No.  69/2017)  approved  the  creation  of  the 
National Council for Food and Nutrition Security (CONSAN). 
57 Nutrition Investment Overview Mozambique 2018. 
18 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Organization 
and Partner 
Project / 
Programme 
Area of Linkage / 
Partnership 
Province / District  
PROMER  
Agricultural diversification  
PROCAVA 
Agricultural diversification 
Cabo Delgado / 
Balama  
Niassa / Lichinga 
65 districts in 
Northern and Central 
Mozambique   
Rome-Based Agencies 
WFP 
Emergency 
response program  
School feeding 
program 
Nutrition Partnership Forum 
Institution markets for the 
aquaculture fish through the 
e-voucher scheme  
Emergency response 
district in the north 
and central(TBC) 
GAIN 
(DFID) 
 B. Catalysing private 
sector in scaling 
up nutrition 2016-
2021 -SUN 
Business Network- 
Mozambique 
Investment fund and 
technical assistance to 
increase safe nutritious diets 
through private sector 
engagement and demand 
generation through market 
place support 
Nampula, Cabo 
Delgado, Tete, 
Niassa, Sofala , 
Manica and 
Zambézia 
USAID  
 C. Community 
nutrition 2019-
2024 
SBCC, nutrition services 
through the national health 
system 
Nampula / 
Murrupula, Meconta, 
Mogovolas and Larde  
UNICEF/ EU 
/ WB funds  
DFID SCI-
HKI 
The Spanish 
Red Cross 
Health and 
nutrition, 
behaviour change 
communication for 
nutrition 2017-
2012 
Linking Agriculture 
to Nutrition 2017-
2022 
Health and 
Nutrition 2019-
2022 
Specific community nutrition 
activities, SBCC platforms and 
WASH services 
 Nampula / Monapo 
and Ribáue 
Zambézia 
SBCC, promotion of orange 
fleshed sweet potato and 
farmer field schools 
Water, sanitation and hygiene 
promotion  
Tete and Manica  
Cabo Delgado  
E. 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
75.  The  PRODAPE  PCU  will  hire  a  nutrition  specialist  officer  to  manage  day-to-day 
activities  related  to  nutrition.  The  nutrition  specialist  will  work  with  the  DPMAIPs,  who 
are  responsible  for  the  coordination,  implementation  and  progress  of  nutrition 
mainstreaming actions for the project at local level. The SDAE extension workers are the 
front-line  team  for  PRODAPE  and  will  be  supported  trained  and  mentored  on  nutrition-
sensitive interventions by the nutrition specialist and the DPMAIPs nutrition focal points.  
76.  The  contributions  of  PRODAPE  interventions  will  be  monitored  through  periodic 
project-specific  monitoring  activities  as  well  as  SETSAN  biannual  surveys.  The  baseline 
survey  on  knowledge,  attitudes  and  practices  and  diet  diversity  surveys  will  provide 
19 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
benchmark data to measure changes related to nutritional outcomes in the project target 
areas.  IFAD  Mozambique´s  Nutrition  Community  of  Practice  will  enable  sharing 
information, best practices and networking within IFAD funded programs (PROMER58 and 
PROCAVA59)  as  well  as  establishing  linkages  with  nutrition  specific  /  sensitive 
programmes. 
77.  Planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  social  behaviour  change  from  the 
multimedia and marketplace campaigns will be done in collaboration with the Ministries 
of  Health,  Agriculture,  Education,  Commerce  and  Industry,  SETSAN,  SUN  business 
network and community activists. 
F. 
Nutrition Indicators 
78.  Diet  diversity  measured  at  the  individual  level  has  been  repeatedly  validated  as 
predictive  of  diet  quality  and  is  associated  with  nutritional  status  across  a  range  of 
countries and contexts60. A positive association has also been shown between higher diet 
diversity and reduced prevalence of stunting and underweight among children under five. 
The  same  applies  to  diet  diversity  and  mean  micronutrient  adequacy  for  women  and 
children. The following indicators will be used by PRODAPE to track nutrition results: 
Impact 
indicators 
Per capita consumption of aquaculture fish 
Outcome 
indicators 
Percentage of smallholder women of reproductive age with increase dietary 
diversity (at least 5 food groups)  
Dietary Diversity Scores consist of a simple count of the different food groups that a 
HH or an individual has consumed over a given period (usually 24 hours). These 
scores have been used by the MGD1c project. Future plans for SETSAN biannual 
evaluations to incorporate MDDW. 
Output 
indicators 
  Number fish (kg) reserved for household consumption per production cycle 
 
Types of fish value added products with proper nutrition labelling and signalling 
  #  of  nutrition  campaigns,  events,  awareness  raising  sessions  and  trainings 
conducted 
 
 Number  of  persons  /  HHs  provided  with  targeted  support  to  improve  their 
nutrition (gender and age disaggregated data) 
  # of government staff trained in nutrition-sensitive food systems 
  #  of  nutrition-related  progress  reports  generated  for  SETSAN,  CODSAN  and 
COPSAN 
 
Fish-related  nutrition  content  developed,  publications  and  policy  briefs  produced 
and disseminated 
III.   ADDRESSING SOCIAL RISKS 
79.  An analysis of social risks which could undermine primary beneficiary engagement 
in project supported activities and/or limit beneficiary HH socio-economic progression led 
the identification of the following:  
 a) Individual HHs seek individual solutions to common problems; 
58 The Rural Markets Promotion Programme. 
59 Inclusive Agri-food Value-chains Development Programme. 
60 Compendium of indicators for nutrition-sensitive agriculture FAO 2016. 
20 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 b) Lack of joint planning at HH level; 
 c) Potential  increase  of  HH  tensions  and  gender  inequality  with  increased 
income flows among married beneficiaries; 
 d) Increased  risk  of  HIV  acquisition  by  women;  limited  health  seeking 
behaviour among HIV positive pregnant women, youth and men.  Threat of 
poor  health  with  deteriorating  health  if  treatment  is  not  initiated  and 
sustained; 
 e) Food  insecurity  and  malnutrition  associated  with  lack  of  production  of  food 
for consumption by participating households and an increase in food prices. 
80.  Whether  organized  under  cluster  models  or  around  aquaparks,  smallholder 
aquaculture farmers face greater challenges than the rest of the actors in the value chain 
due  to  their  socio-economic  vulnerability.    Engagement  in  aquaculture  will  require 
organization  to  address  challenges  and  take  advantage  of  opportunities.    The  Social 
Mentoring intervention aims to support farmers in this respect by working at two levels: 
i)      Aquaculture producer groups (in clusters or aquaparks).  Activities will instil 
joint planning, collaboration and equip them to identify common problems 
and joint solutions.  
ii)       Individual aquaculture producers receiving PRODAPE support.  Activities 
would aim to address social risks that could hinder beneficiary ability to 
sustain engagement and limit socio-economic progression: (i) absence of 
joint HH plans; (ii) gender inequality; (iii) malnutrition; and (iv) HIV and 
AIDS. 
81.  The  proposed  Social  Mentoring  activity,  specifically  catered  to  the  risks  identified 
among  small  aquaculture  farmers  is  facilitative  in  nature.  The  intervention  is  based  on 
the  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)61  broadly  used  by  IFAD,  together  with 
Stepping Stones62, an effective facilitative methodology used in HIV programmes and the 
integration  of  information  and  messages  used  in  the  country  to  fight  malnutrition. 
Activities will be imparted by facilitators trained under PRODAPE and enable participants 
to  develop  realistic  plans,  better  take  advantage  of  existing  opportunities  and  make 
decisions on how to avoid social risks identified.   
61 IFAD, October, 2014.  Case Study: Gender Action Learning System in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone 
and Uganda.  Gender, Targeting and Social Inclusion. 
62 http://steppingstonesfeedback.org Accessed 16th July 2018. 
21 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 6: Key information in relation to four key social risks faced by project 
beneficiaries at HH level to be addressed by the Social Mentoring intervention 
Gender inequality 
HIV and AIDS63 
Malnutrition 
Lack of joint 
household plans 
- High poverty 
levels push HHs to 
rely on day to day 
opportunities  
- Resources tend to 
be scattered and 
poorly coordinated 
and not 
strategically used 
for HH progression 
- Women have more 
responsibilities and 
tasks than men 
and are the prime 
food producers at 
household level 
- Decision making is 
primarily by men 
- Lack of control of 
resources / 
benefits 
-  13.2% HIV 
prevalence64  
-  Challenges: 
 Enrolment in and 
adherence to 
treatment  
 Stigma / 
discrimination  
 Vulnerability of 
women, and 
children 
 HIV disclosure 
- Empower HHs to 
produce HH plans 
and identifying 
solutions to the 
four social risks 
identified herein 
(and others) 
- HH members 
analyse the 
impacts of gender 
inequality on 
individual benefits 
and HH 
progression and 
identify corrective 
measures to issues 
deemed relevant 
 Food availability 
and consumption 
patterns  
-  Sensitization on HIV 
testing, treatment 
and adherence 
-  Sharing information 
on existing HIV 
services  
-  Tearing down 
barriers to 
disclosure / 
discrimination 
-  HIV/AIDS & gender 
inequality 
-  Nutrition in the 
context of HIV and 
AIDS 
S
E
G
N
E
L
L
A
H
C
S
N
O
I
T
U
L
O
S
D
E
S
O
P
O
R
P
-  43% chronic 
malnutrition  
-  54% maternal 
anaemia, iron, 
iodine and vitamin 
A65 
-  Challenges: 
 Limited physical 
and economic 
access to diverse, 
nutritious diets  
 Limited diversified 
protein and 
micronutrient  
 Cultural influence 
on diets/caring 
practises  
 High disease 
burden  
-  Targeted nutrition 
education on 
nutritional value of 
fish, fish safety, 
consumption 
benefits especially 
the 1,000 days 
group66 
-  Demonstration of 
improved 
aquaculture fish 
recipes67 
-  Partnerships with 
relevant sectors  
affects women                                                                                                             
82. 
Issues to be included in the Social Mentoring intervention will include:  
 a. Development of a household vision; 
 b. Household planning: use of resources and opportunities available, including 
remittances; 
 c.
Identifying  and  addressing  common  barriers  for  household  progress 
(including common areas of gender inequality);  
63  Instituto  Nacional  de  Saúde,  Instituto  Nacional  de  Estatística  (INE),  ICF  Internacional,  2015.  Inquérito  de 
Indicadores de Imunização, Malária e HIV/SIDA em Moçambique 2015. Relatório Preliminar de Indicadores de 
HIV.   
64  Mozambique recently  adopted  the  HIV  Test  and  Treat  Strategy,  which  entails  getting  HIV positive patients 
into  anti-retroviral  treatment  as  soon  as  diagnosed.  As  is  the  case  in  other  HIV  high-burden  countries, 
treatment is considered to be the prime prevention strategy. 
65  In-Depth  Review  2018  of  the  ‘Multisectoral  Action  Plan  for  the  Reduction  of  Chronic  Under-nutrition  in 
Mozambique 2011 – 2015 (2020)’. 
66 Adolescents, pregnant and lactating mothers and children aged 6-23 months. 
67 Nutrient dense recipes that use fish as base ingredient and or fish value added products.   
22 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 d. Provision  of  basic  information  on  HIV  prevention  and  clinical  HIV  services 
close to the community, including, as relevant: HIV testing and counselling, 
HIV  care  and  treatment,  community  services  and  support  groups  (if  any) 
and use of services; 
 e.
Importance  of  pregnant  women,  youth  and  men  testing  and  using  clinical 
HIV services and adhering to anti-retroviral treatment; 
 f. Couple  disclose  of  sero-prevalence;  overcoming  HIV  stigma  and 
discrimination; 
 g. Provision  of  basic  information  to  prevent  malnutrition  and  linkages,  as 
appropriate. 
83.  Social  Mentoring  activities  will  be  implemented  by  trained  Mentors.  Social 
Mentoring activities will be imparted to primary beneficiary producer  groups, in groups, 
in whichever way they are organized for the purposes of accessing project opportunities 
related to aquaculture production.  It is expected that groups will consist of 25 members.  
However, more focused attention will be given to "more at risk beneficiaries", considering 
that these will primarily be the poorest HH (those receiving the highest level of support 
to engage in aquaculture), but it could also include beneficiaries that are not among the 
poorest  but  require  additional  assistance  in  overcoming  challenges  and  capitalizing 
opportunities  due  to  enhanced  exposure  to  a  given  social  risk.  These  beneficiaries  will 
receive additional support at HH level. It is expected that the proportion of beneficiaries 
requiring  this  level  of  additional  support  will  represent  20%  of  the  total  number  of 
beneficiaries receiving Social Mentoring support. 
84.  Evidence shows that when implemented correctly, the impact is such that there is a 
multiplier  effect  at  community  level  as  beneficiaries  themselves  target  others 
spontaneously.  As  such,  the  project  will  only  target  50%  of  groups  in  each  community 
and 50% of individual beneficiaries requiring additional support at HH level and will work 
with  those  targeted  directly  by  Mentors  so  that  once  the  "graduate"  they  replicate  the 
same process among the remaining 50% of groups and individual beneficiaries requiring 
additional support. 
85.  Activities  at  group  and  HH  level  will  both  be  implemented  for  a  period  of  12 
months.  It  is  expected  that  after  this  time  groups  and  individuals  targeted  will 
"graduate"  out  of  Social  Mentoring.  Each  Mentor  will  cover  three  groups  (and  the 
estimated  20%  of  group  members  requiring  HH  level  support,  i.e.,  five  people  in  each 
group, totalling 15 HHs) in a period of 12 months. 
86.  All  information  related  to  the  prevention,  treatment  of  and  discrimination  in  the 
context of HIV, as well as nutrition, included in Social Mentoring activities will be aligned 
with  GoM  guidance  documents  and  duly  coordinated  at  local  level  with  other  players 
working towards common goals. 
23 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Attachment 1: Detailed population data per target district PRODAPE. 
Target 
Province 
Niassa 
Cabo Delgado 
Nampula 
Zambézia 
Tete 
Manica 
Sofala 
Gaza 
Target District  Population 
2017 
Lago  
Lichinga 
Mecanhelas 
Metuge 
Balama 
Mueda 
Larde 
Mossuril 
Ribáue 
Mocubela 
Nicoadala 
Milange 
Magoé 
Marávia 
Cahora Bassa  
Vanduzi 
Sussundenga  
Gondola 
Mossurize 
Buzi 
Gorongosa 
Dondo 
Beira 
Chókwè 
163,982 
213,361 
296,908 
89,122 
180,957 
217,641 
85,971 
142,787 
290,244 
110,857 
180,686 
619,275 
91,313 
131,685 
132,972 
124,064 
168,200 
201,735 
219,551 
177,348 
182,226 
184,458 
533,825 
240,244 
24 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Moz Prodape Pdr Annex Institutional Sector Status And Organizational
Arrangements
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex: Institutional Sector Status and Organizational Arrangements 
The  Appendix  presents  detailed  information  on  institutional  and  policy  issues  from  the 
aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique  and  beyond  framing  the  development  of 
aquaculture in Mozambique, which have informed PRODAPE management arrangements 
and capacity building strategies embedded in project design.   
I.    LEGAL AND POLICY CONTEXT FOR AQUACULTURE 
A.  Relevant Sector Policies and Strategies 
Aquaculture in Mozambique is guided by a sub-sector development strategy and a 
1. 
wider  sector  (fisheries)  masterplan.  The  vision  and  strategies  laid  out  in  these 
documents  are  in  turn  integrated  in  the  Government  of  Mozambique´s  (GoM)  five  year 
programme, as described as follows: 
2. 
The  Aquaculture  Development  Strategy  2008-17  is  being  reviewed  through 
the  Aquaculture  Development  Action  Plan  (PADA),  projected  for  a  five-year  period 
beginning  in  2019.  The  development  strategy  acknowledges  that  the  aquaculture 
development  has  been  affected  by  several  factors,  among  which,  insufficient  and  poor-
quality  aquaculture  inputs  (mainly  feed  and  fingerlings),  limited  research  investments 
and extension services and difficult access to credit for aquaculture.  
3. 
The  concept  of  centralities  is  a  key  feature  considered  for  the  effective  and 
inclusive  development  of  aquaculture  in  the  country.  Through  centralities,  currently 
dispersed  functions  and  actors  would  be  concentrated  in  the  same  geographic  areas, 
selected  on  the  basis  of  natural  and  socio-economic  conditions.  The  concept  involves 
concentrating  production  units,  inputs  and  markets  in  the  same  geographic  areas  to 
overcome key bottlenecks currently faced in the aquaculture value chain with the aim of 
transforming  predominantly  subsistence  aquaculture 
into  commercially  oriented 
enterprises.  
4. 
The  PADA  is  based  on  three  pillars:  (i)  increased  production,  productivity  and 
competitiveness  in  aquaculture;  (ii)  improved  access  to  markets  and  financial  services; 
and (iii) institutional development.  It is expected that with the implementation of PADA 
aquaculture  production  will  rise  from  the  current  1,835  tons  (2017)  to  30,000  tons 
(2023). 
The  Fisheries  Master  Plan  2010-19  aims  to  increase  the  fisheries  sector´s 
5. 
benefits to the country, as follows:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Increasing sector contribution (through fish) to food security and nutrition;  
Improving  the  standards  of  living  of  artisanal  fishing  and  small-scale 
aquaculture communities; 
Increasing  the  contribution  of  commercial  fisheries  and  aquaculture  to  the 
achievement of national economic and social development objectives; and  
Increasing  the  sector´s  net  contribution  to  the  country’s  balance  of 
payments.  
The achievement  of the vision laid out in the Fisheries Masterplan requires strong 
6. 
sector  institutions  that  are  able  to  manage  sector  development  to  effectively  transform 
public and private investments into lasting results. 
The  Government  Five-Year  Programme  2015-19 
7. 
is  aligned  with 
Mozambique´s National Development Strategy for the period 2015-35. It establishes five 
general  priorities  which  also  underpin  the  development  of  the  aquaculture  sector, 
namely:  
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
The  defence  of  marine  and  inland  natural  resources  under  national 
jurisdiction;  
Gender mainstreaming in national development policies and strategies;  
The  promotion  of  aquaculture  technologies  and  training  of  small-scale 
processors,  traders  and  fish  farmers  in  fish  handling  and  processing 
techniques as well as the conservation of fish;  
The  promotion  of  aquaparks,  zonal  fingerlings  production  centres  and  other 
facilities to support the development of fish farming and the establishment of 
mechanisms for the certification of aquaculture production;  
The construction and rehabilitation of aquaculture support infrastructure;  
Safeguarding the rights of  communities living in areas endowed with natural 
resource  and  their  access  to  benefits  derived  from  the  exploitation  of  these 
resources;  
Strengthening capacities for the rational exploration of natural resources; 
The  promotion  of  research  on  aquatic  environments  and  aquaculture 
resources. 
The current five-year programme considers the increase of food production as one 
8. 
of the most important elements for the improvement of living conditions in the country´s 
population.   
B.  Legislative Framework 
The  legislative  framework  applicable  to  aquaculture  is  included  in  the  GoM´s 
9. 
fisheries law and associated regulations. 
10.  The  Fisheries  Law  of  2013  provides  the  legal  framework  for  fisheries  and 
aquaculture in Mozambique. Specifically, for aquaculture, it establishes the following: 
i. 
ii. 
The  use  and  enjoyment  of  land  and  water  resources  of  public  domain  for 
aquaculture activities is subject to the respective legislation; 
The government is responsible for establishing the general guidelines for the 
development  and  management  of  marine  and  freshwater  aquaculture, 
including:  
 
 
Determining  species  to  be  cultivated  and  corresponding  production 
systems,  areas  where  aquaculture  can  be  practised,  species  to  be 
introduced, 
Guiding research activities, experimentation and provision of extension, 
use  of  chemical  products,  the  provision  of  feed  and  veterinary  drugs, 
the  organisation,  registration  and  establishing  the  conditions  for 
carrying out aquaculture activity  
 
Providing the necessary frameworks for disease control 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
The  construction  of  aquaculture  installations  must  be  authorised  by  relevant 
sector entities, except when for subsistence purpose; 
Catching  species  in  aquaculture  installations  is  not  subject  to  the  rules 
applied to fishing activities;  
Licensed  aquaculture  units  must  prevent,  detect  and  control  disease,  which 
could  endanger  aquatic  species,  the  environment,  ecosystems  and  public 
health;  
The  cultivation  of  indigenous  or  established  species  and  authorised  exotic 
species is permitted;  
2 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
vii. 
Effluents must be controlled and treated; 
viii. 
ix. 
The  destruction  of  mangroves  for  aquaculture  ventures  is  prohibited,  except 
under conditions and for purposes foreseen by the law; 
Except for subsistence aquaculture units, aquaculture ventures must  present 
project documents,  environmental impact studies,  obtain prior authorization, 
be licensed, and pay taxes.  
11.  The General Aquaculture Regulations of 2001 are based on the 1990 Fisheries 
Law.  As  such,  the  regulations  need  to  be  revised  to  ensure  alignment  and  consistency.  
The  regulations  are  divided  into  five  chapters  containing:  (i)  general  principles,  (ii) 
organisation and management of aquaculture activities; (iii) authorisation and licensing; 
(iv) conditions to be met by products used in aquaculture so as to warrant protection of 
the environment and natural resources; and (v) fees, inspection and penalties. 
12.  The  Regulations  on  Inspection  and  Quality  Assurance  of  Fishery  Products 
of  2009  give  practical  effect  to  the  powers  conferred  by  the  Fisheries  Law  on  matters 
related to health within the sector. It applies to establishments and vessels, local fishery 
products  and  by-products,  processes  and  transport  of  fishery  products  intended  for 
human  consumption,  wholesale  and  export  activities  and  fishery  products  and  by-
products imported and intended for human consumption. 
II.   INSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE AQUACULTURE SECTOR 
13.  The  main  institutions  involved  in  the  promotion  of  aquaculture  activity  in 
Mozambique are the Ministry of Sea, Inland Water and Fisheries (MIMAIP), the Provincial 
Directorates  of  Sea,  Inland  Waters  and  Fisheries  (DPMAIPs),  the  Institute  of 
Development  of  Fisheries  and  Aquaculture  (IDEPA),  the  District  Services  for  Economic 
Activities  (SDAEs),  the  Fisheries  Research  Institute  (IIP),  the  National  Fisheries 
Administration  (ADNAP),  the  National  Institute  for  Fish  Inspection  (INIP),  national  and 
local  non-governmental  organizations  and  the  private  sector.    Within  their  specific 
mandates,  an  analysis  of  strengths,  constraints  faced  and  potential  to  be  explored  was 
conducted in the context of PRODEPA design, as follows: 
  MIMAIP.  Strengths:  (i)  strong  donor  support  through  development  projects; 
(ii)  on-going  improvements  in  light  of  institutional  reforms;  Constraints:  (i) 
insufficient  administration  capacity  at  central,  provincial  and,  particularly, 
district level; (ii) lack of clarity in what regards procedures in the context of on-
going  decentralization,  specifically  in  what  regards  to  planning,  coordination, 
implementing and monitoring; Opportunities: MIMAIP could be supported in the 
areas of (i) policy development; (ii) capacity building.  
  DPMAIPs.  Strengths:  (i)  on-going  improvements  in  light  of  institutional 
implementation  of 
reforms;  Constraints:  (i)  recent  experience 
development  projects;  (ii)  lack  of  procedures  for  institutional  coordination  and 
implementation  in  the  context  of  the  implementation  of  development  projects; 
(ii)  insufficient  technical  capacity  in  aquaculture;  Opportunities:  (i)  increasing 
attention  is  given  to  aquaculture  development;  (ii)  willingness  to  have  an 
increased role in project implementation.  
the 
in 
  IDEPA.  Strengths:  (i)  experienced  leadership  in  the  implementation  of 
development projects; (ii) improved strategy for the development of small-scale 
aquaculture  based  on  lessons  learned  from  recent  interventions;  (iii)  staff 
positively  motivated;  Constraints:  (i)  dependence  on  international  assistance; 
(ii)  insufficient  technical/  extension  capacity  in  the  field;  (iii)  positioning  in  the 
project  implementation  process  insufficiently  defined  after  institutional  sector 
reform;  Opportunities:  (i)  ample  experience  in  implementing  development 
projects. 
3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
  SDAEs. Strengths: (i) presence on the ground, close to communities; (ii) strong 
connection  to  communities  and  fish  farmers;  Constraints:  (i)  high  financial 
dependence;  (ii)  weak  technical  connection  to  institutions  dealing  with 
aquaculture  administration;  (iii)  no  presence  of  aquaculture  administration  and 
development  bodies  at  district  level;  Opportunities:  (i)  growing  attention  to 
aquaculture; (ii) willingness to play a more important role in the development of 
aquaculture.   
  IIP.  Strengths:  (i)  research  and  experimentation  capacities;  support  to  the 
development  of  aquaculture  reinforced  with  the  Aquaculture  Research  Centre 
(CEPAQ);  (ii)  existence  of  regional  research  departments;  (iii)  staff  positively 
motivated;  Constraints:  (i)  dependence  on  international  assistance;  (ii) 
insufficient  scientific  /  technical  capacity  at  central  and  provincial  levels; 
Opportunities:  (i)  experience  in  cooperating  in  international  scientific  bodies  / 
projects. 
  ADNAP. Strengths: (i) experience in fisheries administration; (ii) present in all 
international  assistance;  (ii) 
provinces;  Constraints:  (i)  dependence  on 
insufficient  technical  /  administrative  capacity  at  central,  provincial  and 
particularly  at  district level;  (iii) inexistence  of  an  administration  unit dedicated 
to aquaculture; Opportunities: (i) growing attention given to local administrative 
bodies;  (ii)  willingness  to  integrate  aquaculture  administration  at  central, 
provincial and district levels. 
  INIP.  Strengths:  (i)  clear  strategy  for  the  development  of  fish  inspection 
services; (ii) central and provincial offices able to increasingly cover aquaculture 
produce;  (iii)  receives  international  assistance  in  the  area  of  fish  inspection; 
Constraints:  (i)  high  dependence  on  international  assistance;  (ii)  insufficient 
technical capacity at central and provincial levels and lack of presence at district 
level; Opportunities: (i) willingness to have an increased role in aquaculture. 
  National  NGOs.  Strengths:  (i)  strong  financial  support  from  international 
donors;  Constraints:  (i)  high  operating  costs;  (ii)  poor  coordination;  (iii) 
sustainability is questionable; (iv) loose contract terms, poor monitoring targets 
and  exit  strategies;  Opportunities:  (i)  link  to  NGO  resource  base;  (ii)  sound 
participatory know-how; (iii) strengths in specific training areas. 
  Local  NGOs.  Strengths:  (i)  strong  connection  to  communities;  Constraints:  (i) 
lack of funds and experience in the use of best practices; (ii) difficulty in hiring 
staff;  Opportunities:  (i)  capacity  building  programmes;  (iii)  capacity  to  provide 
services.  
  Private sector. Strengths: (i) growing participation in the country´s economy; 
Constraints: (i) the private sector is still weak and relatively inexperienced; (ii) 
very  limited  experience  in  joint  ventures;  (iii) limited  access  to  financing;  (iv) 
face  difficulties  as  a  result  of  the  country´s  current  economic  crisis; 
Opportunities:  (i)  strengthening  linkages  in  rural  areas;  (ii)  existence  of 
business training modules for small and medium enterprises. 
II.  PRODAPE INSTITUTIONAL AND MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
14.  The PRODAPE directly aligns with the GoM´s policies and strategies as expressed in 
the  Five-year  Government  Plan  for  2015-19  and  the  PADA  (2019-23)  currently  under 
review.  The  project  integrated  a  component  dedicated  to  capacity  building  and 
management  to  fill  identified  gaps  in  the  policy  and  institutional  capacity,  which 
unaddressed,  could  compromise  project  success  and  sustainability  of  project 
investments. 
15.  The  objective  of  PRODAPE´s  component  3  is  to  strengthen  the  institutions 
responsible  for  small-scale  aquaculture  development  to  fulfil  their  roles  in  project 
4 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
implementation  and  increase  their  capacity  to  give  continuity  to  aquaculture  activities 
after  project  completion.  PRODEPA  support  towards  institutional  development  is 
expected to contribute to IDEPA´s performance and that of other institutions involved in 
the  aquaculture  sub-sector  at  central  and  local  level.  The  component  has  the  following 
sub-components:  (3.1)  Project  management,  (3.2)  Institutional  capacity  building  and 
(3.3) Policy and regulatory development. 
A.  PRODAPE INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
16.  The project will operate in a complex institutional framework. Therefore, the roles 
and  responsibilities  of  participating 
institutions,  as  well  as  the  organisational 
arrangements  for  management,  coordination,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  the 
project were identified on the basis of the institutional adjustments that have taken place 
in the sector and the successes and lessons learned from other projects. 
in  PRODAPE 
17.  As  described 
(project  management) 
responsibilities related to PRODAPE lie as follows: (i) MIMAIP is the government entity to 
oversee the project; (ii) IDEPA will coordinate the overall implementation of the project; 
(iii) the DPMAIPs will be responsible for ensuring the implementation of project activities 
with  the  participation,  where  necessary,  of  the  district  level  aquaculture  extension 
services offered by SDAEs.   
sub-component  3.1 
18.  The  distribution  of  responsibilities  described  herein  follows  the  extinction  of  the 
provincial delegations of IDEPA and their integration into DPMAIPs119, specifically, under 
the Department  of Promotion of the Development of Fisheries and Aquaculture.  In light 
of this, and to enable the DPMAIPs and the aquaculture extension services at SDAEs to 
respond  to  PRODAPE  implementation  needs,  the  project  will  provide  the  necessary 
resources  to  cover  existing  capacity  gaps  within  these  institutions  to  cover  investment 
costs  for  the  engagement  of  field  staff  motorcycles  and  housing  for  extensionists, 
equipment, training of staff and technical assistance.  
19.  However,  specific  PRODAPE  activities  will  be  coordinated  with  other  sector 
institutions such as IIP / CEPAQ, ADNAP, INIP and the Fisheries Schools (EP)), and with 
institutions  in  other  sectors  through  their  respective  ministries  including  the  National 
Roads  Administration  (ANE)  /  the  Ministry  of  Public  Works  and  Housing  (MOPH), 
Electricity  of  Mozambique  (EDM)  /  (the  Ministry  for  Mineral  Resources  and  Energy 
(MIREME),  the  Ministry  of  Land,  Environment  and  Rural  Development  (MITADER),  the 
Ministry  of  Health  (MISAU)  /  the  Technical  Secretariat  for  Food  Security  and  Nutrition 
(SETSAN), as described as follows: 
i.  MIMAIP will be responsible for policy and legislative initiatives, for promoting 
any required institutional adjustments and for overseeing the project.  
ii. 
IDEPA  has  the  overall  responsibility  of  promoting  the  development  of  the 
small-scale  aquaculture  in  Mozambique.  This  will  be  done  through  a  Project 
Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  working  under  the  supervision  of  the  National 
Director  of  IDEPA  (for  further  details  refer  to  section  on  Management 
Structure below).  
iii.  DPMAIPs  are  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  project  activities. 
Technical  experts  funded  by  the  project  and  based  at  IDEPA  will  provide 
technical assistance for the implementation of project activities.  
iv. 
SDAES  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  aquaculture  extension  activities 
among project beneficiaries. 
119 The organisational structure of the DPMAIP comprises: (i) an Inspectorate for the Sea, Inland Waters and 
Fisheries, (ii) three technical departments: Maritime and Inland Waters Affairs, Promotion of the Development 
of Fishing and Aquaculture, and Planning and Infrastructure and (iii) support functions, namely: Administration 
and Human Resources, Provincial Director’s Office, Legal Counsel, Information and Communication Technology, 
Communication and Image, and Procurement.  
5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
v. 
vi. 
involving 
INIP  will  provide 
improvements in the quality of fish produced for national and export markets. 
technical  support 
to  project 
initiatives 
IIP  is  responsible  for  CEPAQ,  which  will  play  a  decisive  role  during  the  first 
years  of  PRODAPE  operations,  when  it  is  expected  that  local  production  of 
fingerlings  will  not  meet  the  needs  of  fish  farmers.  In  principle,  CEPAQ  will 
receive assistance from Norway during the next five years. 
vii.  ADNA, presently deals with fisheries but not with aquaculture. It is expected 
that  ADNA,  together  with  the  Department  of  Maritime  and  Inland  Waters 
Affairs  at  DPMAIPs  will  together  be  involved  in  setting  up  the  aquaculture 
administration at sub-national level.   
viii. 
ix. 
INIP  is  the  sector’s  institution  responsible  for  certifying  fish  quality  and  the 
sanitary  conditions  of  fishing  facilities  and  vessels.  It  will  provide  technical 
support  to  project  initiatives  involving  the  improvement  of  the  quality  of 
aquaculture produce.  
FFP. FFP will have, in principle, no direct role in credit management under the 
project,  as  this  will  be  handled  through  the  Rural  Enterprise  Finance  Project 
(REFP)  through  private  sector  financial  institutions  including  banks,  micro-
banks  and  micro-finance  institutions.  Nevertheless,  the  FFP  will  provide 
oversight  and  help  ensure  that  project  activities  requiring  financial  services 
are consistent with the policies and objectives of the sector. 
x.  MOPH  is  the  government  body  responsible  for  public  works.  Project 
investments  in  roads,  either  rehabilitated  or  built  with  project  funds,  will  be 
coordinated  and  supervised  by  ANE  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  in 
force. 
xi. 
xii. 
EDM  the  national  agency  responsible  for  the  provision  of  electricity  from  the 
national  grid,  in  conjunction  with  the  National  Energy  Fund  (FUNAE)  will  be 
responsible  for  supporting  the  implementation  of  project  activities  for 
provision of electricity in key areas supported by PRODAPE, which may require 
ice plants, markets and other installations in the aquaculture value chain.  
The  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF)  is  responsible  for  financial  oversight  for  all 
government  programmes.  It  also  supervises  the  budget  process  and  the 
allocation  of  project  financing  from  external  sources  and  will  supervise  the 
REFP,  which  will  be  housed  at  the  National  Investment  Bank  (BNI).  This 
project  will  fund  the  promotion  and  assistance  to  PCRs  and  financial  literacy 
training in all communities targeted by PRODAPE and make credit available for 
different activities along the aquaculture value chain.  
B.  PRODAPE MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE 
20.  The  IDEPA  will  manage  PRODAPE  with  the  support  of  a  PCU.  The  PCU  will  be 
composed  of  a  Coordinator,  a  Financial  Manager,  an  Accountant,  a  Procurement  Officer 
and  an  M&E  Officer.  In  addition  to  these,  the  project  will  recruit  technical  experts  in 
aquaculture  (two),  value  chain  development,  nutrition  and  a  sociologist,  who  will  be 
integrated into IDEPA departments with the view to not only support PRODAPE but also 
the  broader  institution  as  a  whole.  The  benefits  of  having  a  robust  core  (management 
and  technical)  team  financed  by  PRODAPE  at  IDEPA  is  also  expected  to  trickle  down  to 
the DPMAIPs and SDAEs´ extension service.   
21.  The staffing structure of the PRODAPE PCU at IDEPA is presented in Table 1 below. 
6 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 1: Proposed PRODAPE PCU structure and key responsibilities 
Position 
Project 
Coordinator 
(1) 
Financial 
Manager (1) 
Financial / 
Contracts 
Management 
Assistants (3) 
Procurement 
Officer (1) 
M&E 
Specialist (1) 
KM Specialist 
(1) 
Admin. 
Secretary (1) 
Driver (1) 
Qualifications/Experience 
Background in project management with 
knowledge of administrative/financial 
management and of artisanal fisheries and 
fish marketing 
Background and experience in financial/ 
administration management of 
development projects 
Experience in administration and 
background in accounting (one of which 
with procurement expertise) 
Experience in procurement processes for 
large and complex development projects 
Good experience in project planning and 
management of information systems with a 
degree in economics or related discipline 
Experience in statistics and information 
systems and in moderating discussions on 
lessons learned 
Administrative experience.  Experience in 
accounting and contracts would be a 
condition of preference 
Experience in driving of at least 5 years  
Expected 
contract duration 
Full time for five 
years 
Placement 
Based in Maputo  
Full time for five 
years 
Full time for five 
years  
Full time for five 
years  
Full time for five 
years 
Full time for five 
years 
Full time for five 
years 
Full time for five 
years 
Based in Maputo  
Based in Maputo 
but in charge of 2-3 
provinces each 
Based in Maputo  
Based in Maputo  
Based in Maputo 
Based in Maputo 
Based in Maputo 
technical  support 
22.  As  referred  to  above,  technical  experts  will  be  integrated  into  relevant  IDEPA 
departments.  Expertise will include long- term and short-term specialists who together, 
will  provide 
to  key  project  activities:  aquaculture,  value 
chain/marketing, nutrition and targeting / social inclusion / management of social risks. 
These experts will not be considered as members of the PCU. To ensure that IDEPA staff 
capacity  increases  each  technical  specialist  will  work  closely  with  at  least  one  direct 
counterpart  at  IDEPA.  In  addition,  to  their  project  specific  duties,  technical  specialist 
duties will include on-the-job training of counterparts, contribute towards strengthening 
the  departments  that  they  work  in  in  terms  of  consolidating  strategies,  systems  and 
tools,  among  others.  Table  2  provides  summarised  information  in  relation  to  the 
background  required  for  each  long-term  technical  position  to  be  financed  by  PRODAPE, 
the  duration  of  contract  and  placement  within  IDEPA.  It  is  expected  that  all  technical 
experts will spend approximately 50% of their time in the geographic areas targeted by 
the project. 
Table 2: Summary information on technical experts to be financed by PRODAPE 
Position 
Qualifications/Experience 
Aquaculture 
Specialists (2) 
Value Chain 
Specialist (1) 
Sociologist / 
Experience in fishing operations, fishing 
gear and aquaculture.  Minimum of 
seven years of experience. 
Experience in value chain development 
aspects.  Minimum of seven years of 
experience. 
Experience in community mobilisation, 
Expected 
contract 
duration 
Full time for five 
years 
Placement 
Based in dPPP*, 
Maputo 
Full time for five 
years 
Based in Maputo 
Full time for five  Based in the dEPDS, 
7 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Position 
Qualifications/Experience 
Social 
inclusion 
Specialist (1) 
 Nutritionist 
(1) 
with a strong understanding of social 
and gender analysis and integration in 
project strategies. Minimum seven 
years of experience. Previous 
experience with aquaculture or fisheries 
will be an advantage. 
Experience in and demonstrated 
understanding of food and nutrition 
initiatives in rural development 
contexts; knowledge of and experience 
in mainstreaming nutrition in 
government structures; experience in 
training and capacity building is 
required. 
Expected 
contract 
duration 
Placement 
years  
Maputo 
Full time for five 
years  
Based in dEPDS, 
Maputo 
Financial 
Liaison Officer 
Specialised in the operationalisation of 
financial inclusion projects for specific 
value chains. 
Full time for five 
years 
Based in Maputo 
    * dEPDS = Depart. of Studies, Planning and Socio-economic Development; dPPP = Depart. of 
Promotion of Fisheries Production; dPCP =  Depart. of Promotion of Fisheries Marketing 
C.  Vertical Linkages 
23.  Communications,  planning,  coordination,  implementation  and  monitoring  activities 
in the context of PRODAPE between IDEPA / PCU and provincial / district players will be 
streamlined  from  the  start  of  project  operations,  based  on  existing  institutional 
arrangements  and  systems,  with  improvements  made  as  relevant.  The  experience  to 
date with small-scale fisheries and aquaculture projects will be valuable in this respect. 
Figure 1: Vertical linkages used by other projects and proposed for 
PRODAPE 
8 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
D.  Planning, Budgeting and Monitoring 
24.  The project annual planning and budgeting process will be coordinated by the PCU, 
more specifically by the M&E/Knowledge Management Officer. The process will involve all 
staff  participating  in  the  implementation  of  the  project,  target  communities  and  other 
stakeholders involved in the aquaculture value chain. Experience from other IFAD-funded 
sector  projects  has  shown  that  the  participatory  nature  of  the  process  enhances  buy-in 
and  continued  engagement,  identification  of  areas  requiring  project  attention  and  can 
contribute to improved results.  
25.  As depicted in Figure 1 above, the annual planning and budgeting process will start 
at  community  level.  The  process  will  start  with  community  consultations  in  each 
PRODAPE  target  area  to  disseminate  project  interventions  and  identify  priorities  for  the 
development of aquaculture in each area. A technical review would then be conducted by 
the  project  implementation  team  in  each  area,  in  order  to  establish  /  adjust  priorities 
and  resources  available.  Potential  options  are  then  discussed  with  communities  and 
action plans produced.  
26.  Activity  plans  and  corresponding  budgets  will  be  then  prepared  for  each  district, 
covering training and other activities considered under the project.  It  is crucial that the 
process  involves  district  representatives  responsible  for  the  development  of  small-scale 
aquaculture;  the  information  will  also  feed  into  the  District  Annual  Plan  and  Budget 
produced by the GoM at district level. District level plans and budgets will be aggregated 
and integrated in the PRODAPE AWPB.   
27.  The PCU will be in charge of finalizing the AWPBs and submitting them for review to 
the Provincial Project Steering Committees and later to MIMAIP´s Consultative Council / 
NPSC.  
28.  AWPBs  will  include  a  description  and  justification  for  each  activity,  verifiable 
indicators,  institutional  and  individual  responsibilities,  time  frames  for  implementation 
and  deadlines,  costs  and  the  sources  of  funding.  Annual  procurement  plans  will  be 
prepared  upon  approval  of  the  AWPB.  The  AWPB  preparation  process  and  content  will 
facilitate  individual  staff  performance  appraisal  throughout  project  implementation. 
Performance will be an important factor in establishing the level of financial incentive to 
be given to each member of staff.  
E.  PRODAPE Performance-Based Incentive System 
29.  Among  the  lessons  learned  from  the  implementation  of  projects  previously 
promoted  in  the  fisheries  sector  (namely,  the  Nampula  Artisanal  Fisheries  Project 
(PPAN), the Sofala Bank Artisanal Fisheries Project (PPABAS) and the Artisanal Fisheries 
Promotion  Project  (PROPESCA),  is  the  contribution  of  a  performance-based  incentives 
system  to  project  success.  Such  systems  have  been  based  on  key  government  staff 
involved  in  the  project  implementation  getting  incentive  payments  depending  on  their 
level of responsibility and performance, determined on quarterly basis. 
30.  The  system  of  performance-based  incentives  proposed  in  PRODAPE  will  cover  a 
limited  number  of  staff  in  IDEPA,  the  seven  provincial  directorates  and  the  23  district 
services for economic activities directly involved in the management of project activities. 
The  system  does  not  cover  the  PCU  staff  and  the  technical  team  supported  by  the 
project. The system of performance appraisal under the project would be in accordance 
with the practices used in the past by MIMAIP and subordinate institutions.  
31.  The  proposed  system  would  enable  participating  staff  to  receive  an  average 
increment  of  25%  on  top  of  their  base  salary  (20%  for  the  staff  of  IDEPA  and  the 
provincial directorates and 40% for the staff permanently based in the field integrated in 
SDAEs.  The  costs  resulting  from  these  performance-based  incentives  would  be  covered 
by PRODAPE. 
9 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
32.  Table  3  indicates  the  personnel  covered  by  the  incentive  system  and  associated 
costs. 
33.  The  total  cost  of  the  incentive  system  represents  2%  of  project  total  costs.  This 
value  is  likely  overestimated  as  the  technical  staff  base  salary  used  corresponds  to  the 
senior level salaries.  
34.  The  project  will  also  adopt  other  forms  of  incentives  that  represent  a  benefit  to 
other  staff  involved  in  the  implementation  of  activities,  such  as  participation in  training 
and attendance to meetings in the country and in the region, allocation of computers and 
means of transport in accordance with their needs and responsibilities. 
F.  PRODAPE Governance Framework 
35.  Transparency,  accountability  and  participation  will  underpin  project  management. 
The  PRODAPE  will  also  integrate  an  effective  grievance  mechanism.  Financial  and 
procurement processes and systems will all comply with IFAD and GoM regulations 
36.  The  participation  of  multiple  stakeholders  at  different  levels  in  the  planning, 
implementation  and  monitoring  of  project  operations  (as  depicted  in  Figure  1  above)  is 
expected to result in ensuring inclusive management and monitoring of risks and results.  
Internal and external audits will allow for the identification of existing risks and prompt 
mitigation.  
37.  A  National  Project  Steering  Committee  (NPSC)  and  steering  committees  at 
provincial  -  and  if  necessary,  at  district  level  -  will  assume  an  oversight  function  in 
PRODAPE.  The  committees  will  focus  on  strategic  and  policy  issues,  will  review  and 
approve  PRODAPE  Annual  Workplans  and  Budgets  (AWPB)  and  monitor  progress  and 
quality  of  implementation  and  results  achieved  over  the  course  of  the  project.  If 
considered  appropriate,  the  sessions  of  these  steering  committees  will  be  part  of  the 
agenda of the MIMAIP’s Consultative Council at central level as well as in Provincial and 
District  governments.  The  sessions  are  expected  to  be  attended  by  representatives  of 
the implementing and coordinating entities at the respective levels. 
III. PRODAPE CAPACITY AND POLICY DEVELOPMENT 
38.  The  PRODAPE  will  invest  substantial  efforts  in  building  the  capacity  of  institutions 
involved  in  the  development  of  the  aquaculture  value  chain  in  Mozambique  to  ensure 
that:  (i)  project  interventions  are  implemented  loyal  to  project  design  and  to  expected 
quality  standards  to  achieve  project  objectives;  and  (ii)  lay  the  foundations  for 
sustainability  of  project  interventions.  Likewise,  and  understanding  that  the  sector 
10 
Annual TotalDescriptionStaffbase salaries base salaries IncentiveTotal incetives(number)(USD)(USD)rate(USD)IDEPADirector and management staff1063 054315 26820%63 054Technical staff sr.2272 565362 82420%72 565Subtotal IDEPA32135 618678 092135 618PROVINCIAL DIRECTORATES (DP)Director and management staff40175 507877 53620%175 507Technical staff sr.96316 6461 583 23220%316 646Subtotal DP136492 1542 460 768492 154DISTRICT SERVICES (SDAE)Director 2468 923344 61640%137 846Extension staff (aquaculture)72113 962569 80840%227 923Subtotal SDAE96182 885914 424365 770TOTAL GENERAL264810 6574 053 284993 542 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
development  needs  to  be  driven  and  underpinned  by  a  strong  policy  and  regulatory 
environment, PRODAPE will support required policy development processes, as described 
below. 
39.  Institutional  capacity  building120.  To  support  aquaculture  production  and  the 
fish  value  chain  in  the  areas  covered  by  PRODAPE,  subcomponent  3.2  includes  the 
following main outputs: (3.2.1) Capacity of IDEPA strengthened (set up of PCU); (3.2.2) 
Capacity  of  local  administration  reinforced  (integration  of  the  technical  specialists  in 
IDEPA departments, number of  extension  agents in the districts increased and with the 
means  of  work  required,  provincial-based  technical  staff  trained  and  having  work 
experience  in  business/marketing/value  chains);  and  (3.2.3)  Aquaculture  institutional 
systems  improved  (assistance  to  enhance  the  aquaculture  administration  institutions 
through  the  establishment  of  the  licensing  and  enforcement  functions  at  SDAE  level, 
review of the  role of  small scale aquaculture institutions, including organic statutes and 
regulations, staff tables and professional progression and the design of a pilot statistical 
system  for  small-scale  aquaculture  to  be  tested  and  scaled  up  in  the  project  area  and 
subsequently to the rest of the country).  
40.  Policy development. Subcomponent 3.3 aims at contributing to the improvement 
of the policy/legislative framework, advocacy and governance efforts in support of small-
scale  aquaculture  production,  through  the 
following  outputs:  (3.3.1)  Relevant 
government  authorities  develop  frameworks  enabling  climate  smart  aquaculture  (ESMF 
and  detailed  climate  analysis,  including  an  agro-ecological  map  of  suitable  zones  for 
aquaculture  that  provides  the  basis  for  the  identification  of  areas  to  be  covered  by  the 
project,  specific  guidelines  for  cage  culture  and  biosecurity,  together  with  protocols to 
mitigate risks and  establish remedial actions); and (3.3.2) Policy/ legislative framework 
(regulations on aquaculture production and aquaculture produce, aquaparks, small scale 
aquaculture policy, strategy and planning) updated and improved. 
41.  Other  studies  and  initiatives  aiming  to  strengthen  the  policy/  legislative 
environment for aquaculture arising during  implementation, could be considered. 
120 Capacity building will also take place in the other two components: Development of small-scale 
aquaculture production capacity and Development of aquaculture business. 
11 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Attachment 1: Draft Terms of Reference for PRODAPE PCU Management Team 
PRODAPE PROJECT COORDINATOR 
Background.  IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique 
through  PROAQUA,  a  project  implemented  between  2013-18.  Based  on  the  successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  agreed  on  a  new  project  –  PRODAPE  -  that 
addresses  small  scale  aquaculture  opportunities  for  poverty  alleviation  and  will  have  a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The  project  goal  of  PRODAPE  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
food  security  and  nutrition  among  rural  households  in  targeted  areas.  The  project 
development  objective  is  to  increase  production,  consumption  and  income  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The  main  outcomes  are:  (i)  Increased  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder 
aquaculture;  (ii)  Increased  fish  consumption  by  both  rural  and  urban  households;  (iii) 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based  on  good  information  and  providing  increased  services  to  smallholders  and  other 
value chain actors.   
The  development  objectives  of  PRODAPE  will  be  achieved  through  two  interlinked 
investment  components  (Development  of  small-scale  aquaculture  production  capacity 
and  Development  of  aquaculture  business),  which  are  aligned  with  the  promotion  of 
centralities, a key element driving the vision of aquaculture development in Mozambique, 
aiming  to  increase  production  capacity  and  productivity  of  small-scale  aquaculture 
farmers.  A  third  component  will  be  centred  on  Project  Management,  Institutional 
Strengthening and Policy Development. 
The total project budget is estimated at USD 50 million, to be financed by IFAD and the 
GoM. 
Qualifications  and  Experience.    IDEPA  is  looking  for  an  experienced  Project 
Coordinator to lead PRODEPA management.  The following qualifications and experience 
are required for the position: 
  Academic degree in economics, sociology or aquaculture. 
  Minimum 10 years of experience in project management. 
  Proactive and problem solving, proven ability to lead a team of people of diverse 
backgrounds  and  communicate  effectively  with  senior  government  officials  and 
development partners. 
  Excellent  communication  skills,  written  and  verbal.  Fluency  in  both  English  and 
Portuguese. 
  Knowledge  of  the  following  subjects  are  required:  (i)  financial  management, 
procurement  and  administration,  (ii)  aquaculture,  (iii)  fish  value  chains,  (iv) 
participatory planning methods, (v) environment and climate change. 
Duty  station.  The  duty  station  will  be  in  Maputo,  Mozambique.  The  total  duration  of 
contract is five years. It is estimated that the Project Coordinator will spend at least 50% 
of the time travelling in the target areas.   
Key  responsibilities.  The  objective  of  the  position  is  to  assist  IDEPA  in  the 
management  of  PRODAPE  to  warrant  efficiency  in  fund  use  and  achievement  of  project 
results. The Project Coordinator shall: 
  Ensure adequate use of financial and administrative systems at the PCU; 
14 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
  Ensure  that  the  project  objectives  are  effectively  achieved  within  the  proposed 
time frame;  
  Contribute  to  the  institutional  strengthening  of  IDEPA  and  its  sub-national  level 
implementing agencies for effective project management; 
  Complete  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM),  as  required,  covering 
planning,  budgeting,  implementation  and  monitoring  procedures  for  project 
activities;  
  Facilitate  the  preparation  of  AWPBs  is  made  in  coordination  and  through 
consultation  with  relevant  stakeholders  and  in  accordance  with  the  project 
objectives, outcomes and outputs;  
  Prepare AWPBs, procurement plans and progress reports and submit them to the 
national  director  of  IDEPA,  project  steering  committees  at  different  levels  and 
development partners for obtaining ‘no objection’; 
  Assume all responsibilities for project procurement;  
  Attend  steering  committee  meetings  and  report  on  project  progress  and  results 
achieved; and 
  Ensure that the estimates of cash and disbursements are in accordance with the 
needs  of  the  project  and  that  the  financial  and  accounting  follow  established 
procedures.  
  Ensure  the  correct  functioning  of  PRODAPE´s  grievance  mechanism  and  that 
grievances are responded to in due course. 
PRODAPE FINANCE / CONTRACTS MANAGER 
Background.  IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique 
through  PROAQUA,  a  project  implemented  between  2013-18.  Based  on  the  successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  agreed  on  a  new  project  –  PRODAPE  -  that 
addresses  small  scale  aquaculture  opportunities  for  poverty  alleviation  and  will  have  a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The  project  goal  of  PRODAPE  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
food  security  and  nutrition  among  rural  households  in  targeted  areas.  The  project 
development  objective  is  to  increase  production,  consumption  and  income  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The  main  outcomes  are:  (i)  Increased  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder 
aquaculture;  (ii)  Increased  fish  consumption  by  both  rural  and  urban  households;  (iii) 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based  on  good  information  and  providing  increased  services  to  smallholders  and  other 
value chain actors.    
Qualification  and  Experience.    IDEPA  is  looking  for  an  experienced  Finance  / 
Contracts Manager (FCM) to join the PRODAPE Project Coordination Unit.  The FM will be 
responsible for: managing and coordinating PRODAPE financial management activities in 
strict  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  the  Financing  Agreements  between  the 
Government of Mozambique (GoM) and IFAD, the Project Financial Management Manual 
(FMM) and best financial and procurement management practice. He/she will provide all 
possible support to the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) of which he/she is a member, in 
order to achieve successful project implementation.  
The FCM will report to the Project Coordinator (PC) and will be responsible to the PC and 
IDEPA  for  the  proper  performance  of  the  duties.    The  following  qualifications  and 
experience are required for the position: 
 
A university degree in accounting.  
15 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 
At least three years of proven experience in:  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Projects financed by external donors at a management level;  
Preparing balance sheets according to GoM guidelines and international 
standards;  
Preparing withdrawal applications for external funding agencies;  
Liaising  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  for  replenishment  of  project 
accounts  from  external  funding  and  for  making  payments  to  suppliers, 
service providers and staff;  
Planning  and  presenting  financial  needs  according  to  GoM  budgetary 
cycle and procedures based on activities planned;  
Management  of  procurement  systems  and  practices  in  large  and 
complex development projects; 
g.  Working  in  rural  development  projects,  particularly  involving  rural 
organizations and groups.  
 
 
Proficiency in computer, information and communication technology 
Good  communication  skills;  fluency  in  written  and  spoken  English  and 
Portuguese 
Desirable Skills and Personal Qualities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Experience with IFAD or WB financed projects;  
A solid understanding of GoM accounting practices and systems;  
A practical understanding of external source financing procedures;  
Leadership  skills  and  ability  to  operate  effectively  in  diverse  teams, 
contributing positively to working relationships;  
Willingness to work outside of formal working schedule;  
Willingness  to  link  with  service  providers  to  verify  the  use  of  standard 
accounting practices in reporting.  
Duty  station.  The  duty  station  will  be  in  Maputo,  Mozambique.  The  total  duration  of 
contract  is  five  years.  It  is  estimated  that  the  FCM  will  spend  at  least  30%  of  the  time 
travelling in the target areas.   
Key responsibilities. The FCM specific responsibilities include:  
 
 
 
Implement and update  financial management procedures applying to Project 
receipts  and  payments  and  ensure  that  funds  are  used  for  the  purposes 
intended,  in  an  open  and  transparent  manner;  ensure  that  the  Project 
Coordinator  (PC)  is  aware  of  risks  arising  from  any  weaknesses  associated 
with internal control systems and take steps to minimize risks.  
Ensure that all financial documents relating to the project (expenses, and all 
other  ledger  transactions,  registers,  payroll  records  including  benefits, 
contributions  and  tax  deductions,  invoices  and  all  vouchers)  are  retained  by 
the  PCU  and  are  made  available  for  inspection  by  IDEPA,  external  auditors 
and IFAD supervision mission teams.  
The  implementation  and  maintenance  of  the  e-SISTAFE  accounting  system 
and  ensuring  that  the  chart  of  accounts  and  reporting  system  thereof 
16 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
information  to 
provides 
link  between  project  activities  by  category, 
component and funding source. In the initial stage, until e-SISTAFE reporting 
tools  are  fully  configured,  ensuring  that  PRODAPE’s  off-the-shelf  accounting 
software  balances  are  in  agreement,  and  preparation  of  a  journal  of  entries, 
as  required,  for  reconciliation  with  e-SISTAFE  ledger  entries  for  PRODAPE  in 
the Single Treasury account.  
Managing  and  administering  all  payments  for  contracts,  memoranda  of 
understanding  (MoU)  with  implementing  partners  and  grant  beneficiary 
goods'  proposed  payments  in  accordance  with  IFAD  Guidelines,  Grant 
Selection  Committees,  NPSC  deliberations  and  any  other  applicable  national 
guidelines.  
Management  of  all  procurement  procedures,  obligations,  systems  and 
practices  in  line  with  IFAD  and  GoM  regulations;  timely  production  of 
PRODAPE procurement plan in line with AWPB, budget and project needs; 
Maintenance  and  regular  update  of  the  following:  Fixed  Assets,  Staff,  Grant 
Beneficiary,  MoU  and  Contract  Registers.  Conduct  an  inventory  of  project 
assets at quarterly intervals and ensure insurance coverage thereof.  
In close collaboration with the Monitoring and Evaluation Officer, assist the PC 
with  the  preparation,  monitoring,  consolidation  and  review  of  PRODEPA’s 
AWPB, as follows:  
a. 
b. 
c. 
Provide training and guidance to project beneficiaries and implementing 
partners for AWPB activity preparation and submissions and participate 
in  the  development  and  implementation  of  plans,  and  procedures  for 
budget  request  submission  activities  to  ensure  that  project  objectives 
are  achieved  in  compliance  with  PRODEPA  strategy  and  that  informed 
decisions are taken;  
Consolidation  of  budgets,  plans  and  activities  after  review 
consistency; provide advice to the PC on optimized use of resources;  
for 
Calculate  the  cost  of  services  and  associated  analyses;  translating 
activity  requirements  into  financial  information  for  NPSC  review  and 
guidance,  identify  problem  areas  and  propose  actions  to  be  taken  to 
improve cost-efficiency of services, without affecting quality;  
d.  Monitor  and  provide  advice  on  advance  financing  to  implementing 
partners,  monitor  and  analyse  activities  undertaken  by  these  in 
accordance with AWPB;  
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
Review  and  propose  alternative  financial  solutions  to  the  PC  and  NPSC 
to  facilitate  transparent  and  efficient  allocation  of  resources  for  the 
implementation of project activities;  
Prepare  monthly  projected  liquidity  flow  statements,  and  conduct 
associated analyses;  
Reconcile  and  review  expense  statements  for  Withdrawal  Application 
requests to IFAD every quarter;  
Review 
construction;  
insurance  coverage  of  assets  during 
implementation/ 
Review  all  payroll  and  relevant  worksheets,  payments  to  suppliers, 
utilities,  contractors,  grant  related  payments,  service  providers  and 
implementing partners prepared by the accountant;  
17 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
j. 
Prepare interim and annual financial statements for management, IFAD 
and  liaise  with  the  external  auditors  and  internal  audit  department  of 
MIMAIP.  
 
 
 
The  FM  will  supervise  the  Accountants  and  organize  appropriate  training  / 
career development plan / guidance to ensure successful attainment of tasks 
assigned.  
The  incumbent  is  expected  to  visit  the  project  area  periodically  as  part  of 
monitoring of activities.  
Perform any other financial management duties that may be assigned by the 
PC.  
AQUACULTURE / CLIMATE CHANGE SPECIALIST 
Background.    IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique 
through  PROAQUA,  a  project  implemented  between  2013-18.  Based  on  the  successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  agreed  on  a  new  project  –  PRODAPE  -  that 
addresses  small  scale  aquaculture  opportunities  for  poverty  alleviation  and  will  have  a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The  project  goal  of  PRODAPE  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
food  security  and  nutrition  among  rural  households  in  targeted  areas.  The  project 
development  objective  is  to  increase  production,  consumption  and  income  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The  main  outcomes  are:  (i)  Increased  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder 
aquaculture;  (ii)  Increased  fish  consumption  by  both  rural  and  urban  households;  (iii) 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based  on  good  information  and  providing  increased  services  to  smallholders  and  other 
value chain actors.   
The  development  objectives  of  PRODAPE  will  be  achieved  through  two  interlinked 
investment  components  (Development  of  small-scale  aquaculture  production  capacity 
and  Development  of  aquaculture  business),  which  are  aligned  with  the  promotion  of 
centralities, a key element driving the vision of aquaculture development in Mozambique, 
aiming  to  increase  production  capacity  and  productivity  of  small-scale  aquaculture 
farmers.  A  third  component  will  be  centred  on  Project  Management,  Institutional 
Strengthening and Policy Development. 
Qualifications  and  Experience.    IDEPA  is  seeking  the  engagement  of  an  Aquaculture 
Specialist with the following qualifications and experience: 
         Master’s  of  Science  in  Aquaculture  or  closely  related  discipline  and  a 
Certificate/Diploma in Environmental Impact Assessment; 
         Minimum of 10 years of experience required in: a) Fish seed production; b) 
Fish  nutrition;  c)  Culture  of  fin-fish;  d)  Large  scale  fish  farm  operations  and 
feed  manufacturing;  e)  Fish  processing  and  value  addition;  f)  Fisheries 
extension  and  education;  g)  Fisheries  policy;  h)  Fisheries  regulatory 
frameworks; 
        The  incumbent  should  have  experience  in:  a)  Project  planning  and 
c) 
management; 
Environmental  Audits  d)  Natural  Resource  Management  and/or  Water 
Resource  Management  and/or  Hydrology;  and  f)  climate  change  adaptation 
and mitigation issues related to aquaculture operations; 
Environmental/Climate 
Assessment; 
Impact 
b) 
18 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
        In  addition,  the  incumbent  must  show  evidence  of:  a)  Being  a  registered 
environmental  auditor/expert;  b)  Having  conducted  strategic  environmental 
assessment;  c)  Competency  in  remote  sensing  and  GIS;  d)  Competency  in 
Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT);  e)  Good  communication 
skills, written and verbal and fluency in both English and Portuguese. 
Duty station.  The duty station would be located in Maputo but with frequent travelling 
to project target areas. 
Key  responsibilities.  The  objective  of  the  position  is  to  assist  PRODAPE  with 
aquaculture related planning taking into consideration environmental parameters during 
implementation of the project as well as developing environmental management systems 
and mitigations for potential negative impacts of the project. In particular s/he shall: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ensure  adequate  siting  of  PRODAPE  interventions  according  to  the  criteria 
outlined within the ESMF;  
Carry  out  strategic  environment  assessment  of  aquaculture  activities  on  the 
natural  resources  such  as  land,  water,  air  and  the  biota  during  project 
planning and implementation to ensure that activities take place in adequate 
environmental and climate conditions; 
Advice  the  project  on  potential  environmental  and  climate  hazards  and 
elaborate viable and sustainable best options to mitigate adverse impacts and 
increase resilience, including climate change adaptation and mitigation; 
Ensure  compliance  with  existing  environmental  legislations  and  regulations 
thus  contributing  to  the  best  possible  solution  to  environmental  licensing  in 
coordination with relevant MITADER units; 
Ensure  the  sound  integration  of  best  environmental  practices  and  climate-
resilient  technologies  in  all  aquaculture  development  activities  supported  by 
the project; 
Provide  guidance  to  all  PRODAPE  stakeholders  (including  service  providers) 
on  environment  and  climate 
the 
identification,  planning, 
implementation,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of 
environmental  and  climate  resilient  aspects/  activities  of  the  project, 
including  for  the  preparation,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  annual 
aquaculture development action plans and the promotion of climate resilience 
in farmers’ organisations; 
risk  management.  This 
includes 
Oversee  service  providers´  integration  of  expected  environmental  &  climate 
resilient measures in all activities implemented by the project;  
Liaise  with  the  Rural  Enterprise  Finance  Project  (REFP)  to  explore  potential 
financial products to increase climate resilience of PRODAPE’s beneficiaries; 
Ensure and promote continuous and effective linkages and collaboration with 
relevant  national  institutions  (i.e.  MITADER,  INAM,  INGC,  IPP),  international 
partners, service providers and other IFAD financed projects in Mozambique;  
Instil  the  development  of  a  strong  shared  understanding  at  the  Project 
Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  and  among  service  providers  in  all issues  related  to 
environmental and climate resilience considerations; 
Develop  land  use  maps  to  inform  planning  of  aquaculture  facilities  and 
systems in the project area; 
19 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capture  relevant  lessons  to  support  institutional  capacity  building  and 
knowledge  sharing  on  environmental  and  climate  resilient  aquaculture 
approaches;  
Support  the  Knowledge  Management  (KM)  and  Communication  Specialist  in 
developing 
focus  on 
the  Project  Learning  System  with  a  specific 
environmental and climate change adaptation, mitigation measures and best 
practices; 
Assist  project  efforts  in  providing  climate/weather  information  and  in 
the 
establishing  an  effective  early  warning  system 
climate/environmental package provided to PRODAPE beneficiaries;  
to  strengthen 
Guide  the  preparation  of  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budgets  (AWPBs)  regarding 
environmental requirements and climate resilient activities; 
Develop environmental management plans for all project sites; 
Assess  the  potential  impacts  of  aquaculture  waste  and  suggest  appropriate 
methods of waste disposal;  
Identify  training  needs  for  public  and  private  sector  stakeholders;  plan  and 
implement relevant training, accordingly;  
Ensure the integration of  environmental education sessions for all categories 
of PRODAPE beneficiaries. 
All  responsibilities  assumed  by  the  incumbent  will  seek  to  warrant  effective 
implementation  of  the  project  in  line  with  design  as  much  as  to  build  the 
capacity  of  IDEPA.    The  incumbent  will  work  closely  with  a local  counterpart 
at IDEPA and collaborate with wider IDEPA teams as required; 
Assume  any  other  duties  relevant  to  the  position  indicated  by  the  PRODAPE 
director and / or the IDEPA Director in line with the purpose of the position. 
VALUE CHAIN SPECIALIST 
Background. IFAD has been supporting the aquaculture sub-sector in Mozambique 
through PROAQUA, a project implemented between 2013-18. Based on the successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and the Government of Mozambique (GoM) agreed on a new project – PRODAPE - that 
addresses small scale aquaculture opportunities for poverty alleviation and will have a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The project goal of PRODAPE is to contribute to poverty reduction and enhancement of 
food security and nutrition among rural households in targeted areas. The project 
development objective is to increase production, consumption and income of rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The main outcomes are: (i) Increased production and productivity of smallholder 
aquaculture; (ii) Increased fish consumption by both rural and urban households; (iii) 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based on good information and providing increased services to smallholders and other 
value chain actors.   
Qualifications and Experience. IDEPA is looking for a Value Chain Specialist to lead 
the management of all post-production interventions along the aquaculture value chain 
supported by PRODAPE. He/she will have a wide professional background in tropical 
inland aquaculture and / or fisheries development. The following qualifications and 
experience are required for the position: 
20 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Degree in aquaculture and / or fisheries development; 
Minimum 10 years of experience in rural setting in tropical areas; 
Sound knowledge of aquaculture and fish value chains;  
Successful experience in managing development interventions seeking to 
strengthen aquaculture value chains (post-production);   
Experience and proven capacity in designing and delivering training to 
community members and field officers; 
Experience in the use of participatory methods;  
Proactive and problem-solving attitude, proven ability to lead a team from 
various backgrounds;  
Excellent communication skills, written and verbal fluency in Portuguese as 
well as good skills in English are essential. 
Duty station. The duty station would be located in IDEPA’s office in Maputo, 
Mozambique. It is estimated that the Value Chain Specialist will spend at least 50% of 
the time travelling in the target areas.   
Key responsibilities. The objective of the position is to assist IDEPA in the 
management of relevant PRODAPE interventions for the development of a functional 
aquaculture value chain in line with project design. The Value Chain Specialist shall: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approve and oversee the implementation of all activities aiming to reach 
target beneficiaries and support the engagement of other local stakeholders 
in the development of the aquaculture value chain (post-production); 
Ensure that activities respond to the needs of beneficiaries and are in line 
with the results of market studies supported by the project; 
Participate in all matters related to AWBPs and procurement of equipment 
and supplies for the PRODAPE PCU; 
Identify training needs among target beneficiaries and the wider PRODAPE 
stakeholder base in relation to the development of the aquaculture value 
chain: plan and implement relevant trainings accordingly; 
Lead the development of any relevant manuals and training modules required 
under the project; 
Promote linkages and dialogue between stakeholders at all levels, as 
relevant; 
Ensure consistency in required data collection required by the project; 
Identify relevant risks and adequate mitigation measures to maximize the 
success of project interventions; 
All responsibilities assumed by the incumbent will seek to warrant effective 
implementation of the project in line with design as much as to build the 
capacity of IDEPA.  The incumbent will work closely with a local counterpart 
at IDEPA and collaborate with wider IDEPA teams as required; 
Assume any other duties relevant to the position indicated by the PRODAPE 
director and / or the IDEPA Director in line with the purpose of the position. 
21 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
PRODAPE M&E SPECIALIST 
Background.  IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique 
through  PROAQUA,  a  project  implemented  between  2013-18.  Based  on  the  successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  agreed  on  a  new  project  –  PRODAPE  -  that 
addresses  small  scale  aquaculture  opportunities  for  poverty  alleviation  and  will  have  a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The  project  goal  of  PRODAPE  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
food  security  and  nutrition  among  rural  households  in  targeted  areas.  The  project 
development  objective  is  to  increase  production,  consumption  and  income  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The  main  outcomes  are:  (i)  Increased  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder 
aquaculture;  (ii)  Increased  fish  consumption  by  both  rural  and  urban  households;  (iii) 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based  on  good  information  and  providing  increased  services  to  smallholders  and  other 
value chain actors.    
Qualification  and Experience.   IDEPA is looking for an experienced M&E Specialist to 
assume M&E responsibilities in the context of PRODAPE. The following qualifications and 
experience are required for the position: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master’s degree in Economics, Agriculture, Business Administration, Planning, 
M&E, Development, Management or related discipline 
At  least  7  years  of  professional  experiences  in  the  field  of  research  and 
studies, statistics and at least 5 years proven M&E experience with:  
a. 
The 
logical 
approaches; 
framework  approach  and  other  strategic  planning 
b.  M&E  methods  and  approaches  (including  quantitative,  qualitative  and 
participatory); 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Planning, design and implementation of M&E systems and management 
information systems; 
Training  in  M&E  development  and  implementation  and/or  facilitating 
learning-oriented analysis of M&E data; 
Computer based data processing and information analysis; 
Report writing. 
Familiarity with and a supportive attitude towards processes of strengthening 
local organizations and building local capacities for self-management 
Willingness  to  undertake  regular  field  visits  and  interact  with  different 
stakeholders, especially primary stakeholders 
Proficiency in computer, information and communication technology 
Good  communications  skills;  fluency  in  written  and  spoken  English  and 
Portuguese 
Desirable 
  Understanding of the IFAD systems and procedures 
22 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Duty  station.  The  duty  station  will  be  in  Maputo,  Mozambique.  The  total  duration  of 
contract is five years. It is estimated that the incumbent will spend approximately 50% 
of the time travelling in the target areas.   
Key Responsibilities. Key responsibilities include (but are not limited to) the following: 
 
Planning support 
a.  Support  the  production  of  annual  work  plans  and  budgets  (AWPBs)  in 
consultation with local communities, district stakeholders, the project team and 
other stakeholders; 
b.  Prepare  working  guidelines  for  the  planning  process  in  close  consultation  with 
district stakeholders and the project team; 
c.  Facilitate  the  organization  of  district  and  project  level  annual  reviews  and 
periodic meetings and get feedback for further improvements; 
d.  Prepare timely and relevant quarterly and annual progress reports.  
 
Setting up the Project M&E system 
a.  Develop  the  overall  framework  and  plan  for  the  Project´s  M&E  activities  in 
accordance  with  the  Project  document,  with  focus  on  both  qualitative  and 
quantitative measures; 
b.  Guide and coordinate the review of the Project´s log-frame, including:  
-  Provide technical advice for the revision of performance indicators; 
-  Ensure realistic intermediate and end-of-Project targets are defined; 
- 
Identify  data  sources,  collection  methods,  who  collects  data,  how  often, 
cost of data collection and who analyses it; 
-  Ensure  all  critical  risks  are  identified,  communicated  and  those  related  to 
M&E, duly managed.  
c.  Identify  the  requirements  for  the  project  baseline,  prepare  terms-of-reference 
and arrange for the conduction of a baseline survey; 
d.  Clarify M&E responsibilities of different project staff; 
e.  Contribute  to  the  development  of  AWPBs,  ensuring  alignment  with  project 
strategy,  agreement  on  annual  targets  and  inclusion  of  M&E  activities  in  the 
work plan; 
f.  Prepare detailed M&E budget; 
g.  Prepare calendar of M&E activities; 
h.  Identify technical assistance in the area of M&E and support the hiring process.  
i.  Develop  the  Project  MIS  (Management  Information  System),  ensuring  that 
community  level  data  is  disaggregates  beneficiaries  according  to  beneficiary 
type, gender and age. 
  Implementation of the Project M&E system 
a.  Oversee and execute M&E activities included in the AWPB, with particular focus 
on results and impacts as well as in lesson learned and good practices; 
b.  Based  on  the  AWPB  design  the  framework  for  the  physical  and  process 
monitoring of Project activities; 
23 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
c.  Promote a results-based approach to M&E, emphasizing results and impacts; 
d.  Coordinate the preparation of relevant Project reports. Guide staff and executing 
partners  in  preparing  their  progress  reports  in  accordance  with  approved 
reporting  formats  and  support  their  timely  submission.  This  includes  inception 
report,  quarterly  progress  reports,  annual  Project  report  and  ad-hoc  technical 
reports; 
e.  Collaborate  closely  with  the  KM  and  Communication  Specialist,  prepare 
consolidated progress reports for Project management including identification of 
problems,  causes  of  potential  bottlenecks  in  Project  implementation,  and 
providing specific recommendations; 
f.  Undertake  regular  visits  to  the  field  to  support  implementation  of  M&E  and  to 
identify where consolidations might be needed; 
g.  Foster  participatory  planning  and  monitoring  by  training  and  involving  primary 
stakeholder groups on M&E; 
h.  Support  the  design  of  an  M&E  System  and  coordinate  the  MIS  (Management 
Information  System)  development  through  selection  of  a  competent  and 
experienced service provider. 
i.  Prepare M&E reports for annual supervision missions, mid-term review and final 
evaluation in accordance to IFAD guidelines; 
j.  Facilitate,  act  as  resource  person,  and  join  if  required  any  external  supervision 
and evaluation missions; 
k.  Monitor the follow up of supervision and evaluation recommendations; 
l.  Identify  the  need  and  draw  up  the  TORs  for  Project  specific  studies.  Recruit, 
guide  and  support  consultants  or  service  providers  that  are  contracted  to 
implement special surveys and studies required for evaluating Project outcomes 
and impacts; 
m. Organize  and  provide  refresher  training  in  M&E  for  Project  and  implementing 
partner  staff,  local  organizations  and  primary  stakeholders  with  view  of 
developing local M&E capacity; 
n.  Focus on simplification of e-M&E and reporting tools to achieve effectiveness and 
efficiency; 
o.  Consider  the  need  for  comparative  M&E  of  pilot  activities  to  develop  strong 
rationale  for  scaling  up  proven  practices  within  PRODAPE  as  well  as  other 
Government initiatives; 
p.  Support in the assessment of national as well as project policies and processes, 
providing  recommendations  to  improve  project  performance,  and  to  make  field 
implementation practical and effective; 
q.  Other tasks as directed by PC. 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATION SPECIALIST 
Background.  IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique 
through  PROAQUA,  a  project  implemented  between  2013-18.  Based  on  the  successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  agreed  on  a  new  project  –  PRODAPE  -  that 
24 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
addresses  small  scale  aquaculture  opportunities  for  poverty  alleviation  and  will  have  a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The  project  goal  of  PRODAPE  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
food  security  and  nutrition  among  rural  households  in  targeted  areas.  The  project 
development  objective  is  to  increase  production,  consumption  and  income  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The  main  outcomes  are:  (i)  Increased  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder 
aquaculture;  (ii)  Increased  fish  consumption  by  both  rural  and  urban  households;  (iii) 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based  on  good  information  and  providing  increased  services  to  smallholders  and  other 
value chain actors.   
Qualifications  and  Experience.    IDEPA  is  looking  for  an  experienced  Knowledge 
Management  (KM)  and  Communication  Specialist  to  join  the  PRODEPA  Project 
Coordination  Unit.    The  following  qualifications  and  experience  are  required  for  the 
position: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master’s  degree  in  natural  resource  management,  agricultural  economics, 
information and communication technology or related discipline; 
At  least  7  years  of  professional  experience  in  relevant  fields  with  at  least  4 
years of experiences in knowledge management work; 
Sound  knowledge  and  skills  in  documentation  and  dissemination  of  project 
related information; 
Strong research and report writing skills; 
Extensive  experience 
processes;  
in 
institutional  strengthening  and  participatory 
Ability 
representation skills; 
to  develop  external  organizational  relationships  and  applied 
Proficiency in computer, information and communication technology; 
Good  communication  skills;  fluency  in  written  and  spoken  English  and 
Portuguese. 
Duty station. The duty station will be in Maputo, Mozambique. The total duration of 
contract is five years. It is estimated that the Project Coordinator will spend at least 50% 
of the time travelling in the target areas.   
Key  Responsibilities.  The  main  responsibilities  and  duties  of  the  KM  and 
Communication  Specialist  will  include  gathering  and  analysing  project  information  and 
effectively  communicating  results  to  project  beneficiaries,  management  and  project 
stakeholders.  Other responsibilities are: 
 
 
 
Design and implement a KM and communication strategy to identify, analyse, 
document,  disseminate  lessons  learned  over  the  project  lifetime  and  ensure 
they are adequately integrated in PRODAPE operational strategies; 
Consider  the  GIS/geospatial  nature  of  products  in  KM  outputs,  including 
spatial maps, while designing the KM and communication strategy; 
Ensure  that  terms  of  reference  for  consultants  recruited  by  the  project  also 
incorporate  mechanisms  to  capture  and  share  lessons  learned  through  their 
inputs  to  the  Project,  and  to  ensure  that  the  results  are  reflected  in  the 
reporting system described above; 
25 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consolidate  a  culture  of  capturing  lessons  learned  among  all  Project  staff, 
providing support, as relevant to them, in capturing, documenting, packaging 
and disseminating lessons on a regular basis; 
Establish  and  manage  a  Community  of  Practice  for  knowledge  sharing  on 
climate  change  adaptation  across  the  IFAD  portfolio,  and  support  the 
organisation  of  training  and  workshops  for  climate  change  adaptation 
knowledge dissemination to all stakeholders; 
Identify  and  participate  in  additional  networks,  for  example  scientific  or 
policy-based  networks  that  may  also  yield  lessons  that  can  benefit  Project 
implementation; 
Ensure effective KM of project activities and approaches, including the social 
inclusion strategy embedded in project design; 
Support PRODAPE efforts in using KM tools for policy development processes 
in the aquaculture sub-sector;  
Support  in  the  assessment  of  national  as  well  as  project  policies  and 
processes,  providing  recommendations  to  improve  project  performance,  and 
to make field implementation practical and effective; 
Other tasks as directed by the Project Coordinator and/or IDEPA Director. 
26 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Attachment 2: Terms of Reference for PRODAPE supported technical specialists 
to be integrated in IDEPA 
AQUACULTURE TECHNICAL SPECIALIST   
Background.  IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique 
through  PROAQUA,  a  project  implemented  between  2013-18.  Based  on  the  successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  agreed  on  a  new  project  –  PRODAPE  -  that 
addresses  small  scale  aquaculture  opportunities  for  poverty  alleviation  and  will  have  a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The  project  goal  of  PRODAPE  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
food  security  and  nutrition  among  rural  households  in  targeted  areas.  The  project 
development  objective  is  to  increase  production,  consumption  and  income  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The  main  outcomes  are:  (i)  Increased  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder 
aquaculture;  (ii)  Increased  fish  consumption  by  both  rural  and  urban  households;  (iii) 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based  on  good  information  and  providing  increased  services  to  smallholders  and  other 
value chain actors.   
Qualifications  and  Experience.  IDEPA  is  looking  for  an  experienced  Aquaculture 
Technical  Specialist.    The  following  qualifications  and  experience  are  required  for  the 
position: 
 
 
 
 
Minimum Qualification of Master’s of Science in Aquaculture or closely related 
discipline. Candidates with PhD will have an added advantage. 
Minimum  of  10  years  of  experience  required  in:  a)  Fish  seed  production;  b) 
Fish  nutrition;  c)  Culture  of  finfish;  d)  Large  scale  fish  farm  operations  and 
feed  manufacturing;  e)  Fish  processing  and  value  addition;  f)  Fisheries 
extension  and  education;  g)  Fisheries  policy;  h)  Fisheries  regulatory 
frameworks; 
The  incumbent  should  have  experience  in:  a)  Project  planning  and 
management; b) Public financial management; c) Procurement procedures d) 
Human  resource  management;  d)  Operations  of  donor  funded  projects/ 
programmes; 
In addition, the incumbent must show evidence of: a) Being a team worker; 
b) Proactive in the work environment and problem solver; c) Proven ability to 
lead a team of people with various backgrounds and communicate effectively 
with  senior  government  officials  and  development  partners;  d)  A  good 
communication  skill,  written  and  verbal  and  fluency  in  both  English  and 
in  Information  and  Communication 
Portuguese;  and  d)  Competency 
Technology (ICT). 
Duty station.  The duty station would be located in Maputo but with frequent travelling 
to the project target areas.  
Key Responsibilities.  The objective of the assignment is to assist IDEPA with technical 
implementation aspects of the project to ensure that implementation is based on sound 
technical advice, technological adoption, productivity, management and development to 
improve  the  living  standards  of  project  beneficiaries  by  transitioning  into  commercial 
27 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
activity  and  promote  linkages  between  public  and  private  sector  players  in  the 
aquaculture value chain. In particular s/he shall: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approve the construction and development of all aquaculture systems; 
Supervise  the  construction  and installation  of  all  ponds  and  cages  under  the 
project; 
Ensure  continuous  production  of  fingerlings,  transportation  and  stocking  of 
ponds and cages supported by the project; 
Ensure availability of quality feed to sustain at least two production cycles in 
every culture facility established under the project; 
Plan production cycles at different project sites as established in the project´s 
geographic  targeting  strategy,  ensuring  continuous  stocking  and  production 
of fish;  
Participate  in  all  matters  related  to  AWBPs  and  procurement  of  equipment 
and supplies for the PRODAPE PCU; 
Ensure proper training of the beneficiaries in pond construction, management 
and production (extension); 
Conduct promotion of aquaculture activities through extension, outreach and 
publicity; 
Ensure  consistency  in  aquaculture  data  collection  that  covers  inputs, 
production, value, species and distribution; 
Ensure  safety  and  health  of  aquaculture  products  using  international 
standards for Total Quality Management of fish and fish products; 
Ensure  and  implement  a  disease  monitoring  programme  for  bio-safety  and 
bio-security of farmed fish; 
Produce a state of the environment report for aquaculture on annual basis. 
All  responsibilities  assumed  by  the  incumbent  will  seek  to  warrant  effective 
implementation  of  the  project  in  line  with  design  as  much  as  to  build  the 
capacity  of  IDEPA.    The  incumbent  will  work  closely  with  a local  counterpart 
at IDEPA and collaborate with wider IDEPA teams as required; 
Assume  any  other  duties  relevant  to  the  position  indicated  by  the  PRODAPE 
director and / or the IDEPA Director in line with the purpose of the position.  
NUTRITION SPECIALIST 
Background.    IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique 
through  PROAQUA,  a  project  implemented  between  2013-18.  Based  on  the  successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  agreed  on  a  new  project  –  PRODAPE  -  that 
addresses  small  scale  aquaculture  opportunities  for  poverty  alleviation  and  will  have  a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The  project  goal  of  PRODAPE  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
food  security  and  nutrition  among  rural  households  in  targeted  areas.  The  project 
development  objective  is  to  increase  production,  consumption  and  income  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The  main  outcomes  are:  (i)  Increased  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder 
aquaculture;  (ii)  Increased  fish  consumption  by  both  rural  and  urban  households;  (iii) 
28 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based  on  good  information  and  providing  increased  services  to  smallholders  and  other 
value chain actors.   
Qualifications and Experience.  IDEPA is looking for an experienced Nutritionist.  The 
nutrition  specialist  will  coordinate  and  facilitate  the  implementation  of  the  nutrition 
interventions  defined  in  PRODAPE  at  national,  sub-national  and  community  levels. 
He/she  will  work  closely  with  the  IFAD  nutrition  focal  points  Mozambique  and  Eastern 
and  Southern  Africa  to  ensure  the  operationalization  of  nutrition  mainstreaming  in 
project  investments.  The  following  qualifications  and  experience  are  required  for  the 
position: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advanced  degree  from  an  accredited  institution  in  the  field  of  Human 
Nutrition, food science or equivalent in a field related to food security. 
Solid understanding of mainstreaming nutrition; 
At least 7 years of experience in and demonstrated understanding of food and 
nutrition  initiatives  in  rural  development.  Experience  in  Mozambique  is 
desirable. 
Experience  in  training  and  capacity  building  is  required.  Knowledge  on  the 
linkages  between  nutrition,  social  norms  and  climate  change  is  strongly 
desirable. 
Good communication skills.  Excellent written and verbal communication skills 
in Portuguese is required; working knowledge of English is desirable. 
Experience of interacting with a variety of internal and external stakeholders. 
Strong  management  and  coordination  skills,  including  basic  knowledge  on 
M&E. 
Duty  station.  The  duty  station  will  be  in  Maputo,  Mozambique.  The  total  duration  of 
contract is five years. It is estimated that the Nutrition Specialist will spend at least 50% 
of the time travelling in the target areas.  
Key  responsibilities.  The  objective  of  the  position  is  to  assist  IDEPA  in  the 
management  of  relevant  PRODAPE  interventions  related  to  mainstreaming  nutrition  in 
line with project design. The Nutrition Specialist shall: 
 
 
 
 
 
Conduct  the  analysis  of  food  security  and  nutrition  situation  in  the  project 
locations  and  develop  location  specific  project´s  nutrition  mainstreaming 
strategy in line with project design; 
Ensure that nutrition is adequately mainstreamed across project activities, as 
delineated in the Project Design Document; 
In  close  liaison  with  other  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  team,  ensure 
adequate  integration  of  nutrition  in  the  project  documents  such  as  Project 
Implementation Manual during the start-up phase, M&E system, Annual Work 
Plan and Budgets (AWPBs) and progress reports; 
In  collaboration  with  the  project  M&E  specialist,  ensure  that  results  from 
nutrition  related  interventions  are  captured  and  adequately  recorded  in  the 
Project's M&E database and used to refine operational strategies; 
Develop  terms  of  reference  for  baseline/end  line  studies,  design  additional 
studies including food and nutrition surveys or food knowledge attitudes and 
practice survey, or other, as required; 
29 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish  and  maintain  good  working  relationships  with  the  line  ministries 
(such  as  SETSAN,  MASA,  MISAU,  etc.)  to  build  synergies  with  project 
interventions; establish coordination mechanisms, as required; 
Support  Project  Coordinator  in  the  establishment  of  relevant  partnerships 
(SETSAN,  Mozambique  Scaling  Up  Nutrition  Business  Network  Platform)  to 
support implementation; 
Facilitate the implementation of nutrition activities in close collaboration with 
relevant  stakeholders  (e.g.,  implementing  partners,  extension  workers, 
community service providers); 
Develop  PRODAPE´s  communication  strategy  on  nutrition  and  adequate 
integration  in  project  interventions,  including  the  development  of  messages, 
training events/forum and materials; 
Coordinate  capacity  building  and  training  sessions  on  nutrition-sensitive 
interventions for project staff, implementers and extension workers; 
Track  and  document  substantive  data  and  information  on  food  security  and 
nutrition  indicators  and  maintain  regular  progress  reporting  especially  at 
supervision, midterm and completion; 
Work  collaboratively  with  the  project-supported  technical  specialists  to 
warrant the effective interface towards nutrition outcomes; 
All  responsibilities  assumed  by  the  incumbent  will  seek  to  warrant  effective 
implementation  of  the  project  in  line  with  design  as  much  as  to  build  the 
capacity  of  IDEPA.    The  incumbent  will  work  closely  with  a local  counterpart 
at IDEPA and collaborate with wider IDEPA teams as required; 
Assume  any  other  duties  relevant  to  the  position  indicated  by  the  PRODAPE 
director and / or the IDEPA Director in line with the purpose of the position. 
SOCIOLOGIST / SOCIAL INCLUSION SPECIALIST 
Background.    IFAD  has  been  supporting  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  in  Mozambique 
through  PROAQUA,  a  project  implemented  between  2013-18.  Based  on  the  successes 
and lessons learned from that and three other previous artisanal fisheries projects, IFAD 
and  the  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  agreed  on  a  new  project  –  PRODAPE  -  that 
addresses  small  scale  aquaculture  opportunities  for  poverty  alleviation  and  will  have  a 
duration of five years, starting in 2019. 
The  project  goal  of  PRODAPE  is  to  contribute  to  poverty  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
food  security  and  nutrition  among  rural  households  in  targeted  areas.  The  project 
development  objective  is  to  increase  production,  consumption  and  income  of  rural 
households and other actors involved in the aquaculture value chain in the target area. 
The  main  outcomes  are:  (i)  Increased  production  and  productivity  of  smallholder 
aquaculture;  (ii)  Increased  fish  consumption  by  both  rural  and  urban  households;  (iii) 
Improved efficiency of the fish value chain and associated products through the use of a 
business development approach; and (iv) The aquaculture sector is effectively managed 
based  on  good  information  and  providing  increased  services  to  smallholders  and  other 
value chain actors.   
Qualifications  and  Experience.    IDEPA  is  looking  for  an  experienced  Sociologist  to 
assume  the  position  of  Social  Inclusion  Specialist.    The  Social  Inclusion  Specialist  will 
coordinate and facilitate the implementation of all targeting, gender mainstreaming and 
30 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
social risk management interventions defined in PRODAPE at national, sub-national and 
community levels.  
She  will  work  closely  with  work  closely  with  all  PRODAPE  team  members  and  technical 
specialists  to  ensure  that  project  management  in  loyal  to  design  and  that  the  project 
effectively  and  successfully  reaches  beneficiaries  of  different  socio-economic  groups, 
gender  and  age  –  not  just  the  “easy  to  reach”,  and  project  implementation  of 
approaches and interventions that enable beneficiaries to capture expected benefits and 
sustain  their  engagement  in  opportunities  conferred  by  PRODAPE.  The  following 
qualifications and experience are required for the position: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advanced  degree  from  an  accredited  institution  in  sociology,  anthropology, 
human sciences or related field; 
At least 7 years of experience in the provision of technical assistance to rural 
in 
in 
development  projects.  Experience 
Mozambique is desirable. 
fisheries  /  aquaculture  and 
Experience  in  social  analysis  and  integration  of  findings  in  development 
interventions; 
Solid understanding and proved experience in successfully promoting gender 
mainstreaming in development interventions;   
Solid understanding of the barriers hindering some social groups in accessing, 
successfully  and  sustaining  engagement  in  development  opportunities  and 
capturing / enjoying associated benefits; 
Experience in participatory processes associated to community development; 
Experience in training and capacity building; 
Good communication skills.  Excellent written and verbal communication skills 
in Portuguese is required; working knowledge of English is desirable. 
Experience of interacting with a variety of internal and external stakeholders. 
Strong  management  and  coordination  skills,  including  basic  knowledge  on 
M&E. 
Duty  station.  The  duty  station  will  be  in  Maputo,  Mozambique.  The  total  duration  of 
contract is five years. It is estimated that the Social Inclusion Specialist will spend about 
50% of the time travelling in the target areas.  
Key  responsibilities.  The  objective  of  the  position  is  to  assist  IDEPA  in  the 
management  of  relevant  PRODAPE 
targeting,  gender 
mainstreaming  and  social  risk  management  in  line  with  project  design.  The  Social 
Inclusion Specialist shall: 
interventions  related 
to 
 
 
 
Ensure  that  social  inclusion  and  social  risk  management  is  adequately 
mainstreamed  across  project  activities,  as  delineated  in  the  Project  Design 
Document; 
Lead  the  production  of  PRODAPE´s  Social  Mentoring  and  Social  Inclusion 
Manuals; ensure that all relevant target groups receive training in these areas 
and  that  knowledge  and  skills  are  integrated  into  their  duties  and 
responsibilities;  
Ensure  that  the implementation  of  PRODAPE´s  targeting  and  social inclusion 
strategies are loyal to project design and that they lead to expected results; 
31 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Produce  Terms  of  Reference,  assist  in  the  hiring  of  required  specialists  and 
oversee delivery of quality results for any special qualitative studies aiming to 
increase project understating of social issues faced by the project; 
In  close  liaison  with  other  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  team,  ensure 
adequate  integration  of  social  inclusion  in  the  project  documents  such  as 
Project  Implementation  Manual  during  the  start-up  phase,  M&E  system, 
Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPBs) and progress reports; 
In  collaboration  with  the  project  M&E  specialist,  ensure  that  results  from 
related  interventions  are  captured  and  adequately  recorded  in  the  Project's 
M&E  database  and  used  to  refine  operational  strategies;  ensure  that  data 
collected by the project is disaggregated by beneficiary type, gender and age, 
as relevant.  
Establish  and  maintain  good  working  relationships  with  relevant  ministries 
and other stakeholders  supporting rural development to build synergies with 
project interventions; establish coordination mechanisms, as required; 
Facilitate the implementation of PRODAPE´s Social Inclusion strategy in close 
collaboration  with  relevant  stakeholders  (e.g.,  implementing  partners, 
extension workers, community service providers, etc.); 
Work  collaboratively  with  the  project-supported  technical  specialists  to 
warrant the effective interface towards desired outcomes; 
All  responsibilities  assumed  by  the  incumbent  will  seek  to  warrant  effective 
implementation  of  the  project  in  line  with  design  as  much  as  to  build  the 
capacity  of  IDEPA.    The  incumbent  will  work  closely  with  a local  counterpart 
at IDEPA and collaborate with wider IDEPA teams as required; 
Assume  any  other  duties  relevant  to  the  position  indicated  by  the  PRODAPE 
director and / or the IDEPA Director in line with the purpose of the position. 
32 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Moz Prodape Pdr Annex Financial Services
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex: Financial Services 
A.
  INTRODUCTION 
The  financial  sector  in  Mozambique  comprises  of  18  banks,  11  micro-banks,  nine 
1. 
credit unions, two electronic money institutions, 12 savings and loan organizations, 330 
microfinance  operators;  18  insurance  companies,  59  insurance  brokers,  three  social 
security institutions, eight pension funds, six pension funds management companies and 
nine stock exchange operators. Despite the diversity of the financial sector, the country 
has high levels of financial exclusion. Mozambique scored low marks on the WEF Global 
Competitiveness Index 2015 - 2016 for financial market development because of the low 
availability and affordability of financial services, local equity financing and availability of 
venture capital110. It was also ranked at 157 out of 190 economies on the ease of getting 
credit. The recent financial crisis in Mozambique triggered a series of regulatory actions 
from the Bank of Mozambique (BoM), which had a negative effect on the performance of 
banks and led to further contraction of credit flow into the economy.   
Rural  areas  have  higher  levels  of  financial  exclusion  than  urban  areas.  Recent 
2. 
studies  indicate  that  rural  areas  have  a  higher  gap  between  the  overall  population  and 
the  number  of  bank  branches  while  rural  agriculture  has  the  second  highest  level  of 
exclusion  and  with  the  lowest  access  to  bank  credit  compared  to  other  economic 
sectors111. Banking credit to the agriculture and fisheries sector has stagnated at 2 - 3% 
of  the  total  banking  credit112.  In  the  rural  agriculture  sector  only  8%  of  smallholder 
farmers access credit. The financial exclusion of rural smallholder farmers is attributed to 
supply and demand constraints, including: (i) vulnerability risks (ii) operational risks (iii) 
capacity constraints, political and regulatory constraints.  
3. 
Vulnerability  constraints  include:  (i)  systemic  risk  resulting  from  the  fact  that 
rural  incomes  are  highly  susceptible  to  risk;  (ii)  market  risk  associated  to  cyclical  and 
seasonal price fluctuations of agricultural commodities; (iii) credit risk where lenders are 
unwilling to extend credit to smallholder farmers due to lack of acceptable collateral and 
inability to meet “Know Your Customer” (KYC) requirements. 
4.  Operational  constraints  include:  (i)  low  investment  returns  due  to  low  profit 
margins  from  agriculture;  (ii) low investment  and  assets:  poverty  in  rural  areas  causes 
common  crises  to  become  major  crises  due  to  the  lack  of  asset  “cushion.”  Any  loss  of 
expected  income  through  sickness  or  production  losses  cause  significant  impacts  at  HH 
level.  The  small  asset  base  also  reduces  savings  and  borrowing  capacity,  thus 
constraining  economies  of  scale  in  the  use  or  provision  of  services;  (iii)  geographical 
dispersion:  low  population  density  and  high  dispersion  in  rural  areas  is  coupled  with  a 
relatively low market potential usually accompanied by poor services, making access and 
communication  difficult,  and  hence  cause  high  operating  costs  for  both  production  and 
marketing, as well as for access and delivery of services.  
5. 
Capacity  constraints  include:  (i)  infrastructural  capacity:  poor  communication 
and  poor  road  networks  result  in  high  transaction  costs  low  efficiency  of  operations 
which  discourages  provision  of  services  in  rural  areas;  (ii)  weak  technical  capacity: low 
endowment  in  production  factors,  such  as  land,  water  and  capital  assets  results  in  the 
majority  of  smallholder  farmers  having  low  production  levels  and  offering  poor  quality 
products, which can affect  receptivity by output markets; (iii) social exclusion: cultural, 
linguistic, gender and educational constraints affect market and financial integration; (iv) 
institutional  capacity:  most  financial  institutions  lack  the  necessary  capacity  to  develop 
appropriate products and services for rural smallholder farmers. Even when urban-based 
institutions have the capacity to reach into rural areas, there is little incentive to do so. 
110  AfDB, OECD and UNDP, 2016. African Economic Outlook. 
111  CGAP, 2016. Advancing Financial Inclusion for Smallholder Households in Mozambique. 
112  Ibid. 
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Political  and  regulatory  constraints.  Political  uncertainties  and  regulatory 
6. 
decrees  have  an  impact  on  the  flow  of  financial  services  into  the  economy.  Regulations 
such  as  land  tenure  regulations,  banking  laws,  exchange  rate  manipulation  and 
monetary  policies  can  destabilize  and/or  hinder  viability  of  business  and  financial 
operations in rural areas (for instance the current regulatory actions from the BoM have 
restricted the flow of financial services to rural areas).   
7. 
In order to overcome financial access constraints, provision of financial services to 
rural  smallholder  farmers  requires  the  adoption  of  innovative  financial  intermediation 
instruments  supported  by  complementary  social  and  technical  intermediation  services 
such  as  training,  technical  assistance,  business  development  services,  market  linkages 
etc.  
B.  POLICIES AND LEGISLATION FOR FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
8. 
The  Government  of  Mozambique  (GoM)  has  developed  various  policies  aimed  at 
increasing  expansion  and  access  to  financial  services  in  rural  areas.  The  Strategy  for 
Agricultural  Development  2011  –  2020  recognises  that  providing  access  to  financial 
services  to  producers,  agri-traders,  and  agri-processors  is  critical  to  scale  up  and 
increase  their  competitiveness.  The  Aquaculture  Development  Action  Plan  (PADA)  has 
identified access to financial services as one of the key pillars for the development of the 
aquaculture  subsector.  With  regard  to  financial  inclusion,  the  Mozambique  Financial 
Sector Development Strategy aims to develop a solid, diverse, competitive, and inclusive 
financial sector that serves individuals and Small and Medium Enterprises with access to 
a range of quality, affordable, and accessible products and services.  
The  Financial  Inclusion  National  Strategy  2016  –  2022  aims  to  increase  access  to 
9. 
financial  services  from  24%  to  60%  of  the  population  by  2022.  The  strategy  aims  to 
ensure that districts have at least one formal access point to financial services and 75% 
of  the  population  have  one  financial  service  access  point  within  5  kilometres  of  their 
place of residence or workplace. The strategy is anchored on three key pillars: (i) access 
to and use of financial services; (ii) strengthening of the financial infrastructure; and (iii) 
consumer protection and financial education. The strategy identifies smallholder farmers 
as one of the main target segments. 
10.  On  the  regulatory  front,  the  BoM  introduced  regulations,  which  compel  banks 
intending to expand their activities to locate one in three of their proposed branches in 
under-banked regions. The BoM also introduced the regulation on of warehouse receipts 
aimed at facilitating access to financial products and services by small and medium-scale 
farmers or traders, since it can serve as a bank loan guarantee (up to 70% of the value 
of the produce deposited in the warehouse).  
11.  However,  these  policies  may  not  achieve  the  desired  outcome  in  the  short  term 
due  to  the  country´s  current  financial  crisis,  which  has  triggered  restrictive  regulatory 
actions from the BoM. These include higher interest rate regimes (by the end of October 
2016,  BoM  raised  the  reference  rate  for  credit  to  23.25%),  higher  core  capital 
requirements  and  strict  reporting  requirements.  These  regulatory  actions  will  further 
restrict  the  flow  of  credit  to  sectors  with  high-risk  profiles  such  as  agriculture,  fisheries 
and aquaculture.  
12.  The  financial  services  sub-component  of  PRODEPA  aims  to  provide  a  short  to 
medium  term  intervention,  which  will  catalyse  the  provision  of  financial  services  to 
aquaculture  farmers  and  other  aquaculture  value  chain  enterprises.  Ultimately  the 
subcomponent  seeks  to  demonstrate  that  aquaculture  enterprises  can  be  transformed 
into  commercially  viable  enterprises,  which  can  attract  commercial  finance  including 
venture capital, equity, long-term finance, etc. 
2 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
C. FINANCING AQUACULTURE ENTERPRISES 
13.  Aquaculture farming is a relatively new subsector and the GoM has recognised that 
the  sector  has  a  high-untapped  potential  for  growth  in  production,  value  addition  and 
export113. Access to financial services has been identified as one of the critical pillars for 
the  development  of  smallholder  aquaculture 
farming  and  related  value  chain 
enterprises114. However, access to financial sector by smallholder aquaculture producers 
is  constrained  by  both  supply  and  demand  side  factors.  On  the  supply  side,  most 
financial  institutions  are  typically  reluctant  to  provide  financial  services  to  due  to 
perceived  high  risks  associated  with  aquaculture  farming.  On  the  demand  side, 
smallholder  aquaculture  farmers  and  other  value  chain  entrepreneurs  are  financially 
excluded due to lack of collateral, lack of credit history and weak commercial viability of 
their  enterprises.  Additionally,  aquaculture  farmers  and  entrepreneurs  face  sector 
specific challenges such as seasonality, high transaction costs, poor cash flows and high 
exposure  to  systemic  risks.  Unlocking  the  constraints  to  financial  services  to  the 
aquaculture sector will contribute to the development of commercially viable aquaculture 
enterprises.   
14.  Smallholder  aquaculture  farmers  and  other  value  chain  actors  have  various 
financing needs. At production level, smallholder aquaculture farmers require finance for 
construction  of  ponds,  purchase  of  fingerlings,  purchase  of  fish  feeds  and  general 
management  of  the  fishponds115.  Other  value  chain  actors  include  fingerling  producers 
who need finance to set up hatcheries (facilities, equipment, feed for fingerlings, etc.)116. 
At  marketing  level,  traders  require  finance  to  purchase  various  equipment  including 
freezers,  motorcycles  etc.  At  processing  level,  processors  need  finance  to  establish 
processing units as well as distribution outlets.  
D.   DEVELOPING FINANCIAL SERVICES FOR AQUACULTURE 
15.  The  provision  of  financial  services  to  very  poor  and  economically  active  but  poor 
aquaculture  farmers  is  based  on  the  premise  that  access  to  finance  provides  a 
sustainable  pathway  out  of  poverty.  As  stated  during  the  international  year  of 
microcredit  2005,  ‘Financial  services  contribute  significantly  to  poverty  alleviation.  They 
cannot  directly  multiply  the  net  assets  of  the  poor,  but  they  can  multiply  their  working 
assets,  and  income  is  generated  by  a  return  on  working  (productively  earning)  assets. 
Financial  services  provide  a  family  HH  or  business  the  opportunity  to  leverage  capital 
through  a  loan,  thus  increasing  the  amount  of  earning  assets.  Equally  important, 
financial  services  are  vehicles  for  families  to  productively  invest  excess  liquidity  capital 
and reserves into savings, not only to earn, but more importantly to build a risk reserve 
for future needs and shocks, thus averting more costly future losses caused by crises’117.  
16.  Facilitating  access  to  financial  services  under  PRODAPE  (subcomponent  2.3)  aims 
to contribute to the improvement of the livelihoods of project beneficiaries by facilitating 
access  to  appropriate  and  sustainable  financial  services.  The  subcomponent  aims  to 
stimulate  effective  demand  for  financial  services  among  smallholder  farmers  by 
mitigating  demand  side  constraints  and  enable  aquaculture  value  chain  actors  to 
establish  and  manage  commercially  viable  enterprises  which  can  attract  financial 
services from a range of service providers. The subcomponent will also mitigate against 
supply-side constraints by providing technical assistance and training as well as outreach 
113 GoM Fisheries Master Plan 2010-2019. 
114 The Aquaculture Development Action Plan (PADA). 
115 The estimated fixed cost of construction of a 500 m2 pond is 103,404.60 MZN while variable costs are costs 
of 267,040 MZN. For cage farming, the total cost is 707,007.50 MNZ for the first cycle.  
116 See Table 1 for details of financing requirements of other value chain actors. 
117  AFRACA, 2005.  “Global Perspectives in Rural Finance and Poverty Alleviation. Lessons Learnt in Micro and 
Rural  Finance  Service  Provision  in  Africa”,  Unpublished  paper  presented  during  the  4th  AFRICA  microfinance 
forum. 
3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
expansion  support  to  enable  participating  financial  service  providers  to  develop  and 
deliver appropriate financial products and services to the aquaculture sector. 
17.  Through  the  Rural  Enterprise  Finance  Project  (REFP)  implemented  by  the  Banco 
Nacional de Investimento (BNI), PRODEPA beneficiaries will have access to four financing 
windows and one business development support window, as follows: (i) graduation fund; 
(ii)  establishment  and/or  strengthening  of  community  based  credit  and  savings  groups 
(PCRs);  (iii)  Crowding-In  Fund  (CIF);  (iv)  Line  of  Credit  (LoC);  and  (v)  business 
development support services.   
18.  Specific funds will be ring-fenced to support youth entrepreneurship program based 
on the successful experience of the ILO (Support Your Own Business). 
19.  Graduation  fund.  This  fund  will  be  available  to  support  very  poor  project 
beneficiaries  (i.e.,  the  bottom  end  of  the  income  pyramid),  as  required  by  PRODAPE  to 
support  project  efforts  in  ‘graduating’  beneficiaries  out  of  poverty.  The  graduation  fund 
provides  a  route  for  very  poor  rural  households  that  are  not  bankable  in  their  current 
financial  and  socio-economic  state.  This  graduation  route  is  implemented  through  a 
combination of intensive handholding and technical training with the provision of small-
scale investment funds for a graduation cycle of between 18 and 24 months118. They are 
assisted  in  accessing  micro  loans  to  engage  in  more  profitable  opportunities  and/or 
livelihood diversification to move out of poverty and vulnerability.  Specific opportunities 
for  the  use  of  the  Graduation  Fund  will  be  assessed  in  the  first  year  of  project 
operations. 
20.  Establishment  /  strengthening  of  PCRs.  PCRs  are  community  based  financial 
institutions  designed  to  introduce  financially  excluded  communities  to  a  culture  of 
savings and credit as well as equipping them with financial illiteracy skills. The low level 
of business and financial literacy amongst smallholder aquaculture producers, as well as 
lack  of  experience  with  formal  or  even  informal  savings  or  credit  could  prevent 
smallholders  from  participating  in  establishing  viable  aquaculture  enterprises.  For 
example, if they do not understand the potential returns, have not saved money, or do 
not  know  how  to  manage  credit  for  the  investment.  The  facilitation  of  all  project 
beneficiaries  at  the  producer  level  into  savings  and  credit  groups  will  therefore  build 
financial  literacy  and  a  culture  of  savings  in  the  target  communities.  The  groups  are 
designed to be self-sustaining after twelve months of training and support. This activity 
will be implemented by a service provider under the supervision of BNI.  
21.  Crowding-In Fund. The CIF will offer a tripartite cost sharing with matching grant 
mechanism  to  enable  loan  applicants  with  bankable  propositions  that  are  not  able  to 
attract full private sector financing to get access to part loan financing under the project.  
The  tripartite  cost-sharing  scheme  will  provide  funding  with  beneficiaries  making  a 
matching  contribution,  the  participating  financial  institution  providing  a  market-priced 
loan – the interest rate to be charged to beneficiaries will take into account that the loan 
funds  are  developmental  in  nature  and  not  one  of  profit  maximisation,  and  the  REFP 
providing  a  matching  grant.  This  will  finance  investments  that  do  not  yet  have  proven 
commercial  viability  and  will  serve  as  a  demonstration  for  participating  financial 
institutions  on  supporting  the  viability  of  that specific  type  of  project,  so  that in  future, 
this may be financed on purely commercial terms.  
22.  Line of Credit. The LoC will be available to small-scale investors who are ready to 
expand and intensify their aquaculture enterprises.  It  will finance upstream value chain 
activities,  which  require  relatively  large  capital  outlays  such  as  fish  processing, 
transportation  trucks,  fish  feed  processing  and  export  marketing.  Climate  /  weather 
index-based insurance for smallholder farmers.  During the first year of operations, 
PRODAPE  will  assess  the  degree  to  which  financial  institutions  are  willing  and  able  to 
118 See Annex 1 for graduation model. 
4 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
provide  project  beneficiaries  with  a  weather  /  climate  index  based  insurance  to  cover 
natural calamities.  This assessment will include the possibility of conducting a small pilot 
to  assess  the  viability,  functionality  and  demand  for  such  products.  At  the  same  time, 
the Project will ensure a specific “line of credit” for natural calamities. 
23.  Capacity  building  and  business  development  support  services.  This  activity 
will provide training to aquaculture farmers and other value chain actors to improve their 
business and marketing skills, which could include issues such as book-keeping, business 
forecasting and planning and business management with the use of financial services.    
24.  Targeting  and  outreach.  The  project  will  provide  financial  services  to  at  least 
15,750 PRODAPE beneficiaries to meet their various needs as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
7,000  beneficiaries  will  receive  PRODAPE  support  to  construct  and  manage 
open  pond  or  cage-based  production  enterprises  and  will  be  eligible  for 
financial services (PCRs); 
6,000  beneficiaries  who  already  have  ponds  will  access  financial  services  to 
expand their operations (PCRs, CIF, LoC); 
2,500 beneficiaries engaged in post-production handling and trade levels will 
receive financial services to expand their activities (PCRs, CIF, LoC); 
250  extensionists  and  30  graduates  will  be  supported  in  engaging  in  the 
aquaculture value chain enterprise of their choice (PCRs, CIF, LoC); 
All  the  beneficiaries  engaged  in  running  aquaculture  enterprises  at  various 
levels of the value chain will receive business development support services. 
Table 1: Summary information on financing instruments to be made available for 
PRODAPE beneficiaries across the aquaculture value chain 
Financing instrument 
Provider 
 Full  grant  to  experiment  in 
formulation  and  production 
of 
(cottage 
feed 
fish 
industry) 
Project 
 CIF for scale up 
BNI 
 Full 
grant 
the 
establishment  of  small-scale 
community level producers 
towards 
Project 
 CIF  for  producers  who  want 
BNI 
to scale up 
USD 7,000   Different levels of support for 
investment    costs  and  100% 
project  support  for  inputs 
needed 
first 
production cycle  
the 
for 
Project 
 LoC  for  inputs  for  second 
BNI 
production cycle 
 CIF  for  opening  new  ponds 
BNI 
(maximum 3) 
 After  the  second  cycle,  the 
farmer  should  graduate  to 
the  normal  loans  under  the 
LoC 
BNI 
 CiF  for  investment  and  the 
BNI 
first cycle 
Enterprise 
activity 
Financing 
requirements 
Value of 
financing 
(min)  
Fish feed 
producers 
 Machinery  
 Raw  materials  for  fish 
TBD 
Fingerling 
producers 
Small-scale 
aquaculture 
farming 
(Earthen 
Pond) 
feed 
 Packaging materials 
 Storage  material 
/ 
equipment 
 Labour 
  Hatchery equipment 
  Fish Feeds 
  Labour 
TBD 
  Labour 
hiring 
or 
machinery  for  pond 
construction  
  Purchase 
fingerlings 
of 
  Purchase of fish feed 
  Labour  for  stocking, 
feeding  &  harvesting 
fish 
  Security services 
Small-scale 
aquaculture 
farming 
(Cage 
Farming) 
  Purchase of cage 
  Purchase 
USD 
12,000 
of 
fingerlings 
  Purchase of fish feed 
  Labour  for  stocking, 
feeding  &  harvesting 
fish 
  Security services 
5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Enterprise 
activity 
Financing 
requirements 
Value of 
financing 
(min)  
Financing instrument 
Provider 
 LoC  for  inputs  for  second 
BNI 
production cycle 
 CIF  for  the  establishment  of 
BNI 
new cages (maximum 3) 
 After  the  second  cycle,  the 
farmer  should  graduate  to 
the  normal  loans  under  the 
LoC 
 LoC 
 CIF 
 LoC 
BNI 
BNI 
BNI 
BNI 
TBD 
TBD 
TBD 
Distributors  Refrigerated truck 
Traders  
Fish 
processors 
Motor cycles 
Cooler boxes 
Small scale processing 
units 
22.  Support for essential rural institutions. Financial institutions willing to work in 
the  aquaculture  sector  will  be  supported  to  develop  appropriate  financial  products 
(including  digital  finance  solutions)  as  well  as  support  to  expand  to  the  underserved 
project  areas.  To  achieve  this,  REFP,  in  collaboration  with  PRODAPE  will  support  the 
development  of  skills  and  knowledge  within  financial  institutions,  assist  them  in 
designing  policies  and  tools  /  products  on  the  basis  of  best  international  practices, 
among others.   
23.  Sustainability.  Sustainability  of  financial  services  for  PRODAPE  beneficiaries  is 
assured through the institutional arrangements of both REFP and PRODAPE. The BNI, the 
lead  implementing  agency,  is  a  national  institution  whose  mandate  is  to  mobilise  and 
channel resources to productive sector. It is expected BNI’s mandate will extend beyond 
the  life  of  the  project.  During  implementation  of  both  REFP  and  PRODAPE,  BNI  will 
receive  capacity  building  support  to  strengthen  its  capacity  to  develop  appropriate 
financial products and services for the aquaculture value chain. Similarly, under support 
for essential rural institutions component, all participating financial service providers will 
receive  support  to  expand  their  operations  into  rural  areas  as  well  as  capacity  building 
support  to  enable  them  to  develop  appropriate  financial  products  and  services  for  the 
aquaculture sector.  
24.  Learning  and  knowledge  management.  Learning  and  knowledge  management 
will be implemented through REFP. Since financing aquaculture enterprises is a relatively 
new undertaking for both BNI and the participating financial institutions, the project will 
be  identifying,  testing,  demonstrating  and  disseminating  approaches  with  innovative 
technologies.  In  the  process,  the  project  will  generate  learning  and  knowledge 
management  products  and  best  practices,  which  will  be  documented  and  disseminated 
among stakeholders.  
25.  A  baseline  study  will  be  conducted  as  part  of  the  project  inception  activities. 
Regular Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) reports will be generated by the M&E systems. 
At  the  end  of  the  project,  an  impact  study  will  provide  information  on  achievement  of 
project outputs and outcomes.   
6 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
D.  Implementation Arrangements 
26.  Financial  services  will  be  provided  through  BNI.  The  linkage  process  will  be  as 
follows: 
Table 2:  Institutional framework for linking PRODAPE beneficiaries to REFP 
Targeting and Selection 
Step 1:   Targeting, selection and profiling of PRODAPE beneficiaries undertaken by PRODAPE 
project  staff.  
Step 2:   Information on beneficiary location and profiles and funding requirements is sent to 
Regional REFP PMU. 
Step 3:   Regional REFP PMU provides information to Business development and participating 
financial service providers. 
Step 4:   On the basis of the information provided the participating business development and 
financial service providers prepare work plans for providing services to PRODAPE 
beneficiaries. 
Phase 2: Financing Process 
Step 1:  Participating business development service providers and financial service providers 
conduct outreach and sensitization campaigns in project areas. 
Step 2:  Business development service providers provide training to PRODAPE beneficiaries and 
assist to prepare business plans and funding proposals for submission to financial service 
providers. 
Step 3:  Financial service providers receive loan applications from beneficiaries.  
Step 4:  Financial service providers appraises applications using its internal criteria. 
Step 5:  Financial service providers disburse funds to successful applicants. 
Step 6:  Loan beneficiaries repay loan using modalities established by financial service providers. 
7 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Moz Prodape Pdr Annex Status Of Aquaculture In Mozambique
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex: Status of Aquaculture in Mozambique 
Overview 
Institutions  related  to  this  value  chain  are  as  follows:  for  technical  assistance 
1. 
and  extension,  IDEPA  is  the  institution  at  central level  in  charge  of  the  development  of 
aquaculture,  created  from  the  merging  of  Institute  for  the  Development  of  Small-Scale 
Fisheries (IDPPE) and National Aquaculture  Institute (INAQUA).  It has a group of about 
ten aquaculture technicians; each province of the country is more specifically supervised 
by  one  of  them.  At  provincial  level,  the  aquaculture  specialists  who  previously  were 
under  the  INAQUA  Delegations  are  now  directly  under  the  authority  of  the  Provincial 
Directorates  of  Sea,  Inland  Waters  and  Fisheries  (DPMAIPs);  each  of  them  has  one  or 
two specialists (see the Appendix related to Institutional Development).  
2. 
Two  IFAD  co-funded  projects  implemented  by  IDEPA  are  involved  in  the 
development  of  aquaculture:  PROAQUA,  specifically  dedicated  to  this  sub-sector  and 
covering  four  districts  of  Manica  and  Sofala  Provinces,  and  PROPESCA,  covering  all 
coastal  provinces  of  the  country,  which  recently  opened  its  range  of  activities  to  small-
scale  aquaculture.  The  Fund  for  the  Promotion  of  Fisheries  (FFP)  is  the  major  funding 
agency  for  the  sub-sector  and  finances  small-scale  farmers.  The  Institute  for  Fisheries 
Research  (IIP)  has  a  specific  department  at  central  level  dealing  with  research  on 
aquaculture  and,  through  its  Delegation  in  Gaza  province,  is  in  charge  of  the  CEPAQ 
facility  in  Chókwè,  for  applied  research  on  and  development  of  improved  broodstock  of 
tilapia. 
3. 
Feeds  are  essentially  imported,  either  by  the  existing  commercial  aquaculture 
companies (in Tete and Gaza provinces) or by an importer in Maputo (Laimar), supplying 
IDEPA  and  DPMAIPs  for  their  promotion  activities  with  small-scale  farmers.  Some 
commercial operators (e.g. in Inhambane and Gaza provinces) are setting up their own 
production  capacity,  on  the  basis  of  imported  raw  ingredients  and  /  or  local  products. 
Simultaneously,  IDEPA  is  promoting  cottage  feed  production  at  local  level,  initially  with 
two imported machines, as a possible way of decreasing the feed costs in tilapia culture; 
two  Educational  Superior  Institutes  (“Institutos  Superiores  Pedagógicos”),  in  Gaza  and 
Manica provinces, are developing small equipment to that effect. As an additional route 
for local feed production, an aquafeeds line could be established within an existing feed 
company  such  as  a  poultry  feed  company.  Such  initiatives  may  possibly  arise  in  the 
future with Mereque company in Maputo and other similar companies in other provinces 
(e.g. in Tete). 
Seed production has been pioneered over the last years in Inhambane province 
4. 
(Xibaha) and Tete province (Mozambeze), producing for their own needs and for sale, at 
times  with  quality  concerns  (in  particular  in  terms  of  sex  reversion).  New  commercial 
initiatives  are  been  developed  in  Nampula,  Zambézia  and  Sofala  provinces.  CEPAQ 
stared operated end 2017 and is producing good quality fingerlings for sale.  
5. 
The number of small-scale ponds for tilapia has increased considerably in the 
country  over  the  past  ten  years,  under  IDEPA  and  the  DPMAIPs’  impulse,  and  is 
presently estimated at 9,000 ponds. Some small-scale fish farmers have been identified 
by IDEPA and the DPMAIPs as “reference aquaculturists” and will be essential actors for 
PRODEPA’s  interventions.  Commercial  pond  operators  are  established  in  Inhambane 
and in Gaza provinces.  
The  Sector  is  presently  promoting  small-scale  tilapia  cage  culture  as  well, 
6. 
eventually  in  collaboration  with  established  commercial  cage  operators  in  Tete, 
Inhambane and Gaza provinces, and the number of cages is growing significantly.  
7. 
In terms of fish marketing, the relatively limited quantities produced by small-
scale farmers and commercial operators are sold locally, at farm-gate, mostly to informal 
traders  reselling  on  local  markets;  some  is  sold  to  consumers  in  fish  outlets 
(“peixarias”), as a complement to other types of fish (namely local and imported marine 
25 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
fish, imported tilapia); in the case of Tete province, part of the production is channelled 
to regional export markets.  
8. 
Various  segments  of  the  marketing  chain  are  still  at  a  very  early  stage  of 
development:  the  upper  market  of  restaurants  for  better  quality  fish  and  added-value 
products (e.g. tilapia fillets) is one of the most attractive segments and may offer good 
potential;  it  is  still  limited  (one  private  operator  is  presently  developing  her  processing 
and  marketing  facility  in  Maputo).  Wholesalers  are  also  potential  attractive  buyers  of 
fish, reselling and distributing the fish to a large number of retailers as a way to diversify 
their  range  of  products.  Supermarkets  may  buy  fish  from  wholesalers  but  also  directly 
from producers, whenever and wherever regular consignments can be ensured in terms 
of quantity and quality. 
Table 1 hereafter presents a general overview of the existing actors of the tilapia 
9. 
aquaculture  value  chain  in  Mozambique.  Table  6  in  section  I  gives  more  detailed 
information on the various actors, by province. 
26 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 1: General overview of the present actors of the tilapia aquaculture 
value chain in Mozambique 
Retailers, 
Supermarkets 
Informal market traders 
Retailers (“peixarias”) 
SMALL—
SCALE POND 
FARMERS 
SMALL-
SCALE CAGE 
FARMERS 
COMMERCIAL POND 
FARMERS 
COMMERCIAL CAGE 
FARMERS 
INHAMBANE – Xibaha 
TETE 
GAZA – Papá-Pesca (*) 
  Mozambeze 
 
Chicoa Fish Farm 
INHAMBANE – Poelela (*) 
GAZA – Tilapia de Bilene (*) 
HATCHERIES 
LOCAL FEED PRODUCERS 
IMPORTED FEEDS 
TETE – Mozambeze 
NAMPULA – Sr. Perpétua 
SOFALA – Moz. Agriculture Aquac.  / 
MOZ.TAI (*) 
INHAMBANE – Xibaha 
GAZA 
 
 
CEPAQ (*) 
Tilapia de Bilene (*) 
Commercial operators 
INHAMBANE 
 
Poelela (*) 
 
Xibaha 
GAZA – Tilapia de Bilene (*) 
Cottage producers 
MANICA – Sr. Ali 
ZAMBEZIA – (under 
identification) 
FROM: Zimbabwe, South-
Africa, Mauritius 
MAPUTO - Local importer: 
LAIMAR  (*) 
TA and EXTENSION 
FUNDING 
MAPUTO – IDEPA (*) 
ALL PROVINCES – DPMAIPs  
SUPPORT from PROAQUA (MANICA and 
SOFALA) and PROPESCA (all coastal 
provinces) 
FFP (*) 
MFIs 
APPLIED 
AQUACULTURE 
RESEARCH 
GAZA – CEPAQ (*) 
Sources: IDEPA, Study NORGESVEL Sept. 2017 and IFAD Design Mission 
(*) Visited / met during or before the IFAD design mission 
27 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
  National Aquaculture Production68 
 Annual aquaculture production in Mozambique was 1,835 MT, representing about 
10. 
90% of the projected  and planned production for 2017.  It is worth noting in the period 
the  provinces  of  Inhambane,  Manica,  Niassa  and  Tete  contributed  to  higher  production 
volume than other provinces (Figure 1). 
11. 
The growth in the year 2017 is attributed to:  a) Mass  cultivation in cages in the 
provinces of Inhambane, Gaza and Tete; b) Increase of the minimum size of fish ponds 
from  surface  area  of  200  m²  to  500  m²;  c)  The  use  of  alternative  diets  availed  at 
community level; c) Improvement in the collection of statistical data in the districts with 
the  greatest  potential;  d)  Incidence  of  new  public-private  investments  mainly  in  the 
provinces  of  Sofala,  Gaza,  Maputo  in  fingerlings  production  and  pond  construction;  e) 
Technical  assistance  to  fish  farmers  in  the  construction  and  management,  provision  of 
fish ponds and cages; and f) Enhancement of the training of fish farmers on the handling 
and alternative feed production. 
Figure 1: Estimated aquaculture fish production by province, 2016 and 2017 
800
600
400
200
0
)
T
M
(
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
p
l
a
u
n
n
A
2016
a
s
s
a
N
i
o
b
a
C
o
d
a
g
l
e
D
l
a
u
p
m
a
N
a
i
z
e
b
m
a
Z
e
t
e
T
a
c
i
n
a
M
Province 
l
a
a
f
o
S
e
n
a
b
m
a
h
n
I
a
z
a
G
o
t
u
p
a
M
12. 
There  was  a  rehabilitation  of  shrimp  production  in  Zambézia  with  better  quality 
larvae  that  survived  exposure  to  white  spot  virus,  having  been  obtained  from  20 
nurseries and stocked in about 120 hectares of culture facilities. 
13. 
Information  from  IDEPA  indicates  that  there  has  been  a  diversification  of 
cultivated species in Mozambique in general, prospecting was done in four locations for 
the cultivation of mussels. On the other hand, a catfish production project was initiated 
in Tete province, constituting an easier cultivation method with higher productivity rates 
compared to other species such as tilapia. 
14. 
A  number  of  aquaculture  development  activities  have  been  initiated  in 
Mozambique in the last few years. The current status has been reviewed by IDEPA under 
the Ministry of the Sea, Inland Waters and Fisheries (MIMAIP). Some of these activities 
are highlighted below. 
Construction and stocking of earthen ponds 
A  total  of  590  fish  ponds  were  planned  for  2017  but  over  1,146  ponds  were 
15. 
constructed in various provinces. This phenomenal increase was attributed to awareness 
creation and launching of the challenge of production increase through the Government 
of Mozambique´s (GoM) Operating Plan for Food Production, as well as the approach “a 
leader, ten tanks” an initiative by the Head of State. 
68 IDEPA 2017 Annual Report.  
28 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Similarly, it was planned that about 695 fish ponds would be stocked in 2017 but 
16. 
a  higher  number  of  1,694  were  stocked  with  different  fish  species,  realizing  the  high 
production figures of 2017. The total production by province from aquaculture is shown 
in Figure 2 below. 
Figure 2: Estimated number of tanks constructed by province, 2016 and 
2017 
Constructed 2016
 400
 300
 200
d
e
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
 100
s
d
n
o
p
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N
 -
a
s
s
a
N
i
o
b
a
C
o
d
a
g
l
e
D
l
a
u
p
m
a
N
a
i
z
e
b
m
a
Z
e
t
e
T
a
c
i
n
a
M
l
a
a
f
o
S
Province 
e
n
a
b
m
a
h
n
I
a
z
a
G
o
t
u
p
a
M
Construction and stocking of cages 
About  260  fish  cages  were  planned  for  construction  in  2017,  however  a  total  of 
17. 
350  cages  were  installed  and  stocked  for  production  in  particular  in  Gaza,  Sofala, 
Inhambane,  Manica,  Tete,  and  Zambézia.  This  activity  has  gained  greater  momentum 
because cage culture is more productive and provides greater returns to fish farmers as 
compared  to  fish  ponds.  The  gains  in  cage  culture  have  been  attributed  to:  a)  Use  of 
small production area and high-density stocking; b) Low investment for the construction 
of infrastructure; and c) Resilience to drought or stable availability of water for growth of 
fish. 
Figure 3: Number of tanks constructed and stocked by province, 2016 and 
2017 
 500
 450
 400
 350
 300
 250
 200
 150
 100
 50
 -
d
e
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
s
k
n
a
t
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N
Constructed 2016
Constructed 2017
Stocked 2016
Stocked 2017
a
s
s
a
N
i
o
d
a
g
l
e
D
o
b
a
C
l
a
u
p
m
a
N
a
i
z
e
b
m
a
Z
e
t
e
T
a
c
i
n
a
M
l
a
a
f
o
S
Province 
e
n
a
b
m
a
h
n
I
a
z
a
G
o
t
u
p
a
M
18. 
Aquapark  construction  plans  have  been  laid  out  for  Cabo  Delgado,  Nampula  and 
Manica provinces. In the province of Maputo (Matutuíne District), 39 ponds have already 
29 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
been  constructed  based  on  the  aquapark  model  under  continuous  consultation  to 
enhance aquaculture production. In the province of Sofala (Mwanza District) a number of 
ponds have been constructed based on the aquapark model and stocked with 1,026,000 
fingerlings with an estimated production of 9 MT. In the province of Zambézia (Mocubela 
district),  space  has  been  identified  and  issued  with  an  environmental  license  for  the 
construction  of  an  aquapark.  Some  of  the  plans  that  are  already  in  place  for  aquapark 
development are summarized in Table 2 below. 
Table 2:  Plans for aquaparks development in Cabo Delgado, Nampula and 
Manica provinces 
N. 
SITE 
Province 
District 
DETAILS 
Cabo Delgado 
Metuge 
Realization 
1 (40 ponds) 
1. 
Plan 
Comments 
Province 
District 
0% 
The selected contractor has mobilized machines to start with the activities of 
phase 2. It is expected that the planning activities will be finalized by the end 
of June 2018. 
Nampula 
Ribáuè 
Realization 
1 (40 ponds) 
2. 
Plan 
Comments 
Province 
District 
0% 
Activities for phase 2 have already initiated. The payment to the contractor 
was made to start the opening of the first 16 of the 40 ponds planned. It is 
expected that the planning activities will be finalized by the end of June 2018. 
Manica 
Sussendenga 
3. 
Realization 
1 (30 ponds) 
Plan 
Comments 
30% 
The opening of 9 ponds has been completed and another other 21 ponds are 
under construction. 
c.  Production and availability of feed 
Experimental production of feed 
19. 
The  approval  of  the  new  Customs  Tariff  which  provides  for  exemption  on  raw 
materials imported for the production of fish feed, for example, fish meal, premixes and 
protein concentrates, motivated two feed production companies to plan to invest in a line 
for production of fish feed (one in Maputo province and the other in Nampula province). 
A  number  of  firms  are  also  producing  fish  feed  for  their  own  use  in  farms  for  fattening 
and  fry  production  in:  a)  Tete  (Mozambeze  and  Chicoa  fish  farm);  b)  Sofala  (Mozambique 
Agriculture, Aquaculture); c) Inhambane (Poelela Fisheries, Piagropecus and XIBAHA); and 
d) Gaza (Tilapia from Bilene). The surplus of the produced fish feed has been to date been 
marketed in surrounding fish farms and projects. The estimated feed availability from these 
initiatives is shown in Figure 4 below. 
30 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Figure 4: Feed availability (MZN) by province, 2016 and 2017 
 10 000
 8 000
 6 000
 4 000
 2 000
 -
)
T
M
(
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
s
d
e
e
F
2016
2017
a
s
s
a
N
i
o
b
a
C
o
d
a
g
l
e
D
l
a
u
p
m
a
N
a
i
z
e
b
m
a
Z
e
t
e
T
a
c
i
n
a
M
l
a
a
f
o
S
Province 
a
z
a
G
o
t
u
p
a
M
e
n
a
b
m
a
h
n
I
20. 
There are a number of small-scale fish feed producers with capacities of 250-500 
kg  day-  two  producers  in  the  provinces  of  Manica  and  Zambézia,  and  other  four  in 
Inhambane  province.  Alternative  production  of  fish  feed  in  the  aquaculture  sector  has 
also  focussed  on  feed  manufacturing  training  using  locally  available  ingredients,  taking 
as  an  example  the  “Diet  B”  demonstration  capabilities  to  produce  fish  feeds  from  corn, 
bran  of  corn,  soybean,  peanut  flour  and  seafood.  In  addition  to  these  alternatives  fish 
farmers use “Chicken A2” commercially available feed for feeding fish. These alternative 
ration  feeding  activities  are  mainly  practiced  in  the  districts  of  Beira,  Dondo,  Caia  and 
Gorongosa. There are plans to train extension workers and technicians from the District 
Services  of  Economic  Activities  (SDAE)  and  fish  farmers  from  other  districts  on  these 
suitable and alternative fish feed formulation strategies. 
Provision of feed 
21. 
The  total  amount  of  fish  feed  distributed  in  the  country  in  2017  totalled  20,343 
MT.  This  amount  of  feed  was  expected  to  warrant  small-scale  fish  farming  production 
activities in one production cycle for all stocked fish ponds. 
D. 
Fingerling production 
Production of fingerlings per province 
22. 
The  sector  registered  a  production  of  3,846,317  fry  of  which  3,294,317  were 
produced  in  the  province  of  Inhambane  by  companies  Xibaha  Lda  (2,821,317), 
MozTilapia,  Agapito,  407,119  fingerlings  by  Mozambique  Agriculture  and  Aquaculture 
(MAA) Company in Sofala province, 442,000 fingerlings by companies Chicoa Fish Farm, 
Caliote  Fresh  Fish  and  Bronic  Aquaculture  50,000  fingerlings  by  Aquapesca  company  in 
Zambézia  province  and  60,000  fingerlings  produced  by  Chicoa  renovation  company  in 
Niassa province. With this production of fingerlings, the expectation is to produce 2,000 
tons of fish. 
 a) Maputo: rehabilitation of a fry production unit in Matutuíne is planned and a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  between  the  IDEPA  and  the  non-
governmental  organization  “Asas  que  curam”  (Wings  that  Heal)  has  already 
been signed. Funds have also been already channelled for the rehabilitation of 
hatchery infrastructure and nursery for fingerling production with capacity to 
produce about 500,000 fingerlings per month; 
 b) Gaza: Two fry production units were inaugurated in Bilene-Macia and CEPAQ 
respectively; 
31 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 c) Sofala: Already operating in Beira, the company MAA is a private enterprise, 
with a capacity to produce about 500,000 fingerlings per month; 
 d) Tete:  The  Chicoa  Fish  Farm  is  also  a  private  company,  which  has  already 
started the production of fingerlings; 
 e) Manica:  The  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Manica  has  started  trial  production  of 
fry; 
 f) Nampula: a private centre for fingerling production has been built at Mossuril 
and a MoU between DPMAIP and the Polytechnic Institute of Nampula is being 
developed; 
 g) Cabo  Delgado:  The  construction  of  a  fingerling  production  centre  in 
Mapupulo, in Montepuez district, has started; 
 h) Niassa: Existence of an interested operator for fingerling production. 
23. 
The  national  demand  for  fingerlings  stands  at  about  3,178,000;  records  indicate 
that  2,928,078  were  produced  and  supplied  in  201769.  From  these  figures,  the  present 
demand  can  be  met  by  the  existing  production  with  a  20% increase  in  production.  The 
operation of CEPAQ, on the other hand and private initiatives on experimental production 
of  fry  is  expected  to  reduce  the  cost  of  fry  and  fingerlings  substantially.  The  import  of 
breeding  fish  will  in  turn  improve  the  genetic  quality  of  species  produced  locally.  This 
measure  will  allow  operators  to  produce  quality  fry.  The  following  Figure  5  shows  the 
estimated production of fingerlings by province. 
Figure 5: Number of fingerlings by province, 2016 and 2017 
 1 000 000
 800 000
 600 000
 400 000
 200 000
 -
s
g
n
i
l
r
e
g
n
i
f
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N
2016
a
s
s
a
N
i
o
b
a
C
o
d
a
g
l
e
D
l
a
u
p
m
a
N
a
i
z
e
b
m
a
Z
e
t
e
T
a
c
i
n
a
M
l
a
a
f
o
S
Province 
a
z
a
G
o
t
u
p
a
M
e
n
a
b
m
a
h
n
I
E. Analysis of aquaculture potential 
24. 
The  potential  for  aquaculture  production  in  Mozambique  can  be  estimated  from 
the following: a) It can be assumed that all constructed 1,146 ponds were stocked with 
10,000  fingerlings  that  grow  from  0.4  g  to  400  g  to  produce  4,584  MT  in  one  growing 
season; b) Based on only 1,694 ponds stocked (including pre-existing ones) with 10,000 
fingerlings that grow from 0.4 g to 400 g to produce 6,776 MT in one growing season; or 
c) The number of 2,928,078 fingerlings that grow to 0.4 kg to produce 1,171 MT in one 
growing season. 
69  Figures  related  to  fingerling  production  presented  herein  were  extracted  from  IDEPA´s  annual  report  for 
2017.  Discrepancies between data on fingerlings “produced” and “produced and supplied” do not tally as can 
be  seen  in  paragraphs  22  and  23.  It  was  not  possible  to  obtain  data  to  clarify  this  discrepancy  during  the 
design mission; mortality or other reasons explaining un-supplied fingerlings could explain this discrepancy. 
32 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Based  on  the  present  data  with  two  growing  cycles  per  year,  the  number  of 
25. 
stocked fingerlings would yield 1,171 MT as compared to the reported annual production 
of  1,835  MT  in  2017,  accounting  for  possible  over-estimation  of  664  MT.  It  is  assumed 
that the difference between estimated and actual production data is due to some of the 
production statistics not having been captured at national level. 
26. 
The  number  of  stocked  ponds  seems  to  over-estimate  production  by  a  factor  of 
3.7 and constructed ponds by a factor of 2.5 (4,584 MT as compared to 1,835 MT). The 
difference  in  actual  production  as  compared  to  estimated  production  comes  either  from 
number  of  ponds  stocked  or  number  of  fingerlings  supplied  and  can  possibly  be 
accounted for by: a) Predation; b) Mortality; c) Low growth of less than  0.4 kg; d) The 
effects of feed quality and level of management. 
It is therefore possible to double or even triple the current production by ensuring 
27. 
the Best Management Practices (BMP) as well as ensuring the quality of seeds, feeds and 
water for aquaculture. A complete analysis of aquaculture production potential is shown 
in Table 3 below. 
Table 3:  Analysis of aquaculture production potential based on reported 
ponds and supply of fingerlings 
33 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Extension services and capacity development 
Extension Services 
In 2017, plans for  extension service delivery  were to support 4,127  fish farmers 
29. 
across the country with actual serviced farmers standing at 4,412 as shown in Figure 6 
below. 
30. 
Aquaculture extension aims to provide fish farmers with knowledge and methods 
of  good fish farming practices and include activities such as: a) Technical assistance for 
monitoring  fish  ponds;  b)  Exchange  of  experiences;  c)  Settlement  and  stocking  of  fish 
ponds;  d)  Production  of  improved  diets  for  fish;  e)  Promoting  the  construction  and 
rehabilitation  of  fish  ponds;  f)  Testing  the  quality  of  soil  suitability  for  the  practice  of 
aquaculture;  g)  Demarcation  of  suitable  areas  for  the  construction  of  fish  ponds;  h) 
Assessment  of  water  quality  parameters;  i)  Fish  feed  development;  and  j)  Both  pond 
fertilization regimes and biometrics. 
Gender  segregated  data  show  significant  reach  to  female  producers  in  Niassa 
31. 
(44.5%),  Cabo  Delgado  (41.8%),  Sofala  (45.9%),  Inhambane  (46.2%)  and  Gaza 
(68.6%) as shown in the figure below. 
Figure 6: Number of farmers supported by extension services by province, 
2016 and 2017 
2016
2017
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
d
e
h
c
a
e
r
s
r
e
m
r
a
f
h
s
i
f
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N
a
s
s
a
N
i
o
d
a
g
l
e
D
o
b
a
C
l
a
u
p
m
a
N
a
i
z
e
b
m
a
Z
e
t
e
T
a
c
i
n
a
M
l
a
a
f
o
S
a
z
a
G
o
t
u
p
a
M
e
n
a
b
m
a
h
n
I
Province 
34 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Figure 7: Number of male and female farmers supported by extension 
services by province, 2017 
s
r
e
m
r
a
f
h
s
i
f
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N
 1 200
 1 000
Females
Males
 800
 600
 400
d
e
h
c
a
e
r
 200
 -
a
s
s
a
N
i
o
b
a
C
o
d
a
g
l
e
D
l
a
u
p
m
a
N
a
i
z
e
b
m
a
Z
e
t
e
T
a
c
i
n
a
M
l
a
a
f
o
S
Province 
e
n
a
b
m
a
h
n
I
a
z
a
G
o
t
u
p
a
M
Capacity Building/Training of Staff 
32. 
IDEPA  staff  has  undertaken  a  number  of  long-term  training  courses  leading  to 
graduate  or  master’s  degrees  in  a  number  of  institutions  across  the  country.  Table  5 
below summarises some of these initiatives in the last six years. 
Table 5:  Graduate & post-graduate achievements among IDEPA staff, 2012- 18 
N. 
FELLOW 
Level  
Start   End   Course undertaken 
Institution 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Master's degree  
2016 
2018  Rural development  
University Eduardo 
Mondlane 
Master's degree  
2015 
2018  Aquaculture  
University of Thailand 
Master's degree  
2016 
2018  Corporate Finance  
Graduate  
2017 
2021  Public administration  
Graduate 
2017 
2021  Public administration  
Graduate  
2017 
2021  Public administration  
Graduate 
2012 
2017  Public administration  
Graduate 
2013 
2017  Environmental 
Engineering and 
Disaster Management 
Graduate 
2016 
2019  Accounting and 
Auditing  
University São Tomé 
Mozambique 
Higher Level Institute for 
Public Administration 
Higher Level Institute for 
Public Administration 
Higher Level Institute for 
Public Administration 
Higher Level Institute for 
Public Administration 
Technical University of 
Mozambique 
Higher Level Institute for 
Management, Trade and 
Finance 
10 
M. Professional  
2017 
2017 
Fisheries Biology  
E. Fishing 
NON-FELLOW 
35 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Master's degree  
2016 
2018 
Food security  
Master's degree  
2017 
2019  Public health  
Graduate 
2015 
2019  Accounting and 
management  
University Eduardo 
Mondlane 
University Eduardo 
Mondlane 
Higher Level Institute for 
Management, Trade and 
Finance 
Graduate 
2017 
2020  Public administration   Mozambican Institute for 
International Relations 
IDEPA  has  also  undertaken  a  number  of  short-term  training  programmes  to  build 
33. 
the capacity of its staff to effectively deliver their mandate on aquaculture that include: 
a)  Participation  of  three  staff  members  in  a  course  on  procurement  in  Portugal;  b) 
Participation on one staff member in the course of intensive and sustainable aquaculture 
held in the People's Republic of China; c) Participation of one staff member in a planning 
course  given  by  the  University  of  Aveiro,  Portugal; d)  Participation  of  two  employees  in 
the  International  Course  of  Sustainable  Aquaculture,  molluscs  and  microalgae  in  Africa 
administered  by  the  Catholic  University  of  the  North  in  the  Republic  of  Chile;  e) 
participation  of  two  employees  in  a  fingerling  course  on  production,  maintenance  of 
parks and aquaculture ponds in South Africa. 
Fish prices 
34.  Some  indications  were  collected  during  the  design  mission,  as  a  way  to  situate 
tilapia  within  the  range  of  freshwater  and  marine,  local  and  imported  fish,  in  various 
provinces. This information is not conclusive and will need to be systematically collected 
and  analysed  along  the  Project’s  duration  against  the  fish  production costs;  the  market 
study foreseen at the start of PRODAPE will be instrumental in that respect. 
a.  Prices per Location 
  CHÓKWÈ: Papá-Pesca  - production cost  of tilapia: 80 MZN per kilo; sold at 100 
to 160 MZN per kilo at farm gate (40-45% profit margin) (<180g: 100 MZN; 250 
g: 120 MZN; 350 g: 140; >400 g: 160). 
  MACIA: horse mackerel imported from Namibia (carapau): retail price 73 to 110 
MZN per kilo.  Fresh tilapia: 100 to 200 MZN per kilo in the local market. 
  BILENE: Tilapia de Bilene sells at 180 MZN per kilo in Maputo (for pieces >400g, 
200-250 MZN per kilo); fish is then sold at 250-300 MZN per kilo at retail level. 
  TETE and MAPUTO: 
  Trader  Daniel  da  Costa  buys  from  fishermen  at  Cahora  Bassa  Lake  for 
100-120  MZN  per  kilo  and  sells  at  200  MZN  in  his  “peixaria”  in  Tete  City 
and 320-350 MZN per kilo in Maputo.  
  TETE/MAPUTO  –  Fish  processor  Cândida  Chamussa  (Khulibwa)  indicates 
that tilapia from Tete is sold at 260 MZN per kilo in Maputo to wholesalers; 
350 MZN in local markets in Maputo. 
  MAPUTO: SIP (national industrial fishing company) sale prices to local retailers: 
prawn by-catch “banana” 65 MZN; “espada” 80 MZN; “corvina” 120 MZN per kilo. 
b.  Summary 
Table  4  hereafter  presents  a  summary  of  prices  for  tilapia  and  other  fish  at  various 
stages of the value chain (June 2018). 
36 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 4: Prices of tilapia and other fish at the various stages of the value 
chain, June 2018 (prices in MZN per kilo) 
Source of information 
Observations 
Trader (D. da Costa) 
Papá-Pesca 
Production cost of 
tilapia : 80  
To producer 
Stage of the 
value chain 
Place and price 
(MZN)  
Tete (fisherman) – 100 
to 120 
Chókwè - 100 to 160 
(<180g: 100; 250 g: 
120; 350 g: 140; 
>400 g: 160) 
To wholesaler  Maputo - 260 
Farm gate 
To consumer 
(retail) 
Fish processor (Cândida 
Chamussa) 
Tilapia de Bilene 
Maputo – 180 to 250 
Tete (“peixaria”) - 200  Trader (D. da Costa) 
Macia (local market) – 
100 to 200 
(observation by team) 
Maputo (“peixaria”) – 
320-350 
Trader (D. da Costa) 
Maputo (local market) 
– 250-300 
Tilapia de Bilene 
Maputo (local market) 
- 350 
Fish processor (Cândida 
Chamussa 
Macia (imported horse 
mackerel in “peixaria”) 
- 73 to 110 
Maputo (SIP – 
industrial fishing 
company), to local 
retailers – prawn by-
catch: 
“banana” 65; “espada” 
80; “corvina” 120 
35.  Average  price  per  kilo  of  cultured  fish  at  different  levels  can  be  summarized  as 
follows: 
  Production cost by commercial operators: 80 MZN  
  Price to producer (fisherman in Tete) or at farm gate: 100 - 160 MZN 
  Price to wholesalers: 180 - 260 MZN in Maputo 
  Price to consumers: ranges from 100 – 200 MZN (small and large tilapia) in Macia 
and  fish  outlet  in  Tete  to  250  –  350  MZN  in  local  markets  and  in  fish  outlets  in 
Maputo. 
G. Enterprise budget and production systems 
Enterprise budget for earthen pond (500 m2) 
In Mozambique, the recommended size for earthen ponds is 500 m2, with stocks of 
36. 
10  fingerlings  per  m2  to  a  total  yield  of  5,000  fingerlings.  Normally  a  10%  fingerling 
mortality is assumed resulting in a final density of 4,500 fingerlings of average growth to 
400 g each to yield 1,800 Kg of fish. These estimates are on the higher side and could be 
as  low  as  250  g  each  depending  on  feed  used  and  management  approach  used. 
Assuming as average price of 175 MZN per Kg the expected total revenue is estimated at 
315,000 MZN. 
37.  With estimated costs of 267,040 MZN returns are expected at the range of 47,960 
MZN above total variable costs. The estimated fixed costs of 500 m2 pond construction in 
Mozambique  is  103,404.60  MZN  with  a  depreciation  of  10%  per  annum  amounting  to 
5,170 MZN for the first growing cycle of 5 - 6 months and a similar cost for renovation in 
the  second  growing  cycle.  Earthen  pond  enterprises  are  not  expected  to  make  profit  in 
37 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
the first growing cycle but can register a net profit of 35,119 MZN in the second growing 
cycle. 
Enterprise budget for fish cage (125 m3) 
The  cage  culture  system  consists  of  a  125  m3  facility  accommodating  up  to 
38. 
10,000 fingerlings. With an allowance of 10% mortality, the expected yield is 4,500 kg of 
fish weighing an average unit weight of 500 g. However, weight per unit could be as low 
as 300 g. The main variable costs for cage culture are fingerlings and feed; a boat/canoe 
is  required  on  a  daily  basis.  The  cage  culture  system  is  expected  to  break  even  on  the 
first cycle with a net return of 80,492.50 MZN over total costs and higher returns in the 
second cycle estimated at 197,500 MZN.  
Enterprise budget for partial supplementary feeding (500 m2) 
39. 
There  seems  to  be  market  for  small  sized  tilapia  (125  g  per  unit)  in  Zambia, 
Malawi  and  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  that  can  be  produced  with  adequate 
fertilization,  feeding  only  during  the  last  half  of  the  growth  cycle  and  using  low  cost 
supplementary  feeding  such  as  rice  bran.  This  grade  of  fish  could  be  sold  for  just  80 
MZN. 
40. 
A partial budget for such low-level management production systems indicate that 
the break-even price above variable costs could be as low as 100 MZN in the first growth 
cycle and 102 MZN in the second cycle. To recover both variable and fixed costs, the fish 
has to be sold at least for 197 MZN and 112 MZN in the first and second growing cycles, 
respectively. 
38 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
39 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
40 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
E. 
Details of value chain actors and priority interventions 
41. 
As  a  complement  to  Table  1,  Table  6  gives  additional  information  related  to  the 
main  actors  involved  in  the  aquaculture  value  chain,  their  present  situation  and 
perspectives  in  the  short  term  per  province.  It  subsequently  presents  priority  districts 
chosen  by  MIMAIP  to  be  covered  by  PRODAPE  and  the  respective  actions,  which  are 
foreseen  by  the  sector,  as  preliminary  indications  of  what  the  Project  may  possibly 
support during its 5-year implementation period. 
41 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
F. 
Summary analysis of the aquaculture sub-sector and PRODAPE 
interventions 
42. 
Table 7 hereafter presents a summary of strengths, weakness, opportunities and 
threats analysis of the freshwater aquaculture sub-sector in Mozambique, and the ways 
PRODAPE  will  be  involved  in  building  on  its  strengths,  addressing  its  weaknesses, 
building on its opportunities and mitigating identified threats. Information from this table 
could be used as a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) tool during Project implementation 
to assess how weaknesses are turned into strengths, opportunities are taken advantage 
of and threats are thwarted or mitigated. 
42 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 6: Existing operators per province / priority districts, and actions as defined by IDEPA 
43 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 7: Summary strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats analysis of the aquaculture sub-sector in 
Mozambique and PRODAPE foreseen interventions 
44 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
45 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
46 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
G.  Data collection and monitoring 
43. 
Aquaculture  data  can  be  one  difficult  to  collect  due  to  the  wide  distribution  of 
suitable  sites  for  pond  construction.  However,  the  current  approach  of  centrality  and 
concentration  provides  a  good  avenue  for  designing  and  implementing  suitable 
aquaculture data systems in relation to different production aspects. 
Data collection is simplified by standardizing the pond sizes to 500 m2 at all sites. 
44. 
However, site specific data has to be collected  for the different culture systems, inputs, 
management approaches and yields. Additionally, some information would be required in 
water resource utilization and types of feed used. 
45. 
Datasets can then be stored in either excel spread sheets but eventually require a 
custom  designed  database  ideally  with  GIS  information  to  enable  spatial  and  temporal 
analysis  of  the  aquaculture  sub-sector  as  a  whole.  No  single  database  can  be 
recommended but this can be designed with inputs from the users who could be IDEPA, 
Provincial  Administration  and  District  Administration  Staff.  The  database  must  bear  in 
mind  that  fish  farmers,  traders  and  other  stakeholders  could  also  be  interested  in  the 
data. 
46. 
A  general  guideline  is  provided  herein  on  the  type  of  information  that  should  be 
collected  and  the  procedures  that  may  guarantee  systematic,  timely  and  accurate  data 
collection. 
H.  Lessons Learnt from Other Aquaculture Interventions 
Successfully  supporting  the  development  of  aquaculture  in  Mozambique  depends 
47. 
as  much  on  understanding  the  context,  the  wide  range  of  actual  and  potential 
stakeholders and integrating lessons from on-going and past experiences in aquaculture 
interventions in Mozambique and beyond. This section of the document presents detailed 
information on lessons learnt considered in PRODAPE design. 
48. 
IFAD  has  supported  the  fisheries  and  aquaculture  sector  of  Mozambique  since 
1993 through six projects, which provide valuable lessons and experiences. In particular, 
lessons  from the two most  recent projects, PROAQUA and PROPESCA, have been taken 
to guide PRODAPE design. The design also paid attention to the lessons from other key 
players  in  the  country,  especially  the  Norwegian  funded  programme  Support  to  the 
Fisheries Sector of Mozambique (2013-2017) and IFAD aquaculture programmes in other 
African  countries  as  well  as  the  Evaluation  Synthesis  of  IFAD  activities  in  small-scale 
fisheries, aquaculture and Coastal Zones. Key lessons include the following: 
a)  Comprehensive  approach  to  farmers  "capacity  building".  The  constraints 
presented  by  aquaculture  in  are  multi-dimensional;  projects  in  Mozambique 
highlight  that  beneficiaries  require  a  comprehensive  response  to  capacity 
building, which includes: technical and simple business training, access to inputs 
(in  particular  seed  and  feed)  to  meet  the  needs  of  a  full  production  cycle  until 
when  farmers  have  sold  their  first  harvest,  financial  inclusion  to  expand 
production and investments along the value chain and linkages to markets.  
b)  Duration to have an impact. Aquaculture is relatively new in IFAD programmes 
and  it  is  often  the  first  time  to  be  introduced  to  some  of  IFAD  beneficiaries.  It 
takes  time  for  any  new  technology  or  farming  practice  to  be  understood, 
accepted,  adopted  and  the  impacts  realised.  It  is  often  a  false  expectation  that 
aquaculture  will  take  root  and  impacts  seen  immediately.  In  fact,  experience 
shows  that  it  may  take  at  least  three  years  of  continuous  capacity  building, 
mentoring  and  extension  support  for  aquaculture  to  take  root,  especially  among 
smallholders.  
c)  Working with farmer organizations. Lessons from IFAD-supported projects in 
the  country  demonstrate  that  it  is  more  cost-effective  to  promote  capacity 
47 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
building  and  access  to  other  project  opportunities  through  farmer  organizations. 
Groups  have  been  used  in  on-going  aquaculture  projects  in  Mozambique  as  an 
entry  point  to  initiate  savings  and  credit  activities  and  to  address  nutrition 
mainstreaming, with very positive outcomes.  
d)  Technical  assistance.  Experience  from  other  IFAD  aquaculture  projects  (e.g. 
AFAP in Angola) tells that it may take quite a significant amount of time and effort 
to  procure  international  technical  expertise,  which  can  greatly  disrupt  planned 
aquaculture  production  plans.  Clear  plans  for  technical  assistance  requirements 
should  be  developed  early  and  be  appropriately  sequenced  to  match  technical 
assistance service provision with aquaculture production training needs, to lead to 
expected benefits.  
e)  Promoting  knowledge-based  aquaculture.  Experience  from  other  IFAD 
aquaculture  programmes  (e.g.  in  Eritrea)  shows  the  importance  of  incorporating 
research into aquaculture programmes. Interventions that involve introduction of 
new technologies will necessarily require piloting of technologies on a small small-
scale and evaluation of the technical and economic viability before roll out.  
f)  In-country  capacity  to  support  aquaculture.  Experience  from  PROAQUA  and 
PROPESCA shows that there is inadequate aquaculture technical capacity at sub-
national level  (provincial  and  district level)  to  meet  farmers'  training  needs.  Key 
constraints  include  the  existence  of  limited  human  resources  and  limited 
availability of means of transport both for extension and other technical staff. 
g)  Getting  appropriate  production  models.  Lessons  from  PROAQUA  show  that 
farmers  who  integrate  their  ponds  in  the  wider  agricultural  set-up,  for  instance, 
by applying livestock wastes in the ponds, have better returns. Integration must 
be simple and logical, avoiding unnecessary complexity.  Similarly pond size is a 
major factor, with larger ponds generally providing better cost-benefit results.  
h)  Business  approach  to  aquaculture.  Lessons  from  other  IFAD  programmes 
(e.g.  ABDP  in  Kenya)  underline  the  importance  of  a  business  approach  to 
aquaculture  and  linking  smallholder  producers  with  good  productivity  levels  with 
larger  commercial  players,  input  suppliers,  technical  assistance  and  other 
services.   
i)  Integrating  nutrition.  Nutrition  education  as  stand-alone  activity  has  limited 
impact  as  nutrition  is  multi-dimensional  and  involves  various  sectors.  IFAD´s 
comparative  advantage  is  in  the  implementation  of  strategic  nutrition  sensitive 
actions  that  address  issues  of  access,  availability,  affordability  and  use  of 
nutrient-rich  foods  along  value  chains,  which  are  complemented  by  nutrition 
education activities.  
j)  Lessons  from  Norwegian  project  in  Mozambique.  Norwegian  support  to  the 
aquaculture  sector  in  Mozambique  highlights  a  tendency  by  the  implementing 
entities  to  use  development  programmes  as  budgetary  support,  as  opposed  to 
development,  making  it  difficult  to  realise  concrete  results.    Furthermore,  public 
administration  institutions  have  insufficient  capacity  to  promote  aquaculture, 
carry out fish inspection, research and to enforce laws and regulations relating to 
aquaculture.  Lack  of  formal  credit  hinders  the  evolution  of  subsistence 
aquaculture to commercial levels, while there are inherent difficulties in obtaining 
strategic inputs for aquaculture.  
k)  Long-term  commitment.  In  their  recent  evaluation  synthesis  of  IFAD  global 
engagement  in  fisheries,  aquaculture  and  Coastal  Zones,  Mozambique  was  cited 
as a successful case. Long-term commitment of IFAD and the GoM to the fisheries 
sector  was  highlighted  as  a  key  factor  for  success  of  IFAD  support  that  has 
contributed  to  preventing  the  dispersion  of  experiences  and  competences 
acquired over time and enabled their consolidation in new successive projects.  
l)  Social  inclusion.  Experience  in  the  country  demonstrates  that  without  explicit 
strategies  to  reach  the  poor,  vulnerable  HHs,  women  in  disadvantaged  position 
and  youth,  their  engagement  remains  marginal.    More,  differentiated  labour 
availability,  gender  roles,  poverty  levels  and  interests  can  constitute  barriers  to 
48 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
engagement  and  need  to  be  taken  into  account  in  designing  appropriate 
approaches and support packages for the less easy to reach to effectively engage 
in aquaculture. 
m) Linkages  with  PROAQUA  and  PROPESCA.  PROAQUA  and  PROPESCA  are  the 
on-going  IFAD interventions in  the  country  that  are  most  relevant  for  PRODAPE. 
The new project design draws on the lessons mentioned above as well as on the 
experiences,  capacities  and  systems  developed  by  the  two  earlier  projects. 
Specific  linkages  include:  (i)  IDEPA,  which  implemented  both  projects,  has  been 
retained  as  PRODAPE  implementation  agency,  ensuring  a  rich  institutional 
memory,  experience  and  networks;  (ii)  PRODAPE  has  included  all  PROAQUA 
districts among its targeted areas, ensuring continuity of support for aquaculture 
to  take  root;  (iii)    PRODAPE  will  build  on  and  scale  up  the  extension  model 
developed by PROAQUA and PROPESCA,  retaining some  of the trained extension 
workers  and  community  networks;  (iv)  PRODAPE  will  adopt  and  scale  up  the 
processes  for  organizing  and  building  the  capacity  of  PCRs,  and  retain  the 
networks  and  some  of  the  experienced  PCR  facilitators;  (v)  PRODAPE  will 
continue  to  strengthen  and  work  with  the  inputs  suppliers  and  service  providers 
that  were  identified  and  supported  by  the  two  projects;  (vi)  PRODAPE  has 
adopted  the  farmers  input  support  model  used,  with  some  modification 
particularly in the provision of inputs for a complete fish production cycle (one-off 
inputs provision has proved to result in significant gaps); (viii) PRODAPE will use 
the  results  of  studies  to  ensure  knowledge-based  implementation  (e.g.  zoning 
and  mapping  potential  areas  for  aquaculture,  appropriate  models  for  fingerlings 
and fish feed study and aquaculture cost-benefit study). 
49 
Template for pond record management sheet 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
50 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Use the pond management sheet 
51 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Feeds record sheet 
52 
Use of the feed record sheet 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
53 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Pond production plan 
54 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Health record 
55 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Moz Prodape Pdr Annex Poverty Targeting And Nutrition
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex: Poverty, Targeting and Nutrition 
1. 
This  appendix  presents  information,  analysis  and  strategy  for  PRODAPE  design  in 
relation  to  poverty,  social  inclusion  (including  gender  and  women)  and  nutrition.  
Information  is  presented  in  three  sections:  (i)  Poverty  and  social  inclusion;  (ii) 
Mainstreaming nutrition; (iii) Addressing social risks.  As noted in the PDR, the mitigation 
of common social risks and mainstreaming nutrition was integrated into PRODAPE design 
as a sub-component in itself.  
I.   POVERTY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION 
A. 
Demography and Poverty 
According  to  the  last  population  census  conducted  in  Mozambique,  the  country  is 
2. 
home  to  28.9  million  people;  projections  indicate  that  the  population  could  more  than 
double by 2050.  Demographic distribution of the population is highly differentiated with 
the Provinces of Nampula and Zambézia not being the most populous but also the most 
densely populated12.   
3.  Mozambique´s  population  is  predominantly  young  (between  60-70%  of  the 
population  being  aged  0-35  (final  data  from  the  2017  census  yet  to  be  released).  
According  to  the  Human  Development  Index,  Mozambique  ranks  181/187  countries13, 
due  to  high  illiteracy  rates  (41%)14,  coupled  to  low  enrolment  in  and  poor  quality  of 
education.  Life expectancy has been affected by the country´s generalised HIV epidemic 
currently standing at 55 years of age15.  Twenty-five per cent (25%) of households (HHs) 
in  Mozambique  are  headed  by  women16.  Households  are  in  average  comprised  of  4.7 
people17. 
Table 1: Population and poverty data per target provinces 
Target Region 
/ Province / 
District 
Population 
2017 
Population 
density  
(people / 
km2) 
2017 
% People 
living in 
poverty 2015 
(%) 
NORTHERN REGION 
Niassa 
Cabo Delgado 
Nampula 
Zambézia 
       1,865,976 
2,333,278 
6,102,867 
5,110,787 
14.5 
28.2  
74.8 
48.7 
Manica 
Sofala 
Tete 
Gaza 
CENTRAL REGION 
1,911,237 
2,221,803 
2,764,169 
31.0 
32.7 
27.4 
SOUTHERN REGION 
1,446,654 
19.1 
60.6% 
44.8% 
57.1% 
56.5% 
41.0% 
44.2% 
31.8% 
51.2% 
Sources: (i) INE (no date), Censo 2017, Quarto Recenseamento Geral da População e Habitação.  
Divulgação dos Resultados Preliminares; (ii) MEF, October 2016.  Pobreza e Bem Estar em 
Moçambique: Quarta Avaliação Nacional.  Inquérito ao Orçamento Familiar – IOF 2014/15. 
12    INE,  (no  date).    Censo  2017,  Quarto  Recenseamento  Geral  da  População  e  Habitação.    Divulgação  dos 
Resultados Preliminares. 
13    UNDP,  2016.    Human  Development  Report  2016,  Mozambique.    Briefing  Note  for  Countries  on  the  2016 
Human Development Report. 
14    Danish  Trade  Council  for  International  Development  and  Cooperation,  2017.    Labour  Market  Profile 
Mozambique 2017. 
15  PEPFAR, 2017.  Mozambique Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 2017, Strategic Direction Summary. 
16    CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
17  WB, October 2016.  Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities. 
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
B.  Poverty 
4. 
Poverty levels and distribution. Mozambique has made encouraging progress in 
poverty alleviation over a period of 18 years (1996-2014) with a 25 point drop in poverty 
over  that  period.    However,  despite  the  encouraging  macro-economic  environment  the 
country enjoyed for a couple of decades, up to 2014, poverty reduction has not seen the 
same pace of improvement: poverty reduced in only five points between 2009 and 2014. 
Forty-six per cent (46.1%) of the population still lives under the national (consumption) 
poverty line. In fact, the absolute number of people living in poverty in 2015 is actually 
higher  than  in  2009,  due  to  the  low  percentage  decrease  in  poverty  over  the  period. 
Opportunities for the poor have not been equal to those of the non-poor.   
5. 
Poverty alleviation efforts have generated better results in the Southern Region of 
the  country  (partly  attributed  by  a  higher  degree  of  urbanization),  followed  by  the 
Central  Region.    However,  the  same  does  not  hold  true  for  the  Northern  Region,  where 
poverty has actually increased from 45% to 55%.  
6. 
Poverty is primarily rural (50.1%), this is especially true in isolated areas in which 
assets are not only harder to acquire but also it is more difficult to generate returns from 
them18. The current scenario is Mozambique is thus one of increasing disparities. 
7. 
Key  determinants  of  poverty  in  Mozambique  include  location  of  residence,  low 
education,  low  profitability  livelihood  strategies  (especially  subsistence  agriculture)  and 
high  dependency  ratios19.  Poverty  is  similar  across  male  and  female  HHs,  but  can  be 
lower among females headed ones20. 
8. 
According to the World  Bank, the depth of poverty in  Mozambique is  higher than 
international  standards,  meaning  that  most  people  living  under  the  poverty  line  in 
Mozambique  actually  live  in  a  situation  of  extreme  poverty21.    This  is  in  fact  consistent 
with data produced under the national Demographic Health Survey (IMASIDA) of 2015 in 
relation to poverty quintiles, revealing that 55% percent of the rural population falls into 
the two lowest poverty quintiles22. 
9.  Multidimensional  poverty  (MDP).  HHs  in  Mozambique  are  not  only  affected  by 
consumption poverty; multidimensional poverty (MDP) is also prevalent affecting human 
development,  health  and  standards  of  living  of  Mozambicans23.    Despite  significant 
investments in infrastructure over the past 25 years, access to quality services continues 
being  challenging.  According  to  the  MDP  report  of  2017,  over  69%  of  the  Mozambican 
population  encounters  MDP  deprivations  –  which  is  substantially  higher  than  other 
countries  with  high-income  poverty  levels  (examples  of  other  countries  MDP  levels  for 
the same period include Swaziland 16%, Tanzania 56% and Malawi 53%)24.  
10. 
In  this  context,  poor  rural  HHs  face  a  steep  hill  out  of  poverty.  Overcoming 
poverty in such a context requires increasing the profitability of livelihood activities to a 
level  in  which  people  can  meet  the  triple  challenge  of:  (i)  meeting  their  basic  needs  – 
including  access  to  food  and  basic  services;  (ii)  investing  to  improve  their  living 
standards  and  accumulate  productive  assets;  and  (iii)  continuously  improving  their 
livelihood strategies.   
18  MEF,  October  2016.    Pobreza  e  Bem  Estar  em  Moçambique:  Quarta  Avaliação  Nacional.    Inquérito  ao 
Orçamento Familiar – IOF 2014/15. 
19 WB, October 2016.  Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities. 
20  MEF,  October  2016.    Pobreza  e  Bem  Estar  em  Moçambique:  Quarta  Avaliação  Nacional.    Inquérito  ao 
Orçamento Familiar – IOF 2014/15. 
21 WB, October 2016.  Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Mozambique: Challenges and Opportunities. 
22  INE  and  MISAU,  February  2018.    Inquérito  de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em 
Moçambique (IMASIDA) 2015 Relatório Final. 
23  Oxford  Poverty  and  Human  Development  Initiative,  2017.    Mozambique  Country  Briefing.  Multidimensional 
Poverty Index Data Bank. OPHI, University of Oxford. 
24 University of Oxford, 2017. OPHI Country Briefings 2017 for Malawi, Mozambique and Tanzania. 
2 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
C.  Rural Livelihoods 
11.  Seventy-five  per  cent  of  the  country´s  population  is  involved  in  agriculture  with 
subsistence  agriculture  being  the  main  driver  of  rural  livelihoods.  Seventy  per  cent 
(70%)  of  agricultural  plots  are  up  to  2  ha  and  only  3%  are  over  5  ha.  Maize,  cassava, 
beans and groundnut are the main staple crops, while sugar cane, sesame, mango and 
coconut  constitute  the  main  cash  crops.  Low  input  use,  low  yield,  rain-fed  agriculture, 
low  access  to  extension  and  financial  services  and  to  markets,  and  little  bargaining 
power continue driving HH level agriculture.  
12.  Fisheries  plays  an  important  role  in  the  livelihood  strategies  of  people  living  in 
coastal districts of the  country.  It is  estimated that about 350,000 people participate in 
production, processing and sale of fish in Mozambique. It is estimated that over 90% of 
fish production activities come from artisanal fisheries.   
13.  The  culture  of  freshwater  species  such  as  tilapia  has  been  practiced  for  some 
decades in Mozambique, whereas the cultivation of marine species has emerged over the 
last five years. Aquaculture practices range from extensive farming (tilapia and seaweed) 
with few inputs and modest output, to semi-intensive farming (shrimp) with high inputs 
and high output25.  
14.  The  low  production,  productivity  and  profitability  of  smallholder  livelihood 
strategies  continue  locking  smallholders  in  poverty.    Despite  years  of  investment  in  the 
smallholder  segment 
relatively  unchanged.  Paradoxically, 
remains 
approximately 93% of agricultural production and 90% of fishing activities in the hands 
of smallholders26. 
reality 
this 
15.  Albeit  the  strong  reliance  on  agriculture  and  fisheries,  off-farm  activities  such  as 
casual low paid labour, informal trade and remittances also play an important role in the 
HH economy and actually account for a good proportion of HH revenue27. Women´s and 
men´s  participation  in  different  livelihood  activities  have  shown  minor  shifts  in  recent 
years  even  though  agriculture  continues  being  driven  by  women,  while  fisheries  and 
aquaculture is led by men.   Men are moving out of agriculture, when other opportunities 
arise,  especially  into  non-agricultural  self-employment  and  the  private  sector.  At  the 
same  time  women´s  participation  in  agriculture  dropped  from  89%  to  75%,  which  is 
attributed to increased participation in informal trade from 5.5% to 12%28.  
16. 
Adverse  climatic  conditions,  combined  with  other  activities  providing low  returns 
and  the  lack  of  profitable  alternatives  and  low  asset  base  of  the  majority  of  rural 
dwellers, limits the ability of smallholder farmers to make sustainable economic progress 
and enhance resilience to shocks.  
17. 
In  offering  access  to  a  new  livelihood  activity, such  as  aquaculture,  enables  HHs 
to  diversify  activities  and  spread  risk.    However,  for  the  activity  to  succeed  at  HH  level 
and  for  smallholders  to  sustain  their  engagement  and  be  able  to  capture  expected 
benefits  in  the  short,  medium  and  long  term,  it  is  important  that  concerted  efforts  are 
invested to addressing all elements in the value chain related to inputs for engagement 
and outputs to markets. In this sense, PRODAPE´s comprehensive value chain approach 
aligns well to beneficiary needs. It will be critical however that all interventions are well 
coordinated and offered at the right time and in the right quantities and quality. Just as 
25  Technoserve.  2017.  Aquaculture  Industry  Strategic  Plan  –  Final  Report.  The  sector  could  provide  cheap 
source  of  protein,  improve  the  population’s  diet,  create  jobs,  generate  income  and  promote  regional 
development. 
26  CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
27 Ibid. 
28  Danish  Trade  Council  for  International  Development  and  Cooperation,  2017.    Labour  Market  Profile 
Mozambique 2017. 
3 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
important  is  that  smallholders,  due  to  their  intrinsic  vulnerability,  receive  assistance  in 
overcoming common social risks that could hinder HH socio-economic progression. 
D.  Common Shocks / Risks Affecting Rural Livelihoods. 
18.  Adverse weather conditions / pests. Droughts, floods and cyclones recurrently 
affect Mozambican smallholders.  Localized floods occur almost every year, causing 
multiple casualties and loss of economic assets. Droughts, “late rains” also lead to loss of 
crops, seeds and animals, and generate pockets of food insecurity throughout the 
country. Cyclones are common and have the same effects along coastal districts of the 
country.  Because of the already low resource base, those endowed with more assets in 
rural areas resort to selling assets to smooth consumption. 
19.  Pests constitute the second major threat to rural livelihood activities; low access to 
inputs and extension services exacerbates vulnerability in this respect29. 
20.  Loss  of  labour  force  at  HH  level.  The  temporary  or  permanent  loss  of  labour 
force at HH level constitutes the prime internal shock faced by smallholder households in 
Mozambique.  Mozambique´s  generalized  HIV  epidemic  constitutes  one  of  the  major 
threats in this respect; approximately 1.9 million people are HIV positive in the country. 
In  Mozambique  HIV  transmission is  driven  by  heterosexual  contact,  due  to  inconsistent 
condom use. 29% of new infections are among sex workers and their clients, 26% occur 
in people in stable relationships and 23% due to multiple concurrent partnerships30.  
21.  HIV  prevalence  increased  from  11.5%  to  13.2%  between  2009  and  2015  among 
people aged 15-49.  Women continue being harder hit by HIV: prevalence rates continue 
being persistently higher among women (15.4% vs.10.1% in men at national level, and 
13% vs. 9% in rural areas). People with the highest prevalence rates include those aged 
35-39,  people  who  are  separated  /  divorced  /  widowed  and  people  who  only  have 
primary  education,  but  the  highest  prevalence  rates  are  among  those  in  the  highest 
wealth  quintiles.  Young  women  aged  15-24  are  also  particularly  vulnerable  to  HIV 
acquisition  with  a  prevalence  rate  of  9.8%  versus  3.2%  among  their  male  peers31, 
highlighting the role of transactional and intergenerational sex mainly driven by poverty 
and economic incentives. 
22.  Mozambique  adopted  the  UNAIDS  90-90-90  2020  targets  meaning  that  90%  of 
those  positive  should  know  their  HIV  status,  receive  treatment  and  be  virally  (HIV) 
suppressed. To achieve this, the country also adopted the “Test and Treat” HIV treatment 
protocol,  with  the  aim  of  enrolling  HIV  positive  people  on  ART  as  soon  as  they  are 
identified HIV positive. This measure aims to suppress viral load with ART serving as the 
prime means of avoiding HIV transmission. 
23.  Seventy-eight  per  cent  of  women  reporting  being  HIV  positive  are  on  Anti-
Retroviral  Treatment  (ART)  against  68%  among  men,  and  trends  are  for  enrolment  in 
treatment to be lower among poorer socio-economic groups. 
24.  While  it  is  anticipated  that  substantial  gains  will  be  obtained  from  newly  adopted 
treatment  guidelines  in  line  with  international  strategies  and  protocols,  along  with  the 
foreseen  expansion  of  HIV  services,  positive  health  outcomes  require  addressing 
behavioural transmission risks. In Mozambique, key areas requiring specific interventions 
are:  (i)  increase  demand  for  HIV  testing;  (ii)  getting  pregnant  women,  young  women 
and adult men into HIV treatment; (iii) encouraging retention to treatment from onset of 
treatment; and (iv) couple disclosure.   
29  CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
30 PEPFAR, 2017.  Mozambique Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 2017, Strategic Direction Summary. 
31  INE  and  INS,  March  2017.    Inquérito  de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em  Moçambique 
(IMASIDA) 2015.  Relatório de Indicadores Básicos de HIV. 
4 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
25.  Widespread  poverty,  gender  inequality,  lack  of  time  and  availability  of  limited 
resources  among  women  –  including  time  -  to  take  care  of  themselves,  zero-status 
disclosure related stigma, and lack of access to sufficient food to take with ARVs, could 
be  some  of  the  reasons  explaining  the  disproportionate  vulnerability  and  effects  of  HIV 
and AIDS on women.  
E.  Women and Youth 
26.  Women.  Women  in  Mozambique  play  a  leading  role  in  managing  their  homes, 
rearing  their  children  and  feeding  their  families.  However,  gender  roles  abscrived  to 
women  result  in  them  facing  multiple  barriers  towards  gender  equality,  including  lower 
education,  access  to  opportunities  and  income  than  men.  Illiteracy  among  women  is 
much  higher  than  among  men  (54%  vs.  27%)32.  Women  have  lower  participation  in 
formal  employment  than  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (14%  versus  21%,  respectively)33  and 
are greater hit by HH or climatic changes and are also the prime victims of gender based 
violence34.   
27.  Women  have  limited  ownership  and  control  of  productive  resources,  have  smaller 
plots  of  farmed  land  and  tend  to  own  animals  of  low  economic  value.  Access  to 
agricultural inputs is limited among women as these are mainly used for the production 
of cash crops that are largely in the hands of men. Even if women play a leading role in 
day-to-day  food  production,  men´s  role  at  specific  times  of  the  agricultural  cycle  is 
essential for smallholder farming, fisheries and aquaculture.   
28.  Women´s  role  in  aquaculture  can  involve  feeding,  selling  and  processing  fish. 
However, aquaculture ponds “belong” to a woman´s husband.  During the fieldwork  for 
this  design  mission  it  was  observed  that  women  tend  to  play  a  more  prominent  role  in 
productive livelihood activities and even control assets and at least part of the resulting 
benefits as HH livelihood strategies diversify and several activities generate returns and 
in  turn  increase  HH  wellbeing.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  husbands  are  already 
engaged  in  a  profitable  activity  and  they  perceive  benefits  to  supporting  their  wives 
personal and economic development. In this context, it is probable that as HH strategies 
are strengthened and income levels improve, married women engage in aquaculture, as 
true beneficiaries in their own right.   
29.  The rapid field assessment conducted in the context of this project design indicates 
however that the same is likely not to be the  case among the poorer potential  married 
PRODAPE beneficiaries. In fact, the establishment of quotas for women within the project 
faces  a  high  risk  of  husband´s  “sending”  their  wives  to  apply  for  the  project  to  get 
access  to  this  benefit,  when  in  fact,  husbands  will  “own”  and  control  the  aquaculture 
ponds and associated benefits. 
30.  Women´s  active  participation  in  community  groups  and  the  degree  to  which  their 
voices  are  heard  and  taken  into  account  in  development  processes  varies  widely  from 
community  to  community  and  largely  depends  on  the  value  attributed  by  individual 
groups  and  community  leaders.  However,  cultural  roles  and  tradition  generally 
emphasize men´s dominance in such spaces. Interestingly though, a study conducted in 
2017  indicates  that  women  have  greater  levels  of  participation  in  decision-making 
related to agriculture than would have been thought given the overall trends in women´s 
participation in decision-making at HH and community level35. 
32  Danish  Trade  Council  for  International  Development  and  Cooperation,  2017.    Labour  Market  Profile 
Mozambique 2017. 
33 Ibid. 
34  INE  and  MISAU,  February  2018.    Inquérito  de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em 
Moçambique (IMASIDA) 2015 Relatório Final. 
35  CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
5 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Intra-HH food distribution in rural areas tends to favour men, a trend which can be 
31. 
enhanced  in  situations  of  food  insecurity,  exposing  women,  including  pregnant  women, 
as well as children, to higher levels of nutritional deficiency.  
Interviewees  reached  during  the  design  mission  indicated  that  tensions  and  an 
32. 
increase in gender-based violence could be attributed to sudden increases in HH income 
and women´s increased access to opportunities.   
33.  Different  sources  indicate  that  women  headed  smallholder  HHs  account  for  23%-
38%  of  HHs  in  the  country36.  Lack  of  access  to  male  labour  among  women  headed  HH 
contributes  to  the  gender  gap  in  the  productivity  of  rural  livelihood  activities;  male 
headed HHs are estimated to have 57% more labour power than female headed ones37.   
34.  The  Ministry  of  Gender,  Children  and  Social  Action  leads  efforts  in  promoting 
gender  equality  and  empowering  women.  The  country  has  seen  some  progress  in 
producing sector specific gender policies and strategies and in identifying focal points for 
gender  mainstreaming  within  government  institutions.  IFAD  is  currently  supporting  the 
finalization of a gender strategy and action plan for the agriculture sector for the period 
2016-2025.  A  gender  strategy  and  action  plan  was  developed  for  the  fisheries  sector 
under  PROPESCA  for  the  period  2015-1938  and  serves  as  a  good  basis  for  the 
identification  of  current  needs,  constraints  and  opportunities  for  different  social  groups 
and  the  development  of  sector  wide  commitments  to  render  the  fisheries  and 
aquaculture  sector  more  socially  inclusive.  The  MIMAIP  currently  has  very  limited 
capacity  in  terms  of  gender  mainstreaming  (and  promoting  social  inclusion  more 
broadly). 
35.  Youth. The country´s youth policy considers youth as being people aged 15-3539. 
Illiteracy is lower among youth (23%) than among adults (51%)40. Enrolment in primary 
education  has  increased  substantially  in  Mozambique  but  quality  of  education  and 
completion  rates  continue  being  lower  than  desired.  In  fact,  while  continuity  into 
secondary  education  has  also  increased  dropout  rates  are  still  alarmingly  high. 
Vocational  training  opportunities  for  youth  have  grown  in  the  past  few  decades  but  are 
still not adequate to provide youth without completed secondary education with the skills 
required by the labour market41.  
36.  Agriculture,  the  informal  sector  and  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises  continue 
constituting  the  main  avenues  for  youth.  Youth  lack  some  forms  of  capital,  such  as 
financing,  and  social  capital  to  access  the  few  opportunities  available  in  rural  areas.  
Approximately  37%  remain  unemployed.  Entrepreneurship  constitutes  the  driving 
strategy promoted by the GoM towards youth employment42.   
37.  Youth are not homogeneous, according to anecdotal evidence collected in the field 
during  the  design  mission  youth  aged  15-24  are  more  interested  in  activities  that 
generate  quick  returns;  their  interest  in  longer  term  cycle  opportunities  such  as 
aquaculture  is  generally  contingent  on  their  engagement  in  other  activities  with  quick 
wins.  While this is partly explained by interests, the weight played by the lack of capital 
36    (i)  CGAP,  2016.    National  Survey  and  Segmentation  of  Smallholder  Households  in  Mozambique.  Working 
Paper;  (ii)  Morgado,  J.  and  Salvucci,  V.,  December  2016.  Gender  Divide  in  Agricultural  Productivity  in 
Mozambique.    United  Nations  University  –  UN  WIDER.  Wider  Working  Paper  2016/176;  and  (iii)  INE  and 
MISAU,  February  2018.    Inquérito  de  Indicadores  de  Imunização,  Malária  e  HIV/SIDA  em  Moçambique 
(IMASIDA) 2015 Relatório Final. 
37  Morgado,  J.  and  Salvucci,  V.,  December  2016.    Gender  Divide  in  Agricultural  Productivity  in  Mozambique.  
United Nations University – UN WIDER. Wider Working Paper 2016/176. 
38 Ministério das Pescas, 2014.  Estratégia de Género e Plano de Acção do Sector das Pescas 2015-2019. 
39 Ministério de Juventude e Desportos, February 2012.  Política da Juventude (Revista).  Versão 1.   
40  Danish  Trade  Council  for  International  Development  and  Cooperation,  2017.    Labour  Market  Profile 
Mozambique 2017. 
41 Ibid. 
42 Ibid. 
6 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
of  most  rural  youth  (human,  social, 
underestimated.  
financial  and  material)  should  not  be 
38.  Youth  aged  24-35  have  more  stable  livelihoods  and  are  interested  in  agriculture 
and  other  rural  livelihood  activities.  In  fact,  they  are  the  social  group  with  the  largest 
plots of farmed last among smallholders in Mozambique and are more likely to take risk 
and are better off than their older smallholder peers43. 
39.  Without  being  specifically  targeted  rural  youth  have  a  limited  opportunities  to 
access  rural  development  opportunities.  Creating  an  enabling  environment  for  youth  to 
engage  in  rural  entrepreneurship  is  crucial.  The  situation  of  young  women  deserves 
special  attention,  as  they  are  seldomly  targeted  by  development  interventions;  early 
pregnancies are common in rural areas. Youth do not generally participate in political and 
local planning processes; the voice of youth is overrun by that of older men.   
F.  Socio-Economic Stratification of the Population 
40.  Rural HHs in Mozambique can be divided into  four socio-economic strata, namely: 
a)  Very  poor  subsistence  smallholders;  b)  Smallholders  battling to  make  ends  meet;  c) 
Entrepreneurial smallholders; and d) Economically stable rural dwellers.   
41.  Economically active households comprise some smallholders battling to make ends 
meet those in more favourable positions. 
Table 2: Socio-economic characterization of rural smallholder HHs in 
Mozambique 
G.  PRODAPE Targeting Strategy 
42.  Project targeting strategy. The PRODAPE targeting strategy involves geographic 
and  beneficiary  targeting  and  is  complemented  by  the  integration  of  gender  and  youth 
transformative  approaches  and  measures  to  ensure  effective  social  inclusion  in  project 
activities and generation of associated benefits. 
43  CGAP,  June  2017.    Understanding  the  Demand  for  Financial,  Agricultural  and  Digital  Solutions  from 
Smallholder Households: Insights from the Financial Diaries and Household Survey in Mozambique. 
7 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
43.  The project will include a set of empowering, enabling and procedural measures to 
promote  socio-economic,  gender  and  youth  engagement  and  mitigate  common  social 
risks  identified  during  project  design.  A  comprehensive  set  of  measures  will  be  put  in 
place  to  mobilize,  apply,  and  select  project  beneficiaries  to  ensure  transparency  and 
accountability  to  local  community  members  and  project  staff.    A  grievance  mechanism 
will  enable  community  members  to  submit  concerns  with  the  project  or  any  of  the 
processes employed by it. 
44.  Geographic  targeting.  PRODAPE  will  be  targeting  eight  of  10  provinces  of  the 
country, with a total of 23 target districts, in line with GoM priorities, namely: 
  Niassa Province: Lago, Lichinga and Mecanhelas Districts. 
  Cabo Delgado Province: Metuge, Mueda and Balama Districts. 
  Nampula Province: Mossuril, Ribaue and Larde Districts. 
  Zambézia Province: Milange, Nicoadala and Mocubela Districts. 
  Tete Province: Cahora Bassa, Magoé and Maravia Districts. 
  Manica Province: Sussundenga, Vanduzi, Gondola and Mossurize Districts. 
  Sofala Province: Beira, Dondo, Gorongosa and Buzi Districts. 
45. 
The  project  will  adopt  a  progressive  implementation  approach,  whereby 
operations  will  start  in  key  locations  in  line  with  the  following  criteria:  (i)  favourable 
natural conditions for aquaculture in ponds; (ii) the existence of water bodies capable of 
providing  sufficient  water  for  aquaculture  activity;  (iii)  the  existence  of  potential 
markets;  (iv)  unfavourable  socio-economic  conditions  among  local  populations  (high 
poverty  levels),  food  and  nutrition  insecurity;  and  (v)  the  existence  of  access  roads, 
which  could  be  subject  to  improvements  to  warrant  access  throughout  the  year.  The 
districts  chosen  in  which  to  initiate  activities  being:  Lago,  Baloma,  Ribaue,  Milange, 
Cahora  Bassa,  Sussundenga  and  Beira.  Interventions  in  six  of  the  seven  initial  districts 
(all except Beira, will include a fish production component).   
Expansion  into  other  districts  listed  herein  will  occur  once  the  aquaculture  value 
46. 
chain  in  these  districts  is  operational.  Lessons  drawn  in  these  districts  will  inform 
expansion on the basis of local demand.  
47. 
However,  once  the  results  of  final  assessments  of  damage  caused  by  cyclones 
Idai and Kenneth to aquaculture infrastructure are available, target areas of intervention 
could be adjusted. 
48. 
The  ESMF  will  establish  the  overall  framework  for  project  operations  among  the 
23  target  districts.  This  information,  along  with  demand  expressed  from  districts  will 
support  the  decision-making  process  to  identify  districts  to  be  contemplated  in  the 
second  and  third  batch  of  expansion.  The  phased  implementation  approach  aims  to 
consolidate  supply  and  demand  approaches  towards  effective  and  efficient  value  chain 
functionality.  Lessons  learnt  and  best  practices  will  be  integrated  into  the  project  as  it 
expands from a set of districts to another. 
49.  The  same  criteria  will  be  used  to  identify  specific  target  locations  within  the 
aforementioned  Districts.  Relevant  excluding  criteria  will  also  be  taken  into  account  to 
ensure that the project remains Category B (for example, the project cannot operate in 
conservation areas or in areas with marine water).   
50.  Also,  in  the  event  that  communities  affected  by  large  scale  economic  activities, 
including  extractive 
largely 
deteriorated  as  a  result  of  these  projects  comply  with  all  technical  criteria  stipulated 
above, they will be given priority over other communities. 
livelihood  strategies  have 
industry  projects,  whose 
51.  The  implementation  of  activities  at  community  level  will  also  follow  a  progressive 
approach  through  the  incremental  reach  of  beneficiaries  in  communities  targeted.  The 
first round of  support in each target  community will include financial inclusion activities 
and engagement of easier to reach beneficiaries. 
8 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
52.  Direct  targeting  of  beneficiaries.  The  project  aims  to  reach  88,900  people 
within communities, along the aquaculture value chain and in relevant sector institutions. 
PRODAPE  was  designed  under  an  inclusive  targeting  approach.  Specific  measures  were 
integrated to ensure that poor and vulnerable groups, such as HHs severely affected by 
HIV and the disabled can access project opportunities. At community level, beneficiaries 
will  participate  in  project  activities  based  on  self-selection  within  project-supported 
areas, based on pre-established eligibility criteria.   
53.  Table 3 illustrates the range of beneficiaries that will be reached by PRODAPE over 
the course of the project lifetime. 
Table 3: Summary of PRODAPE beneficiaries at community and institutional 
level 
(i)  Community level beneficiaries: 
 
Smallholder  aquaculture  farmers.  This  group  comprises  poor  /  subsistence 
smallholders and economically active / entrepreneurial smallholders requiring 
support to engage in the aquaculture value chain.  
Figure 1: PRODAPE primary beneficiaries vis-à-vis smallholder categories 
   Poorest                                                           Wealthiest            
SMALL-HOLDER 
TYPES  
Very poor 
subsistence 
smallholders 
Smallholders 
battling to make 
ends meet 
Entreprene
urial small-
holders 
Econo-
mically 
stable 
rural 
dwellers 
PRODAPE 
PRIMARY 
BENEFICIARIES 
Poor / subsistence 
smallholders 
Economically active / 
entrepreneurial 
smallholders 
PRODAPE  will  reach  a  total  of  7,000  people  to  engage  in  smallholder 
aquaculture production over the course of five years, through earthen  ponds 
(60%) and cage culture (40%).   
9 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
                Table 4: Detail of PRODAPE beneficiaries to be reached per year 
EARTHERN  PONDS:  Targeting  quotas  to  be  applied  for  the  smallholder 
aquaculture producers being: 40% poor / subsistence smallholders and  60% 
economically active / entrepreneurial smallholders. Across all socio-economic 
strata 20% of beneficiaries will be women headed HHs, 10% youth aged 18-
24 and 30% youth aged 25-35.   
Table 5:  Expected participation rate of different social groups as primary 
beneficiaries 
Specific  support  packages  have  been  developed  for  the  different  socio-
economic  groups  engaging in  the  production  of  cultured  fish  with  the  use  of 
earthen ponds, as depicted in Table 6. 
Table 6: Packages developed for HHs of different socio-economic groups 
to enable engagement in aquaculture production through earthen ponds 
10 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Other beneficiaries will also include rural HHs already engaged in aquaculture 
production  as  they  will  benefit  from  improvements  at  other  levels  of  the 
aquaculture  value  chain  generated  by  the  project,  with  support  indicated  in 
Table 5 under (support available beyond the first pond). It is expected that at 
least 40% of smallholders owning / managing aquaculture ponds in the target 
areas will progressively expand from 1 to 2-3 ponds over the project lifetime.   
CAGE PRODUCTION: All beneficiaries will be economically active, to ensure 
that they are able to present a 20% contribution of all initial capital costs and 
input costs for the first production cycle, as well as have been granted 
approval for financial support from REFP. 
Rural aquaculture  entrepreneurs.   Comprise individuals wishing to engage in 
levels  of  the  aquaculture  value  chain  other  than  production  but  require 
external support to do so. Fifty per cent (50%) of financial products targeting 
the  value  chain  will  be  attributed  to  women.  Specific  opportunities  and 
products will also be developed to meet the interests and capacities of youth 
of  different  ages.  This  beneficiary  group  will  also  include  existing  private 
sector entrepreneurs. 
A  portion  of  the  youth  reached  at  community  level  as  fish  producers  or 
entrepreneurs  will  benefit  from  participating  in  a  youth  champion  led 
intervention widely used by the International Labour Organization (ILO, Start 
Your Own Business).  
Young  Graduates.    PRODAPE  will  also  target  between  5-10  fresh  graduates 
with  aquaculture  degrees  to  engage  in  the  value  chain,  striving  to  attain  a 
gender balance. In addition to being offered the support packages offered to 
any beneficiary, they will benefit from coaching and mentoring activities from 
specialized institutions. Efforts will be made to attain a gender balance. 
Extensionists.  Extentionists  will  also  be  given  the  opportunity  to  engage  in 
aquaculture  activities  through  the  same  approaches  as  community  level 
beneficiaries. A total of 250 extensionists will receive PRODAPE support. The 
measure  is  intended  to  enable  these  players  to  participate  in  commercial 
activity  within  the  aquaculture  value  chain.  The  approach  replicates  similar 
positive experiences used in the agriculture sector in the country.  
Broader  communities  and  individuals  working  in  markets  targeted  by 
PRODAPE. The following activities are expected to reach and benefit the wider 
communities and markets targeted by the project: (i) The promotion of PCRs; 
(ii)  Nutritional  activities;  and  (iii)  Water  and  sanitation  improvements  in 
markets  and  training  of  traders  in  fish  handling  techniques  and  business 
development. 
 
 
 
(ii)   Institutional level beneficiaries. Staff of all institutions involved in the project 
will benefit from capacity building interventions including exposure visits to locations of 
successful aquaculture activities. Extensionists will be provided with opportunities to 
engage in aquaculture activity. 
H.  PRODAPE Social Inclusion Strategy 
54.  The  PRODAPE  will  integrate  a  comprehensive  social  inclusion  strategy  to  ensure 
that HHs of different socio-economic groups, women, gender dynamics, youth and other 
vulnerable groups are all accounted for. The strategy includes: 
(a)
Parity  of  employment  between  men  and  women  at  the  PCU  and  technical 
assistants hired with PRODAPE funding. 
11 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Training  of  all  project  staff  at  national  level,  implementing  agencies  and 
relevant  stakeholders  on  social  analysis,  as  well  as  youth  and  gender 
sensitive programming. 
PRODAPE human resource policies and procedures are gender sensitive. 
Establishing  targeting  quotas  for  poorer  community  members  who  would 
likely  otherwise  not  be  reached;  identification  and  provision  of  specific 
support  packages  that  cater  to  the  needs  of  each  social  group  at  different 
levels of the aquaculture value chain. 
Ensuring that all activities at local level start with obtaining buy in from local 
structures,  and  specifically,  support  towards  social  inclusion.  Specific  issues 
to be highlighted in that process include:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participatory  socio  economic,  gender  and  youth  analysis  at  community 
level;  
Agreement on the criteria for selection of beneficiaries who will receive 
different support packages promoting meaningful participation of youth 
in project and local governance processes; 
Agreement  on  how  project  information  can  be  disseminated  to  ensure 
that all social groups receive project information;  
Agreement  of  project  related  processes  involving  all  social  groups 
targeted  (men  and  women  of  different  socio-economic  groups,  gender 
and age);  
Participatory  assessment  of  other  common  social  risks  and  barriers 
identified 
that  could  compromise  sustained 
participation in project activities; and 
in  project  design 
Agreement on how the PRODAPE grievance mechanism will work.  
 (f)
(g)
Implementation  of  inclusive  project  information  dissemination,  participatory 
planning and monitoring throughout the lifetime of the project.  
Integration of a Social Mentoring intervention to address pressing social risks 
and  barriers  constraining  sustainable  engagement  of  youth  and  women  and 
enjoyment of benefits to be generated by the project.  
(h) Collection,  analysis  and  use  of  disaggregated  data  by  socio-economic  group, 
gender and age. 
 (i) Monitoring  targeting  goals  per  social  group  and  targeting  effectiveness;  use 
of information to fine tune programme strategies. 
 (j) Monitoring intended and unintended changes in gender relations and common 
areas of gender inequality. 
(k)
 (l)
Earmarking  funds  for  qualitative  special  studies  to  improve  understanding  of 
specific issues related to social inclusion. 
Production  of  knowledge  and  sharing  lessons  learnt  in  the  domain  of  social 
inclusion with stakeholders at national level. 
II.   MAINSTREAMING NUTRITION ACROSS THE VALUE CHAIN 
55. 
In  2015,  Mozambique  reached  the  Millennium  Development  Goal  of  halving  the 
number of hungry people in the country; chronic food insecurity now sits at 24% down 
A. 
Introduction 
12 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
from  61%  in  199744.  Despite  these  impressive  achievements,  significant  challenges  to 
food and nutrition security are still encountered. The situation is made worse by inflation 
and a rise in food prices, recording a five-year high in October 201645. According to the 
2018 Cost of Hunger in Africa study, Mozambique loses more than 10.9 % of its annual 
GDP due to chronic malnutrition, the equivalent to a yearly loss of MZN 62 billion (about 
USD 1.6 billion).  
56. 
In  alignment  with  the  GoM  vision,  the  Mission  underscores  the  importance  of 
aquaculture in poverty reduction, food and nutrition security. In light of this, and based 
on  experience,  PRODAPE  will  mainstream  nutrition;  as  a  result,  rather  than  only 
promoting activities at community level such as nutrition education and demonstration of 
nutritious cooking practices, the project will embed nutrition throughout the value chain. 
The  project  will  focus  on  nutrition-sensitive  strategies  that  increase  supply,  add 
nutritional value and increase demand of aquaculture fish.  
57.  Small-scale farmers will be enabled by the social behaviour change communication 
(SBCC)  activities  to  address  individual  barriers  tied  to  knowledge,  skill,  attitudes  and 
motivation  for  consumption  of  diversified  diets.  To  address  other  underlying  causes  of 
malnutrition, the project will use the nutrition governance structures in place to engage 
in  sector  coordination  with  the  health,  education,  agriculture  and  relevant  programs 
implemented  by  the  nutrition  partners’  forum  implementing  agencies.  Social  Mentoring 
support  will  be  offered  to  rural  aquaculture  producer  households  within  the  farmers 
clustered  groups  to  tackle  social  risks  such  as  lack  of  adequate  planning  and  use  of 
resources at household level, gender inequality and HIV and AIDS.  
58.  Finally,  PRODAPE  will  monitor  nutrition  outcomes  resulting 
from  project 
interventions and contribute to achieve the Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of 
Chronic Malnutrition in Mozambique (PAMRDC) objectives.  The aim of these endeavours 
is to contribute to good nutrition through consumption of fish and fish-based products as 
an entry point to improved and diversified family diet.   
B.  Food and Nutrition Status in Mozambique 
59.  Mozambique  has  a 
three-fold  nutritional  burden  (chronic  undernutrition, 
micronutrient  deficiency  and  emerging  issues  with  overweight  and  obesity  in  urban 
areas). Nationally, 43% of children under the age of five are stunted, 6% are wasted and 
15%  are  underweight.  Low  birth  weight  in  Mozambican  children  is  estimated  at  14%, 
indicating that malnutrition affects children from conception and while in their  mother´s 
womb46.  Adolescent pregnancies contribute significantly to low birth weight. Malnutrition 
levels  vary  across  the  country;  stunting  prevalence  is  highest  in  the  Provinces  of  Cabo 
Delgado  (53%),  Nampula  (55%),  Zambézia  (45%),  Tete  (44%),  Manica  (42%)  and 
Sofala (35%) and highest number of families with limited economic access to a nutritious 
diet.  
60.  Fish is the main source of animal protein for the coastal areas, providing vitamins 
and  minerals,  especially  omega-3.  Freshwater  aquaculture  fish,  mainly  tilapia,  is  not 
widely  eaten  in  comparison  to  marine  fish.  The  main  barrier  to  fish  consumption  is 
accessibility,  affordability  and  preference  to  other  food,  especially in  rural  areas  located 
far  from  the  sea  and  dependent  on  agricultural  crops.  Iron,  Iodine  and  Vitamin  A 
constitute  the  main  micronutrient  deficiencies47.  The  prevalence  of  overweight  and 
obesity among women is reportedly increasing nationwide but is highest in the Southern 
Provinces and in urban areas, affecting over a third of women.   
44 The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2015 – SOFI. 
45 https://tradingeconomics.com/mozambique/inflation-cpi 
46 MISAU, INE and ICFI. 2013.   
47 SETSAN, 2013. 
13 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
61.  High  levels  of  rural  poverty,  low  HH  purchasing  power,  limited  access  to  markets, 
high  post-harvest  losses  and  weather-related  hazards  (droughts,  floods  and  cyclones) 
continue to put significant pressure on food and nutrition security of the population. The 
causes of malnutrition in all its forms are driven by several factors:  
 (i)
(ii)
Nationally,  42%  of  the  population  lives  more  than  30  minutes  walking 
distance from a market and 76% more than 2km from any road. As a result, 
large portions of the population are unable to sell produce, earn an income or 
purchase more nutritious foods.  
The  poorest  do  not  produce  enough  food,  do  not  have  reliable  income 
sources,  and  suffer  disproportionately  from  diseases  due  to  inadequate 
access to quality health care and sanitation. 
(iii) Dependence  on  monotonous  diets  with  limited  diversified  protein  and 
micronutrients.  
(iv) Cultural factors influence food  consumption both in terms  of the  food  that is 
eaten  from  what  is  available  to  HHs,  when  certain  foods  are  eaten  and  in 
relation to food distribution at HH level. 
(v) Women  are  overloaded  with  tasks,  constrained  by  gender  norms,  and  given 
limited access to and control over resources. 
(vi) Limited access to nutrition and consumer awareness information on nutrition.   
62.  Barriers  to  diverse  and  nutritious  diets  have  been  highlighted  by  2018  Fill  the 
Nutrient  Gap  Mozambique  studies  and  the  in-depth  review  of  the  2018  Multisectoral 
Action  Plan  for  the  Reduction  of  Chronic  Malnutrition  in  Mozambique  (PARMDC).48  This 
underscores  that  there  is  a  pressing  need  to  ensure  appropriate  nutrition  interventions 
are in place for vulnerable populations including quality health and nutrition services. 
C.  National nutrition policies, strategies and governance 
63.  Policies  and  strategies.  The  GoM  is  committed  to  tackling  food  and  nutrition 
security.  This  commitment  is  reflected  in  the  Five-Year  Plan  of  the  GoM  (PQG  2015-
2019),  which  includes  the  reduction  of  chronic  undernutrition  as  an  indicator  in  the 
human and social development pillar. It is further supported by the National Strategy for 
Food  Security  and  Nutrition  policy  (ESANII  2008-2015)49  and  the  Multisectoral  Action 
Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Malnutrition in Mozambique (PAMRDC 2011–2020) that 
aim to reduce stunting in children under five; wasting in pregnant and lactating women 
and girls and in children under two are recognized as at-risk groups for stunting.  
64.  The  Communication  and  Advocacy  Plan  in  the  PAMRDC  is  supported  by  the 
Communication  Strategy  for  Social  Behaviour  Change  Communication  (SBCC)  for  the 
Prevention  of  Malnutrition  in  Mozambique  (2015-2019)50.  In  addition,  food  security  and 
nutrition  from  fish  is  one  of  the  development  objectives  of  the  Fisheries  Master  Plan 
2010-19  (PDP)  and  is  also  accounted  for  within  the  PAMRDC.  Finally,  the  Food 
Fortification Strategy (COMFAM)  supports the scale up of industrially processed  fortified 
cereal flours, particularly wheat flour and edible oils.  
65.  Nutrition  governance.  The  Scaling  Up  Nutrition  (SUN)  movement  started  in 
2010; Mozambique was one of the early riser countries committing to the movement and 
its  objective,  namely  to  end  malnutrition  in  all  of  its  forms.  The  movement  has  10 
principles  of engagement and consists  of four  stakeholder networks,  namely the United 
48 2018 In-Depth Review of the Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Undernutrition in 
Mozambique 2011 – 2015 (2020)’. 
49 ESAN III (2018-2025) is currently under development. 
50 Estratégia de Comunicação para a Mudança Social e de Comportamento para a Prevenção da Desnutrição em 
Moçambique ( 2015-2019). 
14 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Nations,  donors,  private  sector  and  civil  society.  SETSAN  with  the  Ministry  of  Health 
(MISAU)  coordinates  the  SUN  movement  and  its  networks  through  a  technical  working 
group. The Executive Director of SETSAN is the SUN focal point.  A similar coordination 
structure has been replicated at provincial level with the recently -decreed provincial and 
district  steering  committees  for  food  and  nutrition  security  (CODSAN  and  COPSAN)51. 
Despite  the  structural  components  in  place,  PAMRDC  2018  review  findings52  show  that 
persistent  gaps  still  exist  at  national,  provincial  and  district  level  in  distinguishing 
nutrition security from food security. As such, it is difficult to accurately assess progress 
in  addressing  chronic  undernutrition,  as  data  is  non-comparable  and  many  times 
missing.    
Mainstreaming Nutrition within PRODAPE 
66.  The investment focus of the PRODAPE has enormous potential  to contribute to the 
increase  in  fish  production  to  meeting  the  country´s  growing  demand  for  fish.  The 
PRODAPE  project  will  improve  nutrition  outcomes  by  using  nutrition-sensitive  impact 
pathways  and  nutrition-sensitive  strategies  that  increase  supply,  add  nutritional  value 
and  increase  demand  of  aquaculture  fish  and  associated  value-added  products.  The 
PRODAPE  will  provide  2,000  women,  youth  and  men  with  targeted  support  to  improve 
their  nutrition.  Overall  however,  it  is  expected  that  13,000  beneficiaries  from  the  24 
target districts benefit from nutrition related activities. 
67. 
Integrated impact pathways embedded in PRODAPE are as follows: 
(a) Consumption  pathway  (among  producers).  The  PRODAPE  will  focus  on 
farmers  as  producers  and  consumers  by  introducing  nutrition  and  consumer 
awareness  around  fish  as  a  driver  for  diet  diversity  among  producers  and 
encouraging  fish  consumption  planning  vis-à-vis  channelling  fish  into 
markets.  Also,  diversified  production  systems  will  be  encouraged  among 
beneficiaries  engaged  in  aquaculture  (fish  production  and  agriculture 
activities)  to  increase  the  quantity  and  nutrient-rich  quality  of  diverse  foods 
available to the HH year-round.  
(b)
Income pathway. The PRODAPE will support the strengthening / emergence 
of  credit  and  savings  groups  (PCRs)  in  all  communities  targeted  by 
aquaculture  production  activities.  These  activities  will  also  include  household 
budgeting  and  business  planning.  The  project  will  encourage  use  of 
associated profits to address malnutrition by addressing health, nutrition and 
care necessities.  
(c) Market  pathway.  The  PRODAPE  will  work  all  across  the  aquaculture  value 
chain to address supply and demand constraints. This is expected to increase 
availability  of  and  access  to  aquaculture  fish  in  markets.  A  consumer 
awareness study on cultured fish and other products will be conducted as part 
of  the  initial  market  survey  to  be  conducted  by  the  project  to  establish 
consumer  awareness  levels  and  on  the  basis  of  that,  delineate  effective 
strategies  for  demand  creation  for  the  purchase  of  aquaculture  fish  in  the 
target districts.  
The  project  team  shall  develop  linkages  with  the  World  Food  Programme 
(WFP)  for  the  fish  farmers  and  cottage  fish  industries  to  explore  the 
possibility of tapping into the diversified diets food baskets e-voucher scheme 
for  emergency response and school feeding programs, so create yet  another 
market for aquaculture producers.  
51 December 6th, 2017, the Council of Ministers (Decree N. 69/2017) approved the creation of the National 
Council for Food and Nutrition Security (CONSAN). 
52 In-Depth Review 2018 of the Multisectoral Action Plan for the Reduction of Chronic Undernutrition in 
Mozambique 2011 – 2015 (2020)’.  
15 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
In  addition,  fish  farmers  with  support  from  the  project  can  benefit  from  the 
Mozambique  Scaling-Up  Nutrition  Business  Network  platform  to  access 
technical  assistance  /  services  on  nutrition  marketing  including  safe  food 
handling  and  packaging  that  preserves  the  nutritional  value  of  fish, 
frameworks for adherence to mandatory minimum requirements for nutrition 
labelling and market place support activities for demand generation. 
Figure 2: PRODAPE integrated impact pathways for nutrition 
68.  PRODAPE  interventions  will  be  implemented  through  the  use  of  nutrition  sensitive 
strategies,  namely,  SBCC  and  consumer  awareness  activities,  institutional  capacity 
building  activities  on  nutrition  mainstreaming  approaches,  and  food  and  nutrition 
security  policy  support.  To  address  other  underlying  causes  of  malnutrition,  the  project 
will  use  the  nutrition  governance  structures  in  place  to  engage  in  sector  coordination 
with the health, education, agriculture and relevant programs implemented by agencies 
in the context of the Nutrition Partners Forum.  
69.  SBCC  activities.  Project  extension  staff  will  engage  and  support  small-scale 
aquaculture  farmers  with  nutrition  education  and  consumer  awareness  information  and 
activities focused on ensuring that farmers and their HHs consume fish produced and use 
16 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
the income from the fish and fish products to access other diverse nutrient-dense food, 
with  the  aim  of  improving  the  quality  of  their  diets.  The  intention  is  for  them  to  also 
become change agents within their communities and use the marketing of their produce 
to increase demand, consumption and utilisation of fish at community level. Some of the 
suggested SBCC activities include: 
(a) Farmer  clusters  and/or  the  PCR  group  nutrition  education  sessions:  Using 
the  farmer  clusters  and/or  the  PCR  groups  as  entry  points,  the  nutrition  education 
activities will include nutrition-specific content on: a) nutritional value of fish; b) fish 
safety; c) fish benefits for the family, especially for the 1,000-days group53; and d) 
demonstration  of  improved  recipes  for  preparing  cultured  fish54.  Activities  will  be 
implemented from the onset and throughout the production and marketing cycles.  
(b) Marketplace  awareness  and  communication  content  and  materials.  To 
address issues related to aquaculture fish acceptability in coastal areas and address 
cultural habits that inhibit the consumption of fish in inland areas, as well as promote 
fish production and overall fish consumption the project will: (1) develop, multimedia 
messages,  creative  print  materials  such  as  scripts,  stories,  lyrics,  agendas, 
discussion guides and slide shows tailored to rural communities; (2) take advantage 
of local fish fairs to promote tilapia and establish promote fish processing and value 
addition; (3) add to the on-going marketplace communication activities to emphasize 
the  prevention  of  chronic  malnutrition  through  community  drama  /  theatre, 
interactive  storytelling,  music  and  road  shows.  National  events  such  as  health  and 
nutrition weeks and the SETSAN “Month Dedicated to Feeding” (Mês da Alimentação) 
offer a wider geographical and thematic focus opportunity for community awareness 
on  the  use  of  aquaculture  fish  and  associated  products  to  improve  HH  diet.  The 
project team will contribute on the production of content and the social mobilization 
activities  for  the  events  in  target  districts;  (4)  explore  use  of  the  district  and 
provincial  community  radios  that  benefited  from  the  Millennium  Development  Goals 
program  (MDG1c)55  radio  station  training  support  and  the  MISAU  “One  Minute  on 
Nutrition”  (Um  Minuto  de  Nutrição)  initiatives  to  convey  the  fish-related  nutrition 
messages. 
(c) To  support  wider  coverage  and  dissemination  of  information  on  aquaculture  fish 
consumption,  the  project  team  could  explore  the  provision  of  tilapia  and  catfish-
related  content  on  production,  consumption  and  marketing  to  community  mother, 
infant and young child nutrition extension teams (SDMAS) to use during home visits 
and  to  the  Nutrition  Partners  Forum  organisation  working  on  nutrition-specific  and 
nutrition-sensitive  intervention  in  the  districts  to  integrate  health,  school  and 
community nutrition activities. 
70.  Institutional  capacity  building  on  nutrition  mainstreaming.  To  facilitate 
quality extension services within the sector a nutrition specialist will be hired to support 
the PCU in planning, implementing and monitoring nutrition outcomes within PRODAPE. 
An  overall  capacity  assessment  planned  for  the  extension  team  and  provincial  and 
district  directorates  will  also  elaborate  on  the  nutrition  capacity  gaps.  In  collaboration 
with  SETSAN,  Ministry  of  Agriculture  National  Directorate  for  Agriculture  Extension 
Department  of  (DNEA),  and  MISAU,  specific  content  for  the  aquaculture  sector  will  be 
developed  and  included  in  the  overall  aquaculture  extension  services  training  plans.  A 
nutrition  focal  point  will  join  the  extension  master  training  team  that  will  train  target 
provincial  directorates  of  Ministry  of  Sea,  Inland  Waters  and  Fisheries  (DPMAIPs)  and 
extension  staff  at  district  levels  and  the  project  team.  The  training  will  be  done  at  the 
53 Adolescents, pregnant, lactating women and children 6-23 months. 
54 Nutrient-dense recipes that use fish as base ingredient and or fish value added products.  
55  Accelerating  progress  towards  the  achievement  of  the  Millennium  Development  Goals1c  in  Mozambique 
(MDG1c) 2013-2018. 
17 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
district level to avoid the cascading training of trainer model to avoid the potential loss of 
technical knowledge and skills along the training chain. 
71.  Food and nutrition policy support. The DPMAIPs and district level nutrition focal 
points will monitor and manage the data collection and utilisation of the routine nutrition 
outcome  data.  The  data  will  then  be  reported  and  monitored  against  the  aquaculture 
planned activities within PARMDC at district, provincial and national level. In this regard 
the  project  will  support  districts  and  provincial  directorates  to  engage  in  the  food  and 
nutrition  policy  alignment.    This  is  in  line  with  planning  and  monitoring  activities 
stipulated  for  the  recently  decreed  provincial  and  district  steering  committees  for  food 
and  nutrition  security  (CODSAN  and  COPSAN)56.  The  project  will  also  engage  with  the 
food and nutrition evaluation assessment and surveys working group chaired by SETSAN 
department of evaluation.  
72.  Do  no  harm  considerations.  The  time  spent  by  women  participating  in  project 
activities  could  have  a  negative  effect  on  breastfeeding  and  other  childcare 
responsibilities  assumed  by  women.  The  project  will  mitigate  these  harms  by  ensuring 
that  the  organisation  of  the  PRODAPE  activities  are  well  coordinated  and  take  place  at 
times  which  are  convenient  for  women.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  timesaving 
technologies  for  food  processing,  such  as  solar  dryers  and  cool  boxes,  as  well  as  for 
marketing, including mobile phone marketing, will be explored by PRODAPE.  
73.  A social and gender analysis will be carried out by the project to determine trends 
in  the  distribution  of  aquaculture  related  benefits  at  HH  level  to  develop  strategies  to 
ensure equitable intra-household access to resources and benefits. 
D.  Partnerships and linkages 
74.  Synergies  with  initiatives  in  other  donor-supported  projects/programmes  working 
in  target  PRODAPE  locations  will  help  maximize  nutrition  outcomes  by  leveraging 
facilities and other resources already in place, among which: 
(a)  Ministry  of  health  provincial  directorate  and  district  services.  In 
provinces  with  persistently  high  stunting  levels,  such  as  Niassa,  Cabo  Delgado, 
Nampula  and  Zambézia,  small-scale  aquaculture  farmers  with  HH  members  who 
are  pregnant,  lactating,  with  children  under-five  and/or  adolescents  will  be  linked 
with on-going child and maternal health support services in their areas, as needed. 
This  will  be  achieved  thorough  collaboration  with  community  health  workers  (in 
Mozambique  APEs)  and  the  district  women's  health  and  social  services  (SDSMAS) 
extension teams.  
(b)  Nutrition  sector  partners.  The  following  table  elaborates  potential  linkages 
which  could  be  explored  by  PRODAPE  with  Nutrition  Partners  Forum  members  for 
projects planned from 2019 through 202257: 
Organization 
and Partner 
Project / 
Programme 
Area of Linkage / 
Partnership 
Province / District  
IFAD-funded projects 
IFAD 
Nutrition 
Community of 
Practice IFAD 
projects  
Sharing lessons learnt and 
experience on mainstreaming 
strategies in Mozambique and 
diet diversity baseline and 
end line surveys 
56  December  6th,  2017,  the  Council  of  Ministers  (through  Decree  No.  69/2017)  approved  the  creation  of  the 
National Council for Food and Nutrition Security (CONSAN). 
57 Nutrition Investment Overview Mozambique 2018. 
18 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Organization 
and Partner 
Project / 
Programme 
Area of Linkage / 
Partnership 
Province / District  
PROMER  
Agricultural diversification  
PROCAVA 
Agricultural diversification 
Cabo Delgado / 
Balama  
Niassa / Lichinga 
65 districts in 
Northern and Central 
Mozambique   
Rome-Based Agencies 
WFP 
Emergency 
response program  
School feeding 
program 
Nutrition Partnership Forum 
Institution markets for the 
aquaculture fish through the 
e-voucher scheme  
Emergency response 
district in the north 
and central(TBC) 
GAIN 
(DFID) 
 B. Catalysing private 
sector in scaling 
up nutrition 2016-
2021 -SUN 
Business Network- 
Mozambique 
Investment fund and 
technical assistance to 
increase safe nutritious diets 
through private sector 
engagement and demand 
generation through market 
place support 
Nampula, Cabo 
Delgado, Tete, 
Niassa, Sofala , 
Manica and 
Zambézia 
USAID  
 C. Community 
nutrition 2019-
2024 
SBCC, nutrition services 
through the national health 
system 
Nampula / 
Murrupula, Meconta, 
Mogovolas and Larde  
UNICEF/ EU 
/ WB funds  
DFID SCI-
HKI 
The Spanish 
Red Cross 
Health and 
nutrition, 
behaviour change 
communication for 
nutrition 2017-
2012 
Linking Agriculture 
to Nutrition 2017-
2022 
Health and 
Nutrition 2019-
2022 
Specific community nutrition 
activities, SBCC platforms and 
WASH services 
 Nampula / Monapo 
and Ribáue 
Zambézia 
SBCC, promotion of orange 
fleshed sweet potato and 
farmer field schools 
Water, sanitation and hygiene 
promotion  
Tete and Manica  
Cabo Delgado  
E. 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
75.  The  PRODAPE  PCU  will  hire  a  nutrition  specialist  officer  to  manage  day-to-day 
activities  related  to  nutrition.  The  nutrition  specialist  will  work  with  the  DPMAIPs,  who 
are  responsible  for  the  coordination,  implementation  and  progress  of  nutrition 
mainstreaming actions for the project at local level. The SDAE extension workers are the 
front-line  team  for  PRODAPE  and  will  be  supported  trained  and  mentored  on  nutrition-
sensitive interventions by the nutrition specialist and the DPMAIPs nutrition focal points.  
76.  The  contributions  of  PRODAPE  interventions  will  be  monitored  through  periodic 
project-specific  monitoring  activities  as  well  as  SETSAN  biannual  surveys.  The  baseline 
survey  on  knowledge,  attitudes  and  practices  and  diet  diversity  surveys  will  provide 
19 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
benchmark data to measure changes related to nutritional outcomes in the project target 
areas.  IFAD  Mozambique´s  Nutrition  Community  of  Practice  will  enable  sharing 
information, best practices and networking within IFAD funded programs (PROMER58 and 
PROCAVA59)  as  well  as  establishing  linkages  with  nutrition  specific  /  sensitive 
programmes. 
77.  Planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  social  behaviour  change  from  the 
multimedia and marketplace campaigns will be done in collaboration with the Ministries 
of  Health,  Agriculture,  Education,  Commerce  and  Industry,  SETSAN,  SUN  business 
network and community activists. 
F. 
Nutrition Indicators 
78.  Diet  diversity  measured  at  the  individual  level  has  been  repeatedly  validated  as 
predictive  of  diet  quality  and  is  associated  with  nutritional  status  across  a  range  of 
countries and contexts60. A positive association has also been shown between higher diet 
diversity and reduced prevalence of stunting and underweight among children under five. 
The  same  applies  to  diet  diversity  and  mean  micronutrient  adequacy  for  women  and 
children. The following indicators will be used by PRODAPE to track nutrition results: 
Impact 
indicators 
Per capita consumption of aquaculture fish 
Outcome 
indicators 
Percentage of smallholder women of reproductive age with increase dietary 
diversity (at least 5 food groups)  
Dietary Diversity Scores consist of a simple count of the different food groups that a 
HH or an individual has consumed over a given period (usually 24 hours). These 
scores have been used by the MGD1c project. Future plans for SETSAN biannual 
evaluations to incorporate MDDW. 
Output 
indicators 
  Number fish (kg) reserved for household consumption per production cycle 
 
Types of fish value added products with proper nutrition labelling and signalling 
  #  of  nutrition  campaigns,  events,  awareness  raising  sessions  and  trainings 
conducted 
 
 Number  of  persons  /  HHs  provided  with  targeted  support  to  improve  their 
nutrition (gender and age disaggregated data) 
  # of government staff trained in nutrition-sensitive food systems 
  #  of  nutrition-related  progress  reports  generated  for  SETSAN,  CODSAN  and 
COPSAN 
 
Fish-related  nutrition  content  developed,  publications  and  policy  briefs  produced 
and disseminated 
III.   ADDRESSING SOCIAL RISKS 
79.  An analysis of social risks which could undermine primary beneficiary engagement 
in project supported activities and/or limit beneficiary HH socio-economic progression led 
the identification of the following:  
 a) Individual HHs seek individual solutions to common problems; 
58 The Rural Markets Promotion Programme. 
59 Inclusive Agri-food Value-chains Development Programme. 
60 Compendium of indicators for nutrition-sensitive agriculture FAO 2016. 
20 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 b) Lack of joint planning at HH level; 
 c) Potential  increase  of  HH  tensions  and  gender  inequality  with  increased 
income flows among married beneficiaries; 
 d) Increased  risk  of  HIV  acquisition  by  women;  limited  health  seeking 
behaviour among HIV positive pregnant women, youth and men.  Threat of 
poor  health  with  deteriorating  health  if  treatment  is  not  initiated  and 
sustained; 
 e) Food  insecurity  and  malnutrition  associated  with  lack  of  production  of  food 
for consumption by participating households and an increase in food prices. 
80.  Whether  organized  under  cluster  models  or  around  aquaparks,  smallholder 
aquaculture farmers face greater challenges than the rest of the actors in the value chain 
due  to  their  socio-economic  vulnerability.    Engagement  in  aquaculture  will  require 
organization  to  address  challenges  and  take  advantage  of  opportunities.    The  Social 
Mentoring intervention aims to support farmers in this respect by working at two levels: 
i)      Aquaculture producer groups (in clusters or aquaparks).  Activities will instil 
joint planning, collaboration and equip them to identify common problems 
and joint solutions.  
ii)       Individual aquaculture producers receiving PRODAPE support.  Activities 
would aim to address social risks that could hinder beneficiary ability to 
sustain engagement and limit socio-economic progression: (i) absence of 
joint HH plans; (ii) gender inequality; (iii) malnutrition; and (iv) HIV and 
AIDS. 
81.  The  proposed  Social  Mentoring  activity,  specifically  catered  to  the  risks  identified 
among  small  aquaculture  farmers  is  facilitative  in  nature.  The  intervention  is  based  on 
the  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)61  broadly  used  by  IFAD,  together  with 
Stepping Stones62, an effective facilitative methodology used in HIV programmes and the 
integration  of  information  and  messages  used  in  the  country  to  fight  malnutrition. 
Activities will be imparted by facilitators trained under PRODAPE and enable participants 
to  develop  realistic  plans,  better  take  advantage  of  existing  opportunities  and  make 
decisions on how to avoid social risks identified.   
61 IFAD, October, 2014.  Case Study: Gender Action Learning System in Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone 
and Uganda.  Gender, Targeting and Social Inclusion. 
62 http://steppingstonesfeedback.org Accessed 16th July 2018. 
21 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Table 6: Key information in relation to four key social risks faced by project 
beneficiaries at HH level to be addressed by the Social Mentoring intervention 
Gender inequality 
HIV and AIDS63 
Malnutrition 
Lack of joint 
household plans 
- High poverty 
levels push HHs to 
rely on day to day 
opportunities  
- Resources tend to 
be scattered and 
poorly coordinated 
and not 
strategically used 
for HH progression 
- Women have more 
responsibilities and 
tasks than men 
and are the prime 
food producers at 
household level 
- Decision making is 
primarily by men 
- Lack of control of 
resources / 
benefits 
-  13.2% HIV 
prevalence64  
-  Challenges: 
 Enrolment in and 
adherence to 
treatment  
 Stigma / 
discrimination  
 Vulnerability of 
women, and 
children 
 HIV disclosure 
- Empower HHs to 
produce HH plans 
and identifying 
solutions to the 
four social risks 
identified herein 
(and others) 
- HH members 
analyse the 
impacts of gender 
inequality on 
individual benefits 
and HH 
progression and 
identify corrective 
measures to issues 
deemed relevant 
 Food availability 
and consumption 
patterns  
-  Sensitization on HIV 
testing, treatment 
and adherence 
-  Sharing information 
on existing HIV 
services  
-  Tearing down 
barriers to 
disclosure / 
discrimination 
-  HIV/AIDS & gender 
inequality 
-  Nutrition in the 
context of HIV and 
AIDS 
S
E
G
N
E
L
L
A
H
C
S
N
O
I
T
U
L
O
S
D
E
S
O
P
O
R
P
-  43% chronic 
malnutrition  
-  54% maternal 
anaemia, iron, 
iodine and vitamin 
A65 
-  Challenges: 
 Limited physical 
and economic 
access to diverse, 
nutritious diets  
 Limited diversified 
protein and 
micronutrient  
 Cultural influence 
on diets/caring 
practises  
 High disease 
burden  
-  Targeted nutrition 
education on 
nutritional value of 
fish, fish safety, 
consumption 
benefits especially 
the 1,000 days 
group66 
-  Demonstration of 
improved 
aquaculture fish 
recipes67 
-  Partnerships with 
relevant sectors  
affects women                                                                                                             
82. 
Issues to be included in the Social Mentoring intervention will include:  
 a. Development of a household vision; 
 b. Household planning: use of resources and opportunities available, including 
remittances; 
 c.
Identifying  and  addressing  common  barriers  for  household  progress 
(including common areas of gender inequality);  
63  Instituto  Nacional  de  Saúde,  Instituto  Nacional  de  Estatística  (INE),  ICF  Internacional,  2015.  Inquérito  de 
Indicadores de Imunização, Malária e HIV/SIDA em Moçambique 2015. Relatório Preliminar de Indicadores de 
HIV.   
64  Mozambique recently  adopted  the  HIV  Test  and  Treat  Strategy,  which  entails  getting  HIV positive patients 
into  anti-retroviral  treatment  as  soon  as  diagnosed.  As  is  the  case  in  other  HIV  high-burden  countries, 
treatment is considered to be the prime prevention strategy. 
65  In-Depth  Review  2018  of  the  ‘Multisectoral  Action  Plan  for  the  Reduction  of  Chronic  Under-nutrition  in 
Mozambique 2011 – 2015 (2020)’. 
66 Adolescents, pregnant and lactating mothers and children aged 6-23 months. 
67 Nutrient dense recipes that use fish as base ingredient and or fish value added products.   
22 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
 d. Provision  of  basic  information  on  HIV  prevention  and  clinical  HIV  services 
close to the community, including, as relevant: HIV testing and counselling, 
HIV  care  and  treatment,  community  services  and  support  groups  (if  any) 
and use of services; 
 e.
Importance  of  pregnant  women,  youth  and  men  testing  and  using  clinical 
HIV services and adhering to anti-retroviral treatment; 
 f. Couple  disclose  of  sero-prevalence;  overcoming  HIV  stigma  and 
discrimination; 
 g. Provision  of  basic  information  to  prevent  malnutrition  and  linkages,  as 
appropriate. 
83.  Social  Mentoring  activities  will  be  implemented  by  trained  Mentors.  Social 
Mentoring activities will be imparted to primary beneficiary producer  groups, in groups, 
in whichever way they are organized for the purposes of accessing project opportunities 
related to aquaculture production.  It is expected that groups will consist of 25 members.  
However, more focused attention will be given to "more at risk beneficiaries", considering 
that these will primarily be the poorest HH (those receiving the highest level of support 
to engage in aquaculture), but it could also include beneficiaries that are not among the 
poorest  but  require  additional  assistance  in  overcoming  challenges  and  capitalizing 
opportunities  due  to  enhanced  exposure  to  a  given  social  risk.  These  beneficiaries  will 
receive additional support at HH level. It is expected that the proportion of beneficiaries 
requiring  this  level  of  additional  support  will  represent  20%  of  the  total  number  of 
beneficiaries receiving Social Mentoring support. 
84.  Evidence shows that when implemented correctly, the impact is such that there is a 
multiplier  effect  at  community  level  as  beneficiaries  themselves  target  others 
spontaneously.  As  such,  the  project  will  only  target  50%  of  groups  in  each  community 
and 50% of individual beneficiaries requiring additional support at HH level and will work 
with  those  targeted  directly  by  Mentors  so  that  once  the  "graduate"  they  replicate  the 
same process among the remaining 50% of groups and individual beneficiaries requiring 
additional support. 
85.  Activities  at  group  and  HH  level  will  both  be  implemented  for  a  period  of  12 
months.  It  is  expected  that  after  this  time  groups  and  individuals  targeted  will 
"graduate"  out  of  Social  Mentoring.  Each  Mentor  will  cover  three  groups  (and  the 
estimated  20%  of  group  members  requiring  HH  level  support,  i.e.,  five  people  in  each 
group, totalling 15 HHs) in a period of 12 months. 
86.  All  information  related  to  the  prevention,  treatment  of  and  discrimination  in  the 
context of HIV, as well as nutrition, included in Social Mentoring activities will be aligned 
with  GoM  guidance  documents  and  duly  coordinated  at  local  level  with  other  players 
working towards common goals. 
23 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Attachment 1: Detailed population data per target district PRODAPE. 
Target 
Province 
Niassa 
Cabo Delgado 
Nampula 
Zambézia 
Tete 
Manica 
Sofala 
Gaza 
Target District  Population 
2017 
Lago  
Lichinga 
Mecanhelas 
Metuge 
Balama 
Mueda 
Larde 
Mossuril 
Ribáue 
Mocubela 
Nicoadala 
Milange 
Magoé 
Marávia 
Cahora Bassa  
Vanduzi 
Sussundenga  
Gondola 
Mossurize 
Buzi 
Gorongosa 
Dondo 
Beira 
Chókwè 
163,982 
213,361 
296,908 
89,122 
180,957 
217,641 
85,971 
142,787 
290,244 
110,857 
180,686 
619,275 
91,313 
131,685 
132,972 
124,064 
168,200 
201,735 
219,551 
177,348 
182,226 
184,458 
533,825 
240,244 
24 
Mozambique
Small Scale Aquaculture Promotion Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Moz Prodape Pdr Annex Partnerships For Aquaculture Development
Document Date:
24/07/2019
Project No.
2000001979
Report No.
5075-MZ
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
Annex: Partnerships for Aquaculture Development 
Business  partnerships, 
including  Public-Private-Partnership  (PPP)  and  Outgrower 
schemes  has  been  identified  as  the  effective  strategies  with  potential  for  the 
development of aquaculture value chain in the following areas: 
a)     Development of quality fish seed system. Based on the notion of centrality and 
concentration,  PRODAPE  will  support  the  development  of  one  main  hatchery  in  each 
target  province.  Where  private  operators  are  already  engaged  in  fingerlings  production 
and  need  to  scale  up  or  improve  their  production  capacity  and/or  quality  to  match 
increasing demand for fish seed, PPP in the forms of Joint Venture (JV) arrangements or 
grants/conditional transfers will be considered. Under the JV arrangements, government 
and  the  private  sector  will  agree  to  jointly  own  the  hatchery,  invest  their  funds  (as 
equity)  and  share  profit  from  operations  under  the  private  sector  operator  (PSO)’s 
management. It could be a temporary or tenured JV where a terminal date is set for the 
winding down of the relationship and appropriation of the project’s assets & liabilities by 
the PSO.  It could also be a permanent JV where a Joint Venture Company is formed to 
drive the relationship. Under the grant or conditional transfer, government may agree to 
invest  PRODAPE  fund  in  the  private  sector  hatchery  without  expecting  any  direct 
financial returns provided the PSO meet some conditions – usually aimed at generating 
public goods, which in this case is high quality affordable fingerlings for small-scale fish 
farmers.  
For the targeted provinces  where private facilities for  fish seed production do not exist, 
constructing  and  privatizing  government-owned  facilities  and  services  is  an  attractive 
option.  In  consultation  with  potential  private  companies,  PRODAPE  will  explore  suitable 
PPP  arrangements,  including  Management/Service  contract  or  outsourcing,  long-term 
concession  and  lease  contracts  to  engage  PSO  to  improve  efficiency  and  effectiveness. 
The  Lease  option  allows  the  government  to  own  and  finance  the  construction  (capital) 
phases  of  the  project  but  leases  (rents)  it  out  to  a  PSO  for  a  fixed  income  to 
government.  The  PSO  finances  the  operations  (recurrent  aspects)  of  the  projects  and 
earns  the  net  returns  after  paying  the  rentals.  Under  the  long-term  concession 
arrangement,  government  owns  and  finances  the  construction  (capital)  phases  of  the 
project  but  grants  a  PSO  the  permission  (concession)  to  run  it.  The  PSO  finances  the 
operations  (recurrent  aspects)  of  the  project.  The  government’s  remuneration  is 
structured to be a combination of a fixed concession fee and a variable dividend from the 
profit  generated  from  the  project.  In  some  cases,  the  PSO  will  be  expected  to  upgrade 
the  facilities  either  from  its  own  resources  or  by  ploughing  part  of  the  dividend  due  to 
government back into the project.  
b)     Development of large commercial fish feed production: To develop the fish 
feed production capacity in the country, it is envisaged that PRODAPE will support  
(i)  on-farm  feed  formulation  for  smallholder  farmers  with  1-3  ponds  to  supplement 
fish nutrition and quality;  
(ii)  entrepreneurial  "cottage"  fish  feed  production  among  small  and  medium  scale 
producers;  
(i)  large commercial fish feed production through PPPs to achieve economies of scale 
and lower production costs.  
With  respect  to  the  latter  option,  the  project  will  establish  a  PPP  with  two  existing 
poultry/livestock  feed  producers  (possible  the  ones  established  in  Maputo  and  Tete)  to 
set up fish feed production lines. A PPP arrangement in the form of JVs will be explored 
with  existing  animal  feed  producers  and  other  emerging  commercial  operators  who  are 
setting-up  their  own  production  capacity  on  the  basis  of  imported  raw  materials/and  or 
local  products.  PRODAPE  will  support  40%  of  the  investment  costs  for  establishing  fish 
seed  production  (with  maximum  contribution  not  exceeding  USD  250,000),  with  the 
private  sector  contributing  the  remaining  investment  cost  through  equity  or  loan.  
1 
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE 
Small-scale Aquaculture Development Project (PRODAPE) 
Detailed Design Report 
PRODAPE  will  facilitate  access  to  loan  funding  through  financing  instruments  available 
under REFP or Agri-Business Capital (ABC) Fund.   
c)          Access  to  input  and  output  markets.  PRODAPE  will  facilitate  access  of 
small-scale  farmers  to  input  and  output  markets  through  development  of  business 
partnerships  with  medium/large  commercial  aquaculture  operators  in  the  form  of 
outgrower  schemes.  Such  schemes  can  improve  smallholder  access  to  quality  inputs 
(fingerlings  and  fish  feed),  extension  services  for  improved  or  best  aquaculture 
management  practices,  finance,  post-harvest  handling  and  marketing  infrastructure. 
PRODAPE  will  support  development  of  at  least  one  outgrower  scheme  in  each  targeted 
district.  In general terms, for a typical outgrower scheme, two main contracts are to be 
signed, one that is expected to rule the use of a grant based on a well-defined business 
plan  signed  between  PRODAPE  and  the  commercial  aquaculture  operator;  and  another 
signed  between  the  commercial  operator  and  the  aquaculture  small  scale  farmers.  The 
latter contract will be a fish purchase agreement that will ensure a market for the sales 
of  the  small  aquaculture  producers  at  market  prices  and  the  provision  of  technical 
support  and  quality  inputs.  It  is  expected  that  these  two  contracts  will  enhance  the 
ability of the commercial operator (aggregator) to get long-term commercial co-financing 
for the development of  his/her productive infrastructure.  It will also enhance the ability 
of  small  aquaculture  producers  to  get  working  capital  from  commercial  sources.  Key 
obligations  of  the  aggregator  under  the  outgrower  scheme  contract  will  be  to  coach 
farmers  in  all  technology  aspects  of  establishing  and  operating  aquaculture  ponds,  do 
procurement  of  fish  feed  and  fingerling  inputs  of  appropriate  quality,  verification  that 
such  inputs  comply  with  best  technical  standards,  and  do  the  marketing  and  sales 
activities for all participant aquaculture farmers. The commercial operator will commit to 
buy  fish  from  the  small  pond  aquaculture  producer  fish  outputs  at  market  prices.  The 
obligation of the aquaculture pond producer will be to supply the aggregator with a given 
volumes of fish of an agreed quality, within a given timeframe. He/she will also commit 
to  adopting  the  promoted  technological  know-how  using  quality  inputs  (feed  and 
fingerlings) procured by the aggregator. 
Funding  for  establishment  of  outgrower  schemes  includes  investment  financing  for  the 
commercial  operator,  which  will  be  documented  in  the  business  plans  presented  by  the 
commercial operator in response to calls for proposals issued by PRODAPE. It is expected 
that  investments  in  a  commercial  operator’s  typical  business  plan  include  a  warehouse 
with cold storage and an area for fish feed storage, a refrigerated truck, outlet furniture 
and  motorbikes.  It  will  also  give  a  description  of  how  he/she  will  conduct  business, 
where the farmers are located and where the target market is located, the area they will 
cover,  how  the  farmers  are  going  to  produce  fish,  pond  and  cage  management,  etc. 
Financing from PRODAPE will include a maximum 45% grant of the commercial operator. 
PRODAPE  will  finance  the  two-year  cost  of  five  technical  extensionists  who  will  work 
hand-in-hand with the small-scale farmers, coaching them operations and management 
of the aquaculture production processes. After the second year, the cost of the technical 
extensionists will pass to form part of the fixed cost staff of the commercial operator, to 
help  him/her  on  the  management  of  all  aspects  of  the  value  chain  management.  To 
receive  funding  from  the  ABDP,  the  commercial  operator  can  be  organized  either  as  a 
limited liability company or as a cooperative, both managed professionally.  
For outgrower schemes in the aquaculture chain to work, banks and other private sector 
financiers  will  provide  working  capital  to  small  aquaculture  producers  and  long-term 
funding  for  the  commercial  operator.  It  is  expected  that  commercial  operators  will 
commit equity funding in addition to grants from PRODAPE  and loans from banks.  The 
participation  of  private  financiers  will  be  the  actual  test  of  commercial  viability  of  the 
outgrower model.  
2 
